* 1253676
* CAREER: The Developmental Origins of Human Cooperation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,04/30/2018
* Felix Warneken, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 04/30/2018
* USD 650,617.00

Humans share valuable resources, assist others who need help, and work together
in teams to produce outcomes that lie beyond the capabilities of any one
individual. Yet the origins of these cooperative abilities are a puzzle. Other
species do not seem to engage in similar behaviors--indeed, humans have been
characterized as a hyper-cooperative primate. One way to address why humans show
these cooperative patterns is to examine how young children acquire these
skills. Are young children initially selfish, and must be taught to become
altruistic? Or do humans have a biological predisposition for altruism that even
children exhibit? How do children learn to share a common resource and acquire
ideas about fairness? With support of a NSF CAREER award, Dr. Felix Warneken
(Harvard University) will conduct a comprehensive developmental study of
children's cooperative behaviors.

This research aims to investigate the fundamental psychological processes that
enable young children to cooperate with others. How do children detect that
another person is in need? Under what circumstances are they motivated to help?
By using experimental studies of young children, this research can address
important questions about the interplay of biological predispositions found
early in development and the socialization practices that influence the further
development of these behaviors. In particular, the research will investigate
when social expectations and norms that characterize cooperative behaviors in
adults begin to play a role in child development. For example, adults often
expect others to reciprocate favors and have norms about what constitutes a fair
share of a valuable resource. Therefore, this research is to determine when
during development children begin to attend to these norms when they cooperate
with others. By integrating insights from evolutionary theory, social
psychology, and child development, this project provides a comprehensive study
of the skill-set for cooperation that children acquire across development. In
addition, this research program will provide a wide range of training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in developmental
psychology, including active participation of students in research, and a summer
internship program with stipends for undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups. It will also educate the broader public about
psychological research through freely available educational material about the
research projects for classroom instructors and the greater public.