* 1253933
* CAREER: An Integrated Treatment of Voltage Noise and Process Variability in Many-core and GPU Systems with Microarchitectural Solutions
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Radu Teodorescu, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

Advances in microprocessor technology have been the main engines for growth in
the computing industry for decades. Microprocessor performance has improved at a
remarkable rate for many years owing to technological and microarchitectural
innovations. Unfortunately technology scaling has reached an impasse in recent
years. Significant challenges with the chip manufacturing process in low-
nanometer dimensions are causing high variability in transistor behavior leading
to lower performance, higher power consumption and higher susceptibility to
errors. In general, high variability leads to larger design margins making chips
less energy efficient. These technological challenges are happening at a time
when the need for energy efficient computing is greatest. With the rapid
proliferation of cloud-based computing and the explosion of smart mobile devices
energy efficiency is now crucial to the entire range of computing markets from
servers to smartphones. Achieving continued performance growth in these systems
going forward requires dramatic improvements in the energy efficiency of
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, new microarchitectural and
software solutions for lowering design margins in future chips are being
developed, achieving substantial energy reduction while ensuring reliable
operation. These solutions employ variation-aware design across multiple layers
of the computing environment including microarchitectural innovations, new
firmware and operating system-based scheduling and power management solutions.
New technology models that for the first time integrate multiple sources of
variability are being developed for this purpose, enabling the design of
variation-aware solutions. The work identifies new reliability challenges that
affect supply voltage stability in chips with large numbers of compute units
such as many-core and graphics processors. It develops novel process and voltage
variation-aware scheduling and power management algorithms that reduce voltage
instability eliminating the need for large and inefficient design margins. At
the microarchitectural and firmware levels the work develops new mechanisms for
dynamically reducing voltage margins by leveraging on-chip resiliency mechanisms
to ensure reliable and efficient execution. These solutions are dramatically
improving the energy efficiency of computation and are therefore expected to
have a significant impact on the computing industry and society in general.