* 1253677
* CAREER:   Insect Flight in Turbulent Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Stacey Combes, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 09/30/2016
* USD 613,916.00

The goal of this project is to investigate how natural, turbulent airflow
affects insect flight stability, and to determine how insects deal with this
challenge. Turbulent airflow, which includes unpredictable wind gusts and
swirling vortices, is found in nearly all natural habitats. However, the extent
to which turbulence affects animal flight remains unknown, because most studies
of flight are performed in lab settings with smooth, simplified airflow, and
because we know very little about the characteristics of environmental
turbulence at size scales relevant to flying animals. This project will address
these unanswered questions by (1) quantifying the natural aerial environments
that flying insects encounter and simulating them in a wind tunnel, (2)
assessing the effects of turbulent flow on flight stability in two widespread
insect pollinators, bumblebees and droneflies, and (3) investigating how insect
body form and/or behaviors may help enhance flight stability in unpredictable
aerial environments. The flight studies in this project focus on insect
pollinators, as these typically travel long distances through a variety of
habitats, performing essential services upon which plants, ecosystems, and the
global food supply ultimately depend. The innovative research proposed will form
the foundation for future studies examining how habitat alteration and climate
change may affect the movement patterns and efficiency of pollinators and other
flying animals by inducing changes in the aerial environment. In addition, this
project may provide inspiration for the design of micro air vehicles (MAVs) by
identifying novel methods of enhancing flight stability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research is inherently multi-disciplinary, as an animal's
movements depend on numerous aspects of its biology (from cells and tissues to
behavior and ecology), and are mediated by physical interactions with the
external environment. Due to these cross-disciplinary connections and the
tangible, visually appealing nature of biological motions, this subject forms an
ideal platform for engaging non-science majors and the general public in
biology, physics and engineering, and for instilling a sense of excitement about
scientific research. To take advantage of this unique opportunity, the
educational objectives of this proposal are to (1) develop a general education
course centered around movement in biology, and (2) expand and improve the
Concord Field Station outreach program at Harvard University to expose K-12
students and the public first-hand to integrative, compelling scientific
research. Through these educational efforts, this project will expose students
of all ages as well as the general public to scientific research that integrates
biology, physics &amp; engineering, and that is tangible, exciting and
memorable.