* 1253703
* CAREER: Practical Language and System Support for Reliable Concurrent Software
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Michael Bond, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2019
* USD 555,143.00

Over the past several decades, computer system performance has grown
exponentially, enabling progress on key problems in science, engineering,
health, and other areas. Owing to power, heat, and wire length limitations,
however, microprocessors are now adding more, instead of faster, cores with each
successive generation. As a result, general-purpose software must become more
concurrent to see continued performance gains. Unfortunately, writing and
debugging shared-memory concurrent software is notoriously difficult. A key
problem is that most shared-memory programming languages and software systems do
not provide good support for correct concurrent execution. They lack such
support because all known approaches are impractical. This project aims to
provide practical support for concurrency correctness in commodity systems. It
develops low-overhead, software-only approaches that execute on existing
commodity hardware. These approaches help programmers write and debug more
reliable, scalable software, and to make software more reliable automatically by
eliminating whole classes of errors. These benefits have the potential to enable
society to continue to rely on software systems for increasingly complex,
critical tasks. Furthermore, the project includes educational and outreach
activities that help educate students in concurrent software systems, enhance
dissemination of the ideas and outcomes, and broaden participation in computer
science.

The project develops practical, always-on dynamic checking and enforcement of
key concurrency correctness properties: atomicity, sequential consistency, and
multithreaded determinism. Existing approaches are impractical because custom
hardware-based approaches are unrealistic, and software-based approaches slow
programs unacceptably. The project builds on preliminary work on an efficient
concurrency control mechanism that elides expensive synchronization from non-
conflicting accesses, which are the vast majority of accesses. Developing new
analyses and systems presents significant new challenges, both to apply the
novel concurrency control mechanism and to make other aspects of these analyses
and systems efficient enough for production systems. For example, precise
conflict detection must track prior accesses and contend with imprecision
inherent to the concurrency control mechanism. The project aims to make the
analyses and systems both practical and flexible, which requires systematically
investigating how to reduce the costs of conflicting and non-conflicting
accesses. Expected contributions are the first practical always-on atomicity
checker, the first practical multithreaded record & replay system, the first
practical sequential consistency checker, and the first practical system
providing multithreaded system determinism. In addition to broader impacts, the
contributions have the potential to enable new research on efficient software-
based analyses and systems that support concurrency correctness.