* 1253058
* CAREER: Investigating Surface Ligand Doping, Organization and Valency in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Quantum Dots: A Bridge Between Nano Chemistry Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Javier Vela, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2019
* USD 786,017.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the
Division of Chemistry supports the CAREER Award's research and education program
of Prof. Javier Vela at Iowa State University. Prof. Vela and his students
investigate new surface ligand doping strategies that enable to control the
degree of functionalization or valency per nanocrystal. As part of this effort,
Prof. Vela's group will investigate the changes in ligand organization, surface
chemistry and nanocrystal properties that result from surface modification.
Controlling the degree of functionalization per nanocrystal remains an unsolved
challenge in colloidal semiconductors. Surface modification is routinely
performed by ligand exchange with excess carboxylate- or amine-terminated
thiols. However, this method fails to control the extent of surface
modification. To solve this problem, Prof. Vela and his students will synthesize
surface-doped quantum dots capped with chemically-active native ligands and
characterize their surface microstructures, synthesize modular functional
polydentate ligands for surface-doping and study their ligand exchange behavior
with quantum dots, and explore the use of surface-doped quantum dots for
lanthanide optical activation and rationing of rare earths. This research will
positively impact our ability to fine-tune the number and relative configuration
of energy- and charge-transfer donors and acceptors, providing unprecedented
control over exciton decay pathways across the inorganic-organic-solvent
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this research will result in powerful
strategies to fabricate, assemble and discover functional nanomaterials for
imaging, biology, energy and catalysis. For example, the extent of surface
coverage by a particular functional group will impact a nanocrystal's surface
affinity and permeability, and its ability to localize, penetrate, and be
transported across biological tissues and subcellular structures. In addition,
advanced characterization of surface-doped nanocrystals will further our
understanding of surface-ligand organization and of how this affects
optoelectronic properties. The educational goals of this proposal are to close
gaps in nanotechnology research and education by introducing a university-wide
nano seminar series and a nanochemistry course at Iowa State University, and to
broaden participation via diverse recruiting and bilingual activities for
Hispanic and Latino/a students and families. A weekly seminar and a formal
course will promote interactions and facilitate exchanges among nanotechnology
researchers across departments. By communicating science in two languages, Prof.
Vela will directly address a growing demographic to raise awareness and advocacy
for nanoscience as a way to improve the community, the national economy, and the
environment.