* 1253157
* CAREER: Shock Waves and Cavitation in Human Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Eric Johnsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 405,449.00

1253157 Johnsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shock waves and cavitation are key
phenomena in high-intensity therapeutic ultrasound and blast-induced traumatic
brain injury (bTBI), as their dynamics may lead to tissue damage, either
deliberately in pathogenic tissue ablation (histotripsy), unintentionally in
bTBI, or collaterally in kidney stone treatment (lithotripsy). While shocks and
bubbles in water are relatively well-understood hydrodynamic phenomena, this
knowledge cannot readily be extended to soft tissue because the viscoelasticity
and heterogeneity at the macroscopic scales of injury (¡­0.01&amp;#8722;10 mm)
and the wide range of loading frequencies in these medical applications
(1&amp;#8722; 1,000,000 Hz) strongly affect the physics. Furthermore, direct
observations are hindered by the opacity of tissue and the difficulties of in
vivo measurements. Recently, numerical simulations have emerged as a tool to
complement and expand the scope of the traditional "theory and experiment"
paradigm. However, cavitation and shocks are difficult to represent in current
approaches for tissue simulations (e.g., finite element modeling for solid
mechanics or nonlinear acoustics), while compressible flow codes are typically
for inviscid materials. These physical and numerical drawbacks undermine efforts
to ascertain tissue damage, thus inhibiting timely progress in therapeutic
ultrasound and bTBI research. The objective of this project is to understand and
predict the response of soft tissue to shocks and cavitation with realistic
material and pulse properties. The hypothesis is that energy is transferred from
the incoming shock and dissipated through different processes, including
cavitation. In a departure from traditional tissue mechanics simulations, the PI
will leverage his experience in compressible multiphase flows, transport
phenomena, and high-performance computing to develop a numerical framework
integrating (i) theoretical/ numerical modeling for spherical bubble dynamics
(Rayleigh-Plesset-like equations) and (ii) direct simulations of the full
equations of motion to accurately represent shocks and bubbles in general
viscoelastic media. This high-order accurate shock- and interface-capturing
framework will be validated against experiments, and uncertainties in the pulse
and material properties will be quantified. Detailed simulations and analysis of
relevant canonical problems (isolated shock propagation and bubble dynamics,
freely collapsing bubbles, and shock interactions) in a medium exhibiting
viscosity, elasticity and relaxation will be conducted. The relationship between
the energy transfer and dissipation processes and the pulse and tissue
properties will be established, and the injury mechanisms will be identified
under realistic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader
impacts, the results of the project will advance the general field of fluid
mechanics and will guide medical researchers in their quest for safer, cost-
effective procedures. The education and outreach program, closely integrated
with the research, seeks to engage the general public and train future leaders
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Undergraduate
students will work primarily on one of the key research thrusts. In cooperation
with the University of Michigan Natural History Museum, a series of
demonstrations on acoustics and viscoelasticity will be developed for hands-on
exhibits, culminating in workshops and campus visits for middle schools students
from Southeast Michigan in the Museum's Science for Tomorrow program. The
proposed research on elucidating the mechanical outcomes of shocks and
cavitation in tissue will provide the foundation for subsequent studies of
biological effects, e.g., changes in cell function caused by transient and
highly variable pressures and displacements.