* 1253975
* CAREER:   Evolutionary Mechanisms for Recruiting Promiscuous Enzyme Activities into New Metabolic Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Margaret Glasner, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 02/28/2019
* USD 715,746.00

The scientific goal of this project is to discover how and why certain enzymes
are capable of evolving new functions. Previous research partially answered the
"how" question: in addition to their biological function, many enzymes carry out
"promiscuous" side reactions by chance. If a promiscuous activity becomes useful
for an organism, natural selection will act to improve that activity. Although
many enzymes have promiscuous activities, they might not be equally capable of
evolving new functions. In order to identify characteristics that promote
evolvability, this research project is comparing the evolution, structure, and
function of a family of promiscuous enzymes to their non-promiscuous relatives.
Identifying the sequence, structural, and catalytic properties that were
required for the evolution of a new function will facilitate the development of
new strategies for engineering other enzymes to carry out new activities.
Improving protein engineering methodology has numerous applications in industry
and medicine, such as using biodegradable enzymes to replace toxic chemicals in
industrial processes.

Broader Impacts

This project will support education in the research laboratory and classroom,
providing interdisciplinary training in bioinformatics and biochemistry, a major
growth area in the biological sciences because of the development of high-
throughput DNA sequencing technologies. The participation of under-represented
minorities in scientific research will be increased by providing full-time
summer internships to undergraduates recruited from colleges that mainly serve
minority populations and have limited research opportunities. Active learning
will be fostered through the augmentation of a lecture course with a research
project that integrates concepts from metabolism with bioinformatics methods
developed in the research laboratory. Finally, evolutionary thinking will be
introduced into a freshman biochemistry and genetics class, with the goal that
these students will become citizens who can explain the mechanisms of evolution
and how it impacts their lives.