* 1253980
* CAREER: Enabling high-throughput data management in scientific domains
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Yicheng Tu, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 499,882.00

Many scientific domains have entered a data-driven era, in which scientific
discovery depends heavily on effective and efficient analysis of large-scale
data generated by wet-bench experiments or computer simulations. Current
database management systems (DBMSs), while being very popular in the business
world, fall short in high-throughput data processing required by scientific
applications. The goal of this project is to design and implement a novel data
management software architecture that enables high-throughput data management
services for general scientific communities. The project achieves this goal via
(1) a novel one-scan-fits-all data processing framework based on repetitive
scans of large data sources; (2) a query engine that leverages the massive
computing power of modern Graphics Processing Units (GPU) hardware; and (3)
design and implementation of algorithms for popular analytics in three
scientific domains on top of the query engine to demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the proposed architecture. The project also aims at building a
software prototype and evaluating this prototype with real-world scientific
datasets and query workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to
provide a highly efficient solution to satisfy the data management needs of a
wide range of scientific fields. To deliver comparable performance, the proposed
architecture requires only a fraction of the hardware and energy costs needed by
existing systems. As a result, it has the potential to make scientific studies
that are regarded as difficult or infeasible a reality. Integration of proposed
research into educational endeavors that contribute to broadening the influence
of computer science, nurturing the next generation of multidisciplinary
scientists, and boosting the success of minority and women students in the
computer science and engineering field are other broader impact activities
planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;