* 1253856
* CAREER:   Design Automation Infrastructure for DNA Assembly in Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2019
* USD 911,608.00

Intellectual Merit Synthetic biology attempts to design novel biological systems
to address a number of challenges in bioenergy, biotherapeutics, and
bioremediation. Synthetic biology computational tools must be closely coupled to
experimental needs to transform the field. A critical opportunity for this
coupling is the DNA assembly process. This project addresses the challenge of
physically assembling DNA in an automated, optimized and efficient software and
liquid handling workflow for a number of applications and assembly chemistries.
This project will: (1) Develop a software library for DNA assembly protocols;
(2) develop application software to create and manipulate DNA protocol and
assembly graphs; (3) develop a common instruction set to abstract low level
liquid handling; (4) experimentally create large, complex genetic regulatory
networks (GRNs); and (5) expand synthetic biology outreach to K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students to include automated DNA
assembly.

Broader Impacts Making open source, freely available DNA assembly software
widely employed will change the entire "design-build-test" cycle proposed by
synthetic biology. Industrially supported liquid handling robotic operations
will unify the domain and make the creation of novel living systems cheaper,
more reliable, and more accessible. The project's software will be the first of
its kind publicly available. Educational outreach will be continued to introduce
synthetic biology to underrepresented groups, undergraduates, and high school
students thus training a future generation of engineering students. DNA assembly
education will be made available to the International Genetically Engineered
Machine (iGEM) software division. A "Registry of Synthetic Biology Software
Tools" will be expanded to provide a community resource for bio-design
automation software. Finally, the International Workshop on Bio-Design
Automation (IWBDA) will expand its educational mission to provide additional DNA
assembly tutorials, a PhD forum, and a formal mentorship program to match
students with academic and industrial mentors.