* 1253700
* CAREER:Cross-Core Learning in Future Manycore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

As computing devices solve increasingly complex and diverse problems, engineers
seek to design processors that provide higher performance, while remaining
energy-efficient for environmental reasons. To achieve this, processor vendors
have embraced manycore devices, where thousands of cores cooperate on a single
chip to solve large-scale problems in a parallel manner. They have further
incorporated heterogeneity, combining cores with different architectures on a
single chip in a bid to provide ever-increasing performance per watt. This
project boosts the search for higher energy-efficient performance by inventing
novel cross-core learning techniques. Cores in current chips individually learn
about the behavior of parallel programs in order to run programs more
efficiently in the future, devoting complex and power-hungry hardware structures
to do this. However, this research observes that parallel programs tend to
exercise the hardware structures of different cores in correlated ways, meaning
that the behavior of the program run on one core can be communicated to other
cores for various performance and power benefits. As such, this form of
intelligent cross-core information exchange is effective in achieving high
performance per watt across computing domains from datacenters to embedded
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this light, this research provides techniques to
deduce how similarly a parallel program's various threads exercise their cores'
hardware structures (looking at a range of different programmer, compiler, and
architectural mechanisms to do so). When this is detected, cross-core learning
hardware gleans the information that is most useful to exchange to improve
performance or power, and then transmits this information among heterogeneous
cores using low-overhead hardware/software techniques. This project develops a
lightweight runtime software layer to orchestrate this information exchange,
relying on dedicated hardware support when necessary. Through developing this
framework, cross-core learning is applied to a number of specific cases, ranging
from higher-performance manycore cache prefetching and branch prediction, to
performance and power-management techniques for interrupts and exceptions in
scale-out systems, as well as thread and instruction scheduling. Furthermore,
this project heavily disseminates knowledge on how to design and program large-
scale manycore systems (or scale-out systems) by involving students at the
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school levels through active research and
coursework. Overall, this work impacts the engineering community and broader
society by: (1) helping to achieve high-performance, but also energy-efficient
and environmentally-friendly computing systems; (2) providing academics and chip
designers a design methodology and infrastructure to study manycore design; (3)
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in computer science; (4)
educating graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students on parallel
programming for manycore systems.