* 1253950
* CAREER: Robust Strategic Reasoning for Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Christopher Kiekintveld, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 01/31/2019
* USD 488,288.00

Many important decision problems in computational science involve multi-­agent
systems (MAS) in which multiple decision makers must choose strategies for
action from a set of alternatives. (One example is selecting a security policy
--- for example by police --- to protect critical infrastructure against
attackers.) This CAREER award project develops methods for analyzing MAS to
select strategies for an agent to follow that will lead to desirable outcomes.

The central tenant driving the project is that a good strategy should be robust
in the sense that it will continue to perform well even when there is
uncertainty about the outcomes or how other agents will choose their strategies.
An important component of the project is a multi-purpose web platform supporting
both research experiments and education on game-playing agents. The PI will
design course modules that use this platform to involve undergraduates in
designing game-playing agents, offering an exciting way to practice basic
programming and develop critical thinking and data analysis skills. The agents
designed by students also play an important role in the research; they will
provide a diverse library of strategies to evaluate the robustness of reasoning
methods for play against opponents with unanticipated behaviors. This platform,
and the data sets generated with it will serve the broader research and
education communities in computer science and MAS.

Research on robust methods for strategic reasoning has the potential to
significantly improve decision making in many important real-world problems,
including decision support tools for homeland security operations. The
availability of robust methods will also enable new applications of
computational game theory in domains where confidence in the strategies, despite
uncertainty, is critical. This award also supports broadening participation by
developing research capacity at UTEP, a minority-­serving institution.

The project's primary technical contributions are in computational game theory.
Typical game-theoretic solutions are not robust to the kinds of uncertainty that
arise in real applications; these include payoff uncertainty, abstraction error,
and opponent modeling error. Robustness requires techniques that encompass
unanticipated situations, as well as those where it is possible to precisely
characterize the uncertainty. The project extends the framework of meta-games to
provide a methodology for evaluating robustness in the context of different
kinds of uncertainty, including the three listed above. The PI uses meta-games
to evaluate new concepts for robust strategic reasoning, including methods based
on Bayesian games, interval-based approaches, and approaches drawn from
behavioral game theory. The web-based platform developed in the project
facilitates extensive experiments with game-playing agents. This will be used to
collect a diverse pool of unanticipated agent strategies (including ones
designed by undergraduate students), enabling a more comprehensive investigation
of robustness to unanticipated opponent behaviors.