* 1253453
* CAREER: Understanding the Micromechanisms of Growth and Remodeling of Collagenous Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Thao (Vicky) Nguyen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate the fundamental microscale mechanisms of growth and remodeling
of collagenous tissues. Collagen structures impart stiffness, strength, and
toughness to a variety of soft tissues including blood vessels, skin, and the
cornea. Mechanical stimuli can alter the production and organization of collagen
structures, leading to growth and remodeling, through a variety of active
cellular mechanisms and passive microscale mechanisms. The research will focus
on a model biological tissue, the sclera of experimental glaucoma mouse eyes
subjected to chronic intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation. We hypothesize that
growth and remodeling of the sclera in response to pathological loading is
strongly influenced by 3 microscale mechanisms: (1) strain-induced collagen
degradation and accumulation, (2) collagen crimp remodeling, and (3)
myofibroblast (cellular) matrix contraction. The proposed work will develop new
experimental methods, including an inflation experiment using confocal
microscopy and a digital volume correlation (DVC), to measure changes in
mechanical properties, collagen structure, and cellular features caused by
chronic IOP elevation; and constitutive models for growth and remodeling based
on the 3 hypothesized mechanisms.

If successful, these studies will add significantly to understanding how
mechanical loading influences growth and remodeling of collagen tissues. This
will have direct translation to the study and treatment of a range of diseases,
such as tendon injuries, cardiac fibrosis, and glaucoma. The basic research of
the proposal is important to public health, because glaucoma is the second
leading cause of blindness in the world. The educational program focuses on
course development on biomechanics and on creating opportunities for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students to participate in biomechanics
research. The research program is multidisciplinary and collaborative in nature.
All student investigators will interact closely with ophthalmologist and
biophysicist collaborators to learn a breadth of knowledge not found in
traditional engineering education.