* 1253363
* CAREER: Stereoselective Homoallylation and Homocrotylation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Isaac Krauss, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Issac Krauss at Brandeis University. Professor Krauss will
develop cyclopropanated allylboronate reagents and catalysts which can be used
for diastereo- and enantioselective homoallylation and homocrotylation of
aldehydes and related electrophiles. In the reagent development area, Dr. Krauss
will 1) explore homoallylation scope and diastereoselection with variously
substituted racemic boronates, 2) investigate enantioselection and
matched/mismatched effects with alpha-chiral boronates, 3) develop optimal
syntheses of optically active trans boronates for enantioselective syn
homocrotylation and optically active cis- and trisubstituted boronates for
enantioselective anti homocrotylation and delivery of quaternary stereocenters,
and 4) demonstrate the utility of these boronates in a concise formal synthesis
of spongidepsin. In the catalyst development area, Dr. Krauss will explore the
potential chiral and achiral homoallylation catalysis by 1) boron carboxylates,
2) boron phenolates, and 3) other Lewis acids, combined with O,O-, N,O-, and
N,N-boracycle reagents. Finally, in collaboration with Professor Kendall N.
Houk's group at UCLA, computational studies will assist in catalyst and boronate
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of more
efficient methods for the preparation of complex organic molecules. Since most
medicines and pesticides are made of complex organic molecules, more efficient
preparation methods will facilitate the development of new medicines and
pesticides. They could also improve the current preparation of existing
medicines and pesticides, thus lowering their costs. Synthesis of complex
organic molecules are also required in many other areas of activities such as
advanced material preparations and fundamental biological studies. In addition,
Professor Krauss will develop an educational program to increase scientific
literacy in mature citizens. With the support of BOLLI (Brandeis' Osher Lifelong
Learning Institute) a series of lay-appropriate educational presentations and
seminars will promote scientific literacy and highlight the impact of basic
research in everyday life. Design and execution of these presentations will
include graduate participation. Presentations and seminars piloted as BOLLI
programming will also be repeated at Boston area retirement communities and
posted on the web.