* 1253276
* CAREER: Individual and Group Animal Flight Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Tyson Hedrick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 590,448.00

Progress in understanding the individual and group maneuvers of flying animals
has been slow to date, hampered by technical limitations in quantifying flight
behavior and performance in the field. However, the diversity of form and
function apparent in living bird, bat and insect species is related to the
ability to maneuver, particularly to avoid or enable prey capture and prevail in
contests with others of the same species - activities which cannot be adequately
replicated in a laboratory. This research will take advantage of recent advances
in low power, high-resolution, high-speed video technology to develop flexible
recording techniques suitable for precisely measuring individual and group
animal flight maneuvers in natural environments over a wide range of sizes and
time scales. These capabilities will be used to address hypotheses on the
fundamental relationships between shape, biomechanics and maneuverability in
flying animals and on their group behavior. Similarities in basic grouping
parameters will be examined among different bird or bat species known for
varying degrees of coordinated behavior. In addition to providing insight into
the biology of a range of animal species, discoveries in this area will also
help speed development of micro-air vehicles, animal scale flying machines.
Finally, this proposal will lead to rich, freely available data sets and ready-
to-use software for other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the
education and outreach activities funded by this proposal, a partnership with
UNC's Morehead Planetarium and Science Center will incorporate findings from
this research and other recent studies of animal flight behavior and performance
into a fulldome planetarium show and associated educational materials to be
viewed by visiting North Carolina primary school students. The show and
materials will also be shared with other planetariums worldwide.