* 1253126
* CAREER: Modulation of a Neuroendocrine System by Endocrine Disruptors -  BPA effects on GnRH neuron development, physiology and reproductive behavior in teleost fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Siddharth Ramakrishnan, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Neurons releasing Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) in the brain are the
main controllers of reproduction and reproductive behavior in most vertebrates,
including humans. Reproductive health, fertility and behavioral problems have
been linked to abnormal development and function of the GnRH neuronal system.
There is increasing evidence that endocrine disrupting chemicals, such as
bisphenol A (BPA) - a synthetic estrogen in our environment - have deleterious
effects on the reproductive systems and behaviors in many species. This study
addresses how GnRH neuron development, physiology and reproductive behavior, are
altered by chronic exposure to low levels of BPA. This project will use
transgenic fish models, having GnRH neurons tagged with green fluorescent
proteins, to address effects of chronic BPA exposure on: a) embryonic GnRH
neuron development, b) physiology of adult GnRH neurons, and c) mating and
social behavior. Experiments will use neural electrical recordings, confocal
imaging, immunohistochemistry and behavioral observations. The project will
result in understanding how endocrine disruptors modulate the GnRH system and
suggest potential solutions for reproductive problems like ovarian dysfunction,
miscarriages, pre-term births, precocious puberty and Kallman's syndrome.

This study will be the first to address the impact of BPA on GnRH neuron
development, physiology, and function, in conjunction with whole animal
behavior. Data and protocols from the study will be available to the academic
community and the general public via the University of Puget Sound archives and
the lab website (http://sidslab.wikispaces.com/). Undergraduate researchers will
receive broad neuroscience training at the cell, circuit, and whole-animal
levels, with ecological perspectives. K-12 students will be involved in
intensive workshops, ongoing collaborative observational studies and regular
seminars through outreach at public schools. The plan is to Excite, Educate,
Engage by making participants excited about science, educated about neuroscience
and the impact of environmental toxins, and engaged with the community and the
environment.