* 1253523
* CAREER: Scaffolding Engineering Design to Develop Integrated STEM Understanding with WISEngineering
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Chiu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 06/30/2019
* USD 535,793.00

The development of six curricular projects that integrate mathematics based on
the Common Core Mathematics Standards with science concepts from the Next
Generation Science Standards combined with an engineering design pedagogy is the
focus of this DRK-12 CAREER project from the University of Virginia. Research on
the learning sciences with a focus on a knowledge integration perspective of
helping students build and retain connections among normative and relevant ideas
and existing knowledge structures the development of the WiseEngineering
learning environment, an online learning management system that scaffolds
engineering design projects. WiseEngineering provides support for students and
teachers to conduct engineering design projects in middle and high school
settings. Dynamic virtualizations that enable learners to observe and experiment
with phenomena are combined with knowledge integration patterns to structure a
technology rich learning environments for students. The research focuses on the
ways in which metacognition, namely self-knowledge and self-regulation interact
with learning in these technology-enhanced environments.Embedded assessments and
student pre and post-testing of key science and mathematics constructs provide
evidence of the development of student understanding.A rubric that examines
knowledge integration is used to examine the extent wo which students understand
how multiple concepts interact in a given context. A mixed-methods research
design will examines how students and teachers in middle school mathematics and
science courses develop understanding of the underlying principles in STEM. The
PI of this award has integrated research and education in this proposal by
connecting her research on engineering design and technology-enabled learning
environments with the preservice secondary education methods course that she
teachs. In addition, she has folded the research into the instructional
technology graduate courses of which she is the
instructor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering design is a key area of the Next
Generation Science Standards that requires additional curricular materials
development and research on how students integrate concepts across mathematics
and science to engage in these engineering practices. The technology-rich
learning environment, WISEngineering, provides the context to examine how
student engineering design principles evolve over time. The opportunitiy for
students to provide critiques of each others' work provides the context in which
to examine crucial metacognitive principles. Classroom observations and teacher
interviews provides the opportunity to examine how the technology-rich
engineering design learning environment integrates STEM knowledge for teachers
as well as students.