* 1253723
* CAREER: Replication Protein A Modification-Dependent Function in Mitosis and Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Stuart Haring, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2019
* USD 992,429.00

Intellectual Merit: Proper replication and maintenance of the DNA genome is
essential for cell growth, function, and viability. When cells are exposed to
environmental stresses that damage DNA, pathways for repairing the DNA damage
are induced. One key player in this damage control is Replication Protein A
(RPA), a complex of three proteins that serves as a "bridge" between damaged DNA
and the machinery needed to repair the damage. In this capacity, RPA has the
potential to interact with many proteins, but how specificity of those
interactions is determined is not clear. One idea is that stress-induced
phosphorylation of RPA mediates differential interaction between RPA and various
proteins involved in DNA repair. This research will test that hypothesis by
identifying which amino acid residues in the RPA proteins are phosphorylated,
how phosphorylation affects physical interactions between RPA and different
protein partners, and what impact RPA phosphorylation has on the ability of
cells to maintain proper growth and viability. The research will be carried out
in baker's yeast, which is amenable to both genetic and biochemical manipulation
and is accessible to researchers of all skill levels. Because RPA is highly
conserved (from yeast to human), the research findings will advance
understanding of how eukaryotes coordinate DNA repair processes for maintaining
genome integrity and cellular viability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Centered at North Dakota State University, this project will contribute to
learning and research opportunities science for college students in rural North
Dakota and surrounding states by: improving molecular biology course content;
expanding educational opportunities for non-traditional students through
development of distance-learning courses in molecular biology, cell biology,
genetics and biochemistry; providing opportunities for undergraduate students to
conduct hands-on laboratory research; and providing a pipeline for interested
students to obtain master's degrees as prerequisite for entering a new doctoral
research program in STEM education. By fostering student literacy in science,
this project will enable North Dakota State University to produce graduates with
a solid scientific foundation that could positively impact their future
contributions to society.