* 1253036
* CAREER: Redesigning a Learning Progression to Build upon Students' Intuitive Ideas about Motion and Support Teachers' Formative Assessment Practices
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2020
* Alicia Alonzo, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2020
* USD 659,773.00

CAREER: Redesigning a Learning Progression to Build upon Students? Intuitive
Ideas about Motion and Support Teachers? Formative Assessment
Practices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning progressions??descriptions of the
successively more sophisticated ways of thinking about a topic that can follow
one another as children learn? (National Research Council, 2007, p. 219)?have
the potential to influence a wide range of educational policies and practice.
However, learning progressions based upon research on students? misconceptions
may not be well-suited to informing teachers? formative assessment practices
(eliciting, interpreting, and responding to students? ideas). This project
explores the premise that a focus on the productive nature of students?
intuitive ideas may provide a stronger basis for both formative assessment
practices and learning progressions that can support these practices. Insights
derived from this work should influence the design of learning progressions,
curricula, formative assessment strategies, and teacher preparation to be more
responsive to students? intuitive ideas. The project will take place in high
school physics classrooms and in the science teacher preparation program at
Michigan State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of four
strands. Strand A involves curriculum design work to redesign the introductory
high school physics curriculum to highlight the productive nature of students?
intuitive ideas about motion. Videos of classroom instruction and design team
meetings, as well as evidence of student learning (interviews and student work
samples) will be used to inform the design process.&lt;br/&gt;Starting with a
single pilot teacher and later expanding to involve an additional six teachers,
design principles will be developed that can be used to revise existing physics
curricula to be more responsive to students? intuitive ideas. Strand B uses the
curriculum design research as the basis for developing an alternative force and
motion learning progression and associated assessment items. Three rounds of
revisions, drawing upon students? responses to the assessment items (in open-
ended and ordered multiple-choice item formats, as well as in cognitive and
think-aloud interviews) will be used to develop the learning progression and
assessment items. Strands C and D focus on supporting teachers? formative
assessment practices. Strand C entails a summer professional development
workshop and ongoing assistance during the academic year to support in-service
teachers? formative assessment practices, based upon the force and motion
learning progression. Strand D involves application of ideas from the other
three strands to inform revisions to the Michigan State University secondary
science teacher preparation program. This effort represents an expansion and
application of ideas about the potential of students? intuitive ideas to other
science content areas and to work with novice teachers. An advisory board will
provide formative and evaluative reviews of all project products and evidence
for their use. A key indicator of success is whether formative assessment
practices based on the alternative learning progression have a positive
influence on student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will directly
involve seven in-service high school physics teachers and a cohort of
approximately 30 secondary science pre-service teachers, as well as their
students. The project will contribute specific examples of redesigned physics
curricula and a learning progression, both building upon students? intuitive
ideas. These examples will represent a departure from typical physics
instruction, in which students? real world experiences are rejected as
?misconceptions.? The project will also contribute evidence of the use of a
learning progression (and, more generally, an emphasis on the productive nature
of students? intuitive ideas) to support teachers? formative assessment
practices. Since formative assessment has been demonstrated to have a
significant impact on student learning, particularly for lower-performing
students, the products of this research have the potential to expand access to
physics learning.