* 1253465
* CAREER: Towards HCI Theory for Technical and Gender Identity
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Jennifer Rode, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2019
* USD 316,559.00

The PI's long-term goal is to create theory to inform HCI design practices, to
ensure the production of egalitarian designs that reflect all users' values. In
particular, she aims to create feminist theory for HCI , which she hopes will
close the gap in women's participation in computing. Previously, the PI has
shown how approaches to designing for women are questionable when viewed in
light of feminist theory. Feminist scholars argue that the lack of women in
computing further discourages women from pursuing programming-related careers,
and that women are also excluded because technologies created by men better
address male needs. The PI believes the problem lies not only in who is excluded
but in that the design processes inherently alienate women. Her approach is to
address the problem by bridging previously unrelated aspects of the learning
sciences, human-computer interaction, and the science and technology studies of
gender, which will be combined with findings from a multi-year ethnographic
study to acquire a deep understanding of how girls co-construct their gender and
technical identities, how technologies come to be associated with one gender or
the other, and how this affects girls' career choices. These results will be
used as the basis for participatory design with the girls to create technologies
in keeping with their gender identity. In doing so the PI expects to learn about
girls' needs, enabling her to develop best practices for gender-sensitive design
ensuring equitable access to technology. By bridging previously unconnected
literatures, the project will reframe the problem of gender-equity in computer
science from a pipeline issue to one requiring improved design and evaluation
practices in HCI. The multi-year ethnographic study, to be conducted both in
school and at after school programs, will provide a longitudinal understanding
of how young women co-construct their gender and technical identities, what
appeals to them about technical careers, and the process by which technology
artifacts acquire symbolic gender. Participatory design will allow theory to be
applied to understand what appeals to girls in the technology design process.
While the project is not itself an education intervention, by building on both
the empirical and theoretical contributions this research will explore how
design practices themselves can be used to increase female participation in
computing.

Broader Impacts: This research will directly impact women's training in
computing, as well as lead to changes in the design process to be more inclusive
for women. The project will create grounded theory on gender and technical
identity that will inform participatory design, which in turn will allow the
identification of needed changes to the software development process so that it
results in more technologies that empower young women to use technology. As a
consequence, the pool of qualified computer scientists will ultimately expand to
include more women, which in the long turn will increase workforce thereby
making the United States more globally competitive in business and more able to
pursue scientific national security efforts. Furthermore, the project will
directly benefit the group of young women involved in the ethnographic study,
increasing their practical experiences with technology by teaching them software
design, HCI, programming skills, and a foundation in computational thinking.
Through participatory design the project will also expose middle and high school
teachers to ubiquitous computing technologies, providing teacher development.