* 1253327
* CAREER: PROTEUS: A Practical and Rigorous Toolkit for Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Ashwin Machanavajjhala, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 01/31/2019
* USD 659,996.00

Statistical privacy, or the problem of disclosing aggregate statistics about
data collected from individuals while ensuring the privacy of individual level
sensitive properties, is an important problem in today's age of big data. The
key challenge in statistical privacy is that applications for data collection
and analysis operate on varied kinds of data, and have diverse requirements for
the information that must be kept secret, and the adversaries that they must
tolerate. Thus, application domain experts, who are frequently not experts in
privacy, cannot directly use an existing, general-purpose privacy definition.
Instead, they must develop a new privacy definition or customize an existing
one. Currently there exist no rigorous techniques to customize privacy to
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds PROTEUS, a general-
purpose toolkit for developing rigorous privacy definitions and mechanisms that
can be customized to applications. The cornerstone of PROTEUS is a novel privacy
framework that allows customized privacy protection by explicitly listing the
secrets to be protected, enumerating the (potentially infinite set of) possible
adversaries, and ensuring rigorous bounds on the information disclosed to each
adversary about every secret. Novel theoretical tools in PROTEUS include methods
to reason about privacy for correlated data, privacy against realistic
adversaries, and techniques to express and enforce personalized privacy
preferences. These tools result in practical privacy mechanisms for publishing
social science survey data, social network analysis, and analysis of user-
activity streams. Broader impacts of this project include developing new courses
in privacy and big-data management, as well as technology transfer to the US
Census.&lt;br/&gt;