* 1253081
* CAREER:  Noticing and Using Students' Prior Knowledge in Problem-Based Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Gloriana Gonzalez Rivera, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 04/30/2019
* USD 860,509.00

Advocates of problem-based instruction argue that the approach can help students
develop a deeper understanding of mathematics, acquire more positive attitudes
toward mathematics, and gain experience with more authentic applications of
mathematics. Engaging students in problem-based instruction, however, increases
challenges to teachers who must attend to the influence of student prior
knowledge and adjust instruction accordingly. The proposed project will develop
and study a professional development framework that is designed to help high
school geometry teachers attend more carefully to student prior knowledge,
interpret the learning implications of student prior knowledge, and adjust
teaching practices accordingly. Participating teachers will learn to perform
these complex tasks by participating in study groups to analyze animations of
productive teaching practices; to collaborate in planning, implementing, and
analyzing geometry lessons; and to critique videos of their own classroom
instruction. Prior research has shown that collective examination of videos can
help teachers increase attention on student thinking, a key to noticing and
accommodating student prior knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key, innovative
feature of the professional development framework for this study is the use of
animated vignettes of classroom instruction to prepare teachers to examine
videos of their own practice. The advantage of using cartoon-based animations of
classroom practices is that they can be designed to depict specific teaching
actions while excluding the usual distractions in videos, such as physical
features, clothing, or individual mannerisms. Also, teachers can develop a
critical eye for relevant interactions without feeling the need to be overly
polite when discussing fictional scenarios portrayed by cartoon characters. This
preliminary practice will also enable teachers to develop a common language
about noticing and responding to student prior knowledge before critiquing
videos of their own classroom practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances knowledge of professional development experiences that help teachers
notice and take into account the prior knowledge that students bring to the
classroom. Results from studying the effects of coupling analysis of animated
vignettes of classroom practices with critiquing videos on one's own classroom
practices have the potential to significantly enhance professional development
practices among mathematics teachers, as well as teachers in general. Results
from the project will be broadly disseminated via conference presentations,
articles in diverse media outlets, and a project website that will make project
products available, be a location for information about the project for the
press and the public, and be a tool to foster teacher-to-teacher communication.
The results of this study, as well as the protocols and instruments developed
during the research project, will inform and support the researcher's own
efforts to better understand and improve teacher learning. The education plan of
the researcher focuses on translating the outcomes of this study to the
practices of preservice teacher education by connecting instructional decision-
making more explicitly to research on student learning, thereby promoting
learning trajectory based instruction.