* 1253143
* CAREER:  Surface Chemistry-Controlled Formation of Colloidal Nanoparticle Alloys
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Jill Millstone, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2018
* USD 612,280.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the
Division of Chemistry will support the CAREER research and education program of
Prof. Jill Millstone at the University of Pittsburgh. Prof. Millstone and her
students will develop surface-chemistry driven methods for preparing a broad
range of transition and noble metal nanoparticle alloys. These alloys exhibit
unique optical, magnetic, and catalytic behaviors that make them attractive for
technologies ranging from near-infrared (NIR) imaging to heterogeneous
catalysis. Prof. Millstone and her students will investigate the impact of
particle-ligand interactions, intermolecular ligand forces, and solvent-ligand
chemistry to tune both the atomic composition and atom distribution throughout
the nanoparticle. The role of ligand species will be tracked by combining
standard nanoparticle analysis techniques such as electron microscopy with
classic molecular characterization approaches such as nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR), where NMR allows one to simultaneously acquire detailed
information about both nanoparticle surface and ligand environments. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the proposed study will introduce a
synthetic framework that bridges molecular and bulk descriptions of alloy
formation and provides a straightforward, sustainable route to a previously
inaccessible class of homogeneous-alloy nanostructures. These well-defined
architectures then provide promising platforms for applications ranging from
fossil fuel conversion to cancer detection. The CAREER educational plans of
Prof. Millstone focus on the development of a Wikipedia-style website devoted to
nanochemistry. This website will act as a "living" resource for a broad
community of students and faculty who are interested in learning, teaching, or
performing nanomaterial synthesis but who have limited access to the expertise
necessary to begin their involvement productively.