* 1253413
* CAREER: Achieving Quality Crowdsourcing across Tasks, Data Scales, and Operational Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Matthew Lease, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 582,000.00

While crowdsourcing and human computation methods are rapidly transforming the
practice of data collection in research and industry, ensuring quality of the
collected data remains difficult in practice and exposes projects relaying on
quality of crowdsourced data to significant risk. This reduces the benefits of
crowdsourcing for both current adopters and a wider community of potential
beneficiaries. Although diverse communities have developed statistical
algorithms for quality assurance, the splintered nature of these communities has
led to relatively little comparative benchmarking and/or integration of
alternative techniques. Dearth of reference implementations and shared datasets
has further abated progress, as have evaluations based on tightly-coupled
systems, domain specific tasks, and synthetic data. This project investigates,
integrates, and rigorously benchmarks diverse quality assurance algorithms
across a range of tasks, data scales, and operational settings. Overall,
technical findings are expected to transform current understanding of quality
assurance methods for crowdsourcing, including identifying key limitations of
the current state-of-the-art in order to focus ongoing research and innovation
where it can have the greatest impact. Reference implementations of key
algorithms are designed to support reuse, reproducible findings, continual
benchmarking, and ongoing progress. Project will yield new, sanitized public
datasets to support ongoing community benchmarking and shared-task
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical contributions from the project are
expected to offset risk of growing social inequity as online, distributed work
becomes increasingly prevalent. Assumptions that crowdsourcing workers are
unreliable or interchangeable limit the complexity and scope of work which can
be successfully accomplished with online crowdsourcing. By limiting the amount
of work available online and opportunities for skilled work, this further
restricts the range of upward economic mobility achievable via crowd work. By
developing effective methods to measure work quality over time and identify
trusted workers, it will be possible to differentiate, recognize, and reward
quality work to promote merit-based economic mobility. Educational activities
include a new crowdsourcing course designed for college freshman from diverse
backgrounds, a graduate seminar integrating the project's research software,
presentations to the student chapter of a professional society, and tutorials
and short courses benefiting industry practitioners and researchers. This
project will inform the principal investigator's community advisory and
organizational activities, including Advisory Board service for an annual
industrial conference and organizing workshops bringing the industry and
research communities together. Information and results will be disseminated via
the project web site (http://ir.ischool.utexas.edu/career/).