* 1253334
* CAREER: Domain-Specific Modeling Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2021
* Jonathan Sprinkle, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2021
* USD 541,350.00

The objective of this research is an injection of new modeling techniques into
the area of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs). The approach is to design new
architectures for domain-specific modeling tools in order to permit feedback
from analysis, validation, and verification engines to influence how CPSs are
designed. This project involves new research into the integration of existing,
heterogeneous modeling languages in order to address problems in CPS design,
rather than a single language for all CPS. Since many tools for analysis,
validation, and verification focus on at most two of the three major components
of CPS (communication, computation, and control), new paradigms in modeling are
used to integrate tools early in the design process. The algorithms and software
developed in this project run validation and verification tools on models, and
then close the loop by using the tool outputs to automatically modify the system
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The satisfaction of design requirements in CPSs is
critical for tomorrow's societal technologies such as smart buildings, home
healthcare, and water management. Among the most compelling design requirements
are those of safety, and CPSs for autonomous vehicles exemplify this well. By
involving a full-sized autonomous vehicle in this project, the validation and
verification of safety requirements is tied to a concrete platform that is
broadly understood. By involving students in the design of behaviors of the
vehicle, the project exposes scientists and engineers of tomorrow to societal-
scale problems, and tools to address them.