* 1253073
* CAREER: Scaling of Memristive Nanodevices and Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Qiangfei Xia, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

The research objectives of this CAREER proposal are to fabricate, test,
characterize and understand memristive nanodevices and arrays with
unprecedentedly small feature size and high packing density. The approaches are:
1) scaling of memristive nanodevices using nanoimprint lithograpy, electron beam
lithography, directed self-assembly of block copolymer, and the combination of
these next generation nanolithography technologies; 2) systematic electrical
measurements of the devices/arrays of different length scale and elucidation of
the scaling rules to sub-5 nm regime; and 3) physical characterization and
underlying device physics studies at different length scales.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;As CMOS scaling approaches its limit,
it is important that we develop new devices more versatile in functionality.
Memristive devices are two-terminal passive electronic devices that use high and
low resistance states instead of charge storage as '1's and '0's. As a result,
the device scalability is not limited by the quantum effect but only dependent
on how small the device one can make. Memristive devices have fast switch speed,
overwrite ability without erase, low power consumption, high endurance and long
data retention time. They are promising for applications in non-volatile memory,
non-volatile logic, reconfigurable circuits and neuromorphic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will lead to significantly smaller
memristive nanodevices (3 nm) in the densest arrays (10 Tbits/in2), offering a
universal solution to high-density non-volatile data storage and non-volatile
logic. With devices of different dimensions available, full spectrum studies in
device switching behavior (power consumption, endurance, switching speed, data
retention time, etc.) as a function of size will be extended to sub-5 nm.
Consequently, the proposed research will increase our understanding of the
switching mechanisms/device physics and extend our knowledge to a physical
regime not as yet achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will have significant scientific, educational and societal impact.
The research will advance transformative device technologies for the integrated
circuits (IC) industry, sustaining the U.S. competitiveness in high-technology
areas. The education objectives of this CAREER proposal are to train next
generation researchers and engineers, and to create motivating learning
opportunities for students, STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) teachers and the general public. The approaches to accomplishing
these goals include: 1) innovative curricula design in semiconductors and
nanotechnology for both graduate and undergraduate students; 2) inspiring
research experience for undergraduate students, in particular women and
minorities; and 3) engaging outreach activities such as Nanotechnology Summer
Institute at UMass Amherst for K-12 teachers and promoting nanoscience using art
among a much broader audience including the general public.