* 1253935
* CAREER: Next Generation Patient Simulators
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Laurel Riek, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 625,160.00

It is estimated that in the United States many thousands of people are killed
each year and billions of dollars lost due to medical errors. The PI argues that
one way to reduce the incidence of such errors is through education involving
human patient simulator (HPS) systems. Although perhaps the most commonly used
android robots in America, a critical technology gap is that none of the
commercially available HPS systems exhibit realistic facial expressions, gaze,
or mouth movements, despite the vital importance of these cues in how providers
assess and treat patients. The PI's goal in this project is to address this
shortcoming by developing novel expression synthesis algorithms and social
control methods, thereby advancing the fields of affective computing and human-
robot interaction. To these ends the PI will model facial features
characteristic of 3 pathologies (stroke, cerebral palsy and dystonia, the latter
being a neurological disorder in which the muscles of the trunk, shoulders, and
neck go into spasm so that the head and limbs are held in unnatural positions),
and 2 affective states (pain and drowsiness). She will synthesize these facial
features on a new HPS system and create a model of shared social control for
operators of expressive robots, and evaluate their impact on educational and
task outcomes.

Broader Impacts: This research will transform the state of the art in HPS
technology by enabling educators to run simulations currently impossible with
commercially available technology, thereby leading to more realistic training
experiences for doctors, nurses, and combat medics, which will ultimately
improve healthcare. It will create new facial models of stroke, dystonia and
cerebral palsy, which may impact fields such as computer vision and biometrics
while also enhancing our understanding of these disorders and providing a means
for educating people how to better interact with those suffering from these
disabilities and/or to quickly recognize signs of stroke. The PI will also
conduct substantial mentoring activities for undergraduates and outreach
activities for K-12 students.