* 1253263
* CAREER:Numeracy and Risk Literacy
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Edward Cokely, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2016
* USD 451,566.00

A century ago, the writer H.G. Wells predicted that statistical thinking would
one day be as necessary for efficient citizenship as the ability to read and
write. This day has come. A growing body of research in the decision sciences
has shown that statistical numeracy (i.e., the ability to understand
probabilistic information) is strongly related to risk literacy (i.e., the
ability to accurately interpret and make good decisions based on information
about risk). In order to model and improve these crucial decision making skills
we need a better understanding of underlying cognitive mechanisms and we need
more efficient assessment and training technologies. This project maps cognitive
processes and individual differences (e.g., intelligence, numeracy, anxiety,
personality) linking numeracy and risk literacy across diverse populations
(e.g., varying in ages, cultures, education levels) and wide-ranging decisions
(e.g., medical, financial, environmental, political). Psychometric and process-
tracing experiments serve as a basis for an integrated cognitive model of risk
literacy and its relationship to numeracy. In turn, the project develops new
numeracy and risk literacy tests and tutoring tools, improving our ability to
predict risk comprehension and to avoid misunderstanding. The risk literacy
norms developed in the project help in estimating the generalizability of basic
laboratory findings and in informing the design of decision support technologies
(e.g., risk communication, intelligent tutors).

Professionals, policy makers, and the public (e.g., for loans, diets, surgeries,
investments, safety, energy) all routinely use statistical information about
risk to inform their decisions. Related mathematical skills are among the most
influential educational factors contributing to economic prosperity in
industrialized countries. Unfortunately, many people are not sufficiently
numerate or risk literate and so they may not make the most informed decisions.
In accord with primary goals of the US public education policy, this project
produces new knowledge to improve our understanding of numeracy and the
mechanisms. This project supports students and researchers who are committed to
theoretically grounded research on risk literacy and its applications, including
the creation of free online educational tools for use in high schools, colleges,
businesses, hospitals, and by the general public. These and other outreach
efforts increase awareness of numeracy and risk literacy, and the biases they
inoculate against. These efforts also coordinate worldwide research and widen
the impact of www.RiskLiteracy.org, thereby improving access to evidence-based
resources for students, scientists, policy makers, and people around the world.