* 1253229
* CAREER: A Formal Verification Platform Focused on Programmer Productivity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2018
* USD 520,000.00

Billions of people depend daily on software systems built on top of slowly
changing operating systems, programming languages, and library interfaces. A
unifying theme of this infrastructure, from operating systems to Web browsers,
is the use of nested sandboxes, involving multiple levels of abstraction, with
complete mediation of resource accesses within and across levels. That is, as a
program runs, several layers of abstraction are checking all resource accesses
for conformance to security and isolation policies. This run-time checking
imposes substantial overhead and is also quite inflexible. Often some sandbox
layer is fundamentally incompatible with a new programming technique that could
bring improved performance, security, etc. We will study how the Bedrock system
may be used to replace restrictive run-time policy enforcement with open-ended
compile-time policy enforcement, by requiring programmers to distribute code
with formal mathematical proofs of policy conformance. As a concrete case study,
we will implement a platform to replace today's common combinations of cloud
hosting and Web browsers, providing a similar application experience to end
users while giving programmers much more flexibility. To educate the future
users of our tools, we will also develop an online tutor program suitable for
use in introductory discrete math and logic classes, giving students instant
feedback on the validity of their rigorous proofs.

The theoretical foundation of Bedrock, a Coq library, is higher-order separation
logic for assembly languages. Several past projects have demonstrated how proofs
in such logics may be carried out using proof assistants. Bedrock is
distinguished by providing tools for mostly automated proofs, where the
programmer provides help to the verifier through loop invariants and a few other
types of annotation. We will continue improving this automation support to lower
the human cost of verification further, while also investigating ways to broaden
Bedrock's domain, such as to multi-core programs. We also intend to investigate
the new semantic idea of phantom monitors, which allow Bedrock programs to spawn
arbitrary automata (defined with their transition relations in Coq) that watch
all program behavior and may veto actions that violate some policy. This is a
compile time-only feature to support effective specifications, and we hope to
use it as a unifying framework for specifying the interfaces between components
in our proof-of-concept distributed application platform.