* 1253644
* CAREER: Abstractions and Middleware for D3 Science on NSF Distributed Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 715,999.00

Technical Description: This CAREER Award project will develop middleware to
support Distributed Dynamic Data-intensive (D3) science on Distributed
Cyberinfrastructure (DCI). Existing NSF-funded CI systems, such as the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) and the Open Science Grid
(OSG), use distributed computing to substantially increase the computational
power available to research scientists around the globe; however, such
distributed systems face limitations in their ability to handle the large data-
volumes being generated by today?s scientific instruments and simulations. To
address this challenge, the PI will develop and deploying extensible
abstractions that will facilitate the integration of high-performance computing
and large-scale data sets. Building on previous work on pilot-jobs, these new
abstractions will implement the analogous concept of ?pilot-data? and the
linking principle of ?affinity.? The result will be a unified conceptual
framework for improving the matching of data and computing resources and for
facilitating dynamic workflow placement and scheduling. This research has the
potential to significantly advance multiple areas of science and engineering, by
generating production-grade middleware for accomplishing scalable big-data
science on a range of DCI systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Importance:
Increasingly, the high-performance computing resources available to scientific
researchers are distributed across multiple machines in multiple locations. The
integration of these resources requires a fabric of ?middleware,? upon which a
wide variety of user applications, tools and services can be built and run. As
more accurate and ubiquitous scientific instruments and models produce ever-
larger volumes of data, however, this distributed cyberinfrastructure (DCI) is
confronting unprecedented data-handling challenges that exceed the capabilities
of existing DCI middleware. In this project, the PI will develop, test and
implement new middleware solutions, specifically designed for the coming era of
big-data distributed supercomputing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also
develop new curricula and new teaching and outreach materials for introducing
secondary and college students, secondary school teachers, and the general
public to the emerging field of distributed data-intensive science. In
partnership with FutureGrid, the PI will design simple and effective vehicles
for sharing these resources with Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and other institutions where faculty might otherwise have relatively
limited opportunity to develop advanced course materials. The PI will also
partner with the Douglass Program for Women in Science, and The Academy at
Rutgers for Girls in Engineering and Technology (TARGET), to increase engagement
of, and support for, female students in the DCI research community.