* 1253530
* CAREER: Automatic Generation of High Efficiency Graphics Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Kayvon Fatahalian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2018
* USD 503,914.00

The next generation of visual computing applications will require graphics
systems to execute within a wide range of computing environments (from embedded
devices to supercomputers) and be both more powerful and orders of magnitude
more efficient than existing systems today. Unfortunately, creating efficient
rendering solutions for any one platform or any one class of workloads is
currently a laborious, expert-level task whose difficulty discourages innovation
in interactive graphics techniques and graphics hardware architecture. In
response, the PI is developing technologies that, given knowledge of a virtual
scene, a specific rendering task, and parallel hardware platform, can
automatically generate an optimized graphics system implementation specialized
for this context. The core idea is to develop unifying representations for the
large space of algorithmic approaches to key rendering problems such as surface
visibility and shading and then to leverage these representations in new
intelligent renderer compilation systems that identity efficient algorithms for
a given workload and machine context. In this system, selecting appropriate
algorithms is as much a part of the renderer compilation process as synthesis of
high performance code. Defining new core graphics programming abstractions that
embody these parameterized algorithmic spaces, exploring their application
scope, and determining what graphics domain knowledge is fundamental to
automating graphics system optimization are significant research components of
this project. A second component of the project involves modeling and
characterizing graphics system behavior in order to guide automated discovery of
efficient solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphics system performance is a
fundamental enabler of new visual computing applications. In particular, project
success stands to catalyze the impact of visual computing in mobile and embedded
environments, where photorealistic augmented reality and high-resolution display
of information will be transformative to tasks such as navigation, worker
training, as well as new forms of digital entertainment and the arts. Success
also stands to have cross-disciplinary benefit to the domain of scientific
computing, as hardware, software, and compilation technologies developed for
graphics acceleration continue to have widespread impact on the advancement of
general parallel computing. High-performance visual computing topics will be
used as a central component of efforts to modernize parallel computing
education. The results of this effort will be available to the public as an on-
line textbook and web reference for modern parallel computing. The project web
site (http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/projects/renderergenerator/) provides
additional information on the project.