* 1253129
* RUI:   Survey and Inventory of Parasites of Fishes in the Big Thicket National Preserve
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Michael Barger, Peru State College
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 267,000.00

This project tests whether streams and lakes in the Big Thicket National
Preserve (BTNP) in East Texas harbor a higher diversity of animal species than
streams and lakes in surrounding, unprotected areas. This will be accomplished
via a comprehensive survey of the parasites of fishes in the BTNP and the
surrounding area that encompasses the historical range of the Big Thicket.
Parasites will be utilized as indicator species for overall biodiversity and
community interactions, and is expected to include at least 220 parasite species
from 8 animal groups and at least 95 species of fishes.&lt;br/&gt;The project
will greatly accelerate discovery of new species in an area under intense human
pressure, provide critical, informative tests of the utility of conservation
preserves in protecting natural ecosystems, and will help inform future
decisions regarding conservation design and protection of natural resources. In
addition, the project will enhance the nation's public museum holdings of
parasite and fish specimens (at least 1,600 new lots of specimens), enhance
infrastructure for research and education of students in STEM disciplines at a
small, rural college, provide opportunities and effective avenues for student
advancement towards careers in the sciences, and contribute to ongoing research
and conservation endeavors, including the Big Thicket All Taxa Biodiversity
Inventory coordinated by the National Park Service.