* 1253463
* CAREER:   Correlates of diversification and the investigation of the accumulation of evidence for speciation: phylogeny and systematics of a rapid and recent radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2020
* David Tank, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 806,976.00

It is widely accepted among evolutionary biologists that speciation is a gradual
and constant process. As an empirical investigation of the unified species
concept, this study seeks to understand how the evidence for speciation has
accumulated over time, and to quantify the tempo and mode of trait evolution, in
the North American group of the plant genus Castilleja (the paintbrushes)
inferring if there is an order or a sequence for the acquisition of species
properties, and if specific properties are more important than others at a
certain times or depths in their evolutionary history. Additionally,
paintbrushes are one of the most emblematic groups of wildflowers in western
North America, but are also one of the most taxonomically difficult; this study
will provide the evolutionary framework necessary to investigate species
delimitation, and create a stable and useful infrageneric classification to aid
in species identification, future discovery, and conservation. Furthermore, the
proposed work will critically evaluate the evolutionary and ecological
correlates of diversification, allowing for the discovery of the extent to which
extrinsic (e.g. geography and/or ecology) and intrinsic (e.g. polyploidy and/or
morphology) isolating mechanisms lead to increased diversification rates, and
increase our understanding of the process of speciation in the heterogeneous
mountains of western North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
integrates education and training across multiple subdisciplines in the
biodiversity sciences (e.g. from molecular systematics to floristic research)
and across multiple educational levels (from K-12 to postdoc). It is clear that
federal land management and science agencies are facing a significant shortage
of botanical expertise that will reduce our ability to conserve natural
landscapes in the future. The richness found in the texture that the
biodiversity sciences add to the natural world is where the Advanced Field
Botany course proposed here will fill this growing need for botanical expertise,
provide significant career opportunities to students, and enhance botanical
education and research at the University of Idaho. Moreover, the collaborations
with University of Idaho McCall Outdoor Science School (MOSS) faculty and
graduate students will ensure that this botanical knowledge flows to the more
than 2,000 K-12 students and 200+ teachers that participate in MOSS education
and training programs each year.