* 1253317
* CAREER: Research and Education on Control of Human Movement
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Reinbolt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 429,918.00

Reinbolt 1253317

Project Summary: This CAREER proposal seeks to cultivate an integrated research
and education program to understand human movement control through a design,
control, and simulation environment. A scientific framework, combining
simulations with experiments, is needed to uncover unrecognized principles
governing muscle coordination of abnormal human movement, such as post-stroke
gait limitations. Muscle-actuated dynamic simulations complement experimental
approaches by estimating important variables and identifying cause-and-effect
relationships. The proposed research activities will enable scientific tools and
simulations to investigate rehabilitations that minimize patient-specific gait
limitations following stroke. This research project seeks to: 1) generate
optimization algorithms to match models to experiments; 2) link control systems
and open-source software to simulate neuromuscular systems; 3) create a
controller to synthesize post-stroke gait; 4) characterize and minimize patient-
specific gait limitations following stroke; and 5) disseminate project tools and
results. These research activities are intimately linked to educational
activities that will teach students at various levels the important concepts of
coordinated and uncoordinated human movement. This education project seeks to:
1) design both undergraduate and graduate courses to promote human movement
simulation research; 2) develop an outreach program, with the help of graduate
students, to expose the general public as well as pre-college students to the
exciting multidisciplinary study of human movement control; 3) increase the
participation of underrepresented students in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics; and 4) increase the accessibility for students with
disabilities to participate in programs and activities.

Intellectual Merit: This project is important to advancing knowledge and
understanding in more than one field of science and engineering. It will bridge
gaps existing between the experimental approaches used by physicians, physical
therapists, and rehabilitation scientists and the computer simulation approaches
used by engineers, mathematicians, and computer scientists. The proposed
activities will unite these different approaches and form a symbiotic
relationship that will overcome a critical barrier to advancing the field of
human movement control. The project proposed here is transformative because 1)
simulations will be based on optimal, patient-specific models rather than
generic, one-size-fits-all models, producing the best possible results for
individual subjects and 2) a quantitative basis to discover effective treatments
will be enabled, providing evidence-based knowledge about which treatment
paradigms work best in which post-stroke patients. Although the proposed
activities focus on neuroscience and rehabilitation, these activities may impact
other areas, including ergonomics, sports performance, and injury.

Broader Impact: This project will advance discovery and understanding for post-
stroke rehabilitation while promoting teaching, training, and learning by
contributing tutorials to the National Science Digital Library. A set of models
representing the experimental data will be generated with participation of
students from underrepresented groups. The proposed activities will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education to a large extent in three ways: 1)
establishing collaborations between U.S. academic institutions and international
partners, 2) developing scientific framework for next-generation research and
education, and 3) improving an existing open-source simulation platform with new
capabilities. Results will be disseminated broadly through SimTK.org, a
community-building website with over 10,000 members (more than 5,000 of whom
will be directly impacted by the proposed activities). Its potential widespread
use will benefit society by advancing core medical technology, enabling new
discoveries in the neuroscience and medical rehabilitation communities. In the
spirit of NSF topic areas, one such discovery may be a fundamental theory of
physically-interactive motor control. A step toward such discoveries is
identifying effective rehabilitation strategies for patients following stroke
and other movement disorders.