* 1253215
* CAREER:   Essential Functions of Secondary Metabolic Networks for Bacterial Competition
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Paul Straight, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/29/2020
* USD 893,260.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;While secondary metabolites are organic compounds
that are considered to be nonessential for survival, bacteria are known to
produce these compounds for important specialized functions. Some secondary
metabolites inhibit or destroy competitors. Others are signals to control
transitions between cellular states, such as biofilm formation and swarming.
Traditional studies of secondary metabolites involve purified molecules that are
tested on isolated species. However, bacteria predominantly exist in complex
multi-species communities, which select for robust competitive mechanisms.
Therefore the question as to how networks of secondary metabolites function in
the competition between species is not addressed by such traditional approaches.
This NSF CAREER project focuses on examining mixed-species cultures that expands
the range of detectable bioactive metabolites and their competitive functions.
Based on preliminary data that indicate several secreted metabolites are
exchanged between Bacillus subtilis and Streptomyces sp. Mg1, microbial genetics
in combination with physiological and developmental analyses will be used to
determine the role of the compounds in the competition between these two species
for limited resources. Further, studies of metabolic activity will be integrated
with innovative imaging mass spectrometry to assess the net impact of multiple
active metabolites. Secreted enzymes that contribute to the competitive success
of the species producing the secondary metabolites will also be identified. This
project will provide a new view of secondary metabolic networks in bacterial
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The research goals
of this project are interwoven with education and outreach programs to promote
public awareness and understanding of natural sources of antibiotics, which are
microbial secondary metabolites, and their metabolism. The education program
will produce and disseminate basic knowledge of bacterial ecology, metabolism,
and synthesis of secondary metabolites via coursework and laboratory studies
that focus on microbial interactions and emphasize a changing perspective on
bacteria from single pathogenic entities to communal organisms. The coursework
also includes database development and web-based interfaces accessible to
students and the public, and so is integrated with the outreach program, which
will convey the same basic knowledge to wider audiences.