* 1253234
* CAREER: Novel Determinants of Motility and Chemotaxis in Sinorhizobium meliloti
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Birgit Scharf, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 892,346.00

Nitrogen is the most limiting nutrient for plant growth. While chemically
synthesized inorganic nitrogen fertilizers are effective in increasing crop
yields, they are costly and also have a negative impact on the environment,
especially on aquatic ecosystems. In contrast, sustainable agriculture relies on
biological nitrogen fixation as an economically attractive and ecologically
viable source of new nitrogen. The conversion of molecular nitrogen into ammonia
is performed by bacteria (Rhizobia) that live in symbiosis with leguminous
plants such as peas, soy beans, and alfalfa. The research will be carried out
using the symbiotic model system, the nitrogen-fixing soil bacterium
Sinorhizobium meliloti (S. meliloti). The process of chemotaxis enables motile
rhizobia to preferentially move in the soil towards host plant roots and
supports efficient interaction between symbiosis partners. Many motile bacteria
are propelled by means of rotating flagella, driven by a powerful, self-
assembling nanomachine. The unique flagellar motor and the specially adapted
chemotaxis system of S. meliloti make cells more efficient at maneuvering in the
viscous soil environment, leading to better survival and optimal interaction
with their host plant alfalfa. Previous research uncovered several novel
molecular mechanisms governing chemotactic responses and motility in S.
meliloti, thereby setting the stage for an in-depth analysis of the underlying
molecular events. The overarching goal of this project is to analyze the
specific adaptations that occurred in S. meliloti motility and chemotaxis due to
the soil habitat and communication with its plant host. The first objective of
the research analyzes the roles of two novel proteins in the response of S.
meliloti to quickly changing environmental signals, which is essential for
bacterial survival. The second objective determines the cellular concentrations
and enzymatic activities of key chemotaxis components, allowing prediction of
bacterial behavior in the interaction with alfalfa crop. The third objective
will identify the function of newly discovered flagellar motor components in
facilitating effective movement of S. meliloti in the soil and towards symbiosis
partners. This research will lead to the discovery of significant bacterial
properties and impact current understanding of how bacterial symbionts respond
to plant signals and efficiently move through soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt; The project directly benefits future agricultural and
environmental issues for society. By enhancing understanding of the cues that
bacterial symbionts use to efficiently interact with their host crop, the
research will impact biological nitrogen fixation and thus crop yields and
reduce the use of detrimental synthetic fertilizers. The project will also
vertically integrate research activities with educational activities through the
development of an undergraduate classroom exercise addressing currently open
research questions, which will transform into scientific discoveries in the
research laboratory. The existing, successful outreach program of the
Microbiology Club of Virginia Tech will be expanded to rural, underdeveloped
communities of Appalachia. Outreach activities in the form of interactive
lectures and hands-on activities will promote scientific awareness across the
educational spectrum, including a local 4-H Agricultural Club and rural
elementary schools. Studies of motility and chemotaxis can be demonstrated
easily and will allow the development of innovative, inquiry-based microbiology
lessons with High School science teachers, a valuable strategy for effective
learning. Collaboration with Novozymes? BioAgricultural Group will give Virginia
Tech students the opportunity not only to experience basic research approaches
at the university and applied research in industry through merged collaborative
training programs, but also to increase their chances for recruitment into
professional careers. Overall, this project integrates research and education
through the fusion of classroom and laboratory research, hands-on outreach
activities in rural communities, and internships in industry, which will promote
student engagement and transform student learning and will permanently stimulate
student's interest in science.