* 1253553
* CAREER: Cooperative Motion Planning for Human-Operated Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Kris Hauser, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Chirikjian
* 05/31/2015
* USD 283,620.00

This proposal outlines a research and educational plan to advance decision-
making techniques for robots that cooperate with human operators. Because humans
far exceed the abilities of state-of-the-art robots in vision, creativity, and
adaptability, interest is rapidly growing in a human-centered approach to
robotics: combining the strengths of humans with the superior precision and
repeatability of robots. And yet, our available motion planning tools, while
powerful at computing motions for complex autonomous tasks, are poorly suited
for human-centered applications that demand responsive and natural motions. This
proposal hypothesizes that a new cooperative motion planning paradigm will
support major advances in intuitiveness and task performance of human-operated
robots such as intelligent vehicles, tele-surgery systems, search and-rescue
robots, and household robots. This hypothesis is echoed in an educational plan
that aims to train engineers with cross-disciplinary strengths that bridge both
the technical and social dimensions of robotics. Initial human subjects studies
on novice operators with the PI's cooperative motion planning algorithms suggest
that the technique leads to dramatic reductions in task completion time and
collision rate in cluttered environments. The proposed work will conduct further
investigations along this line of research to 1) identify characteristics of
cooperative planners - such as optimality, responsiveness, and completeness -
that yield effective human-operator systems, both in terms of objective
performance metrics and subjective preferences, 2) to design planners that
optimize cooperativity metrics under computational resource and communication
constraints, and 3) to enhance the capabilities of such planners to assist
operators in complex manipulation tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planners
developed in this research and the rich datasets acquired via user studies will
serve as resources to help human-robot interaction (HRI) researchers design safe
and socially acceptable robot behaviors. Moreover, advances in cooperative
motion planning may have long-term social and economic impact by enabling new
applications of robotics in driver assist systems, space exploration, medicine,
household robotics, manufacturing, and construction. Research is integrated with
education in a range of activities that include CS curriculum development,
development of a new graduate course on optimization and machine learning, and
in new software libraries for robotics education. New modules on motion
planning, behavior recognition, and HRI will be incorporated in AI and robotics
courses. An REU is requested for each summer of the grant and will be recruited
from a minority-serving institution in cooperation with the Alliance for the
Advancement of African-American Researchers in Computing (A4RC). One or more IU
undergraduates will be involved in research and mentored according to the
Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Computing (UROC) program, with
preference given to minority and women students.