* 1253670
* CAREER: Hardware and Algorithmic Architectures for Analyzing Physically-complex Systems: embedding inference capabilities in ultra-low-power sensors
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Naveen Verma, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2019
* USD 445,734.00

The scientific aim of this work is to study how small electronic devices can
function at a high level in the face of increasingly-severe physical
complexities. The complexities can originate from the physical signals of
interest in a sensing system or from non-ideal device and algorithmic behaviors
within the electronics itself, which are becoming unavoidable due to technology
and system scaling. As an example, this study focuses on analyzing physiological
signals that are available through low-power medical sensors. Though such
signals are highly indicative, extracting medical information of value requires
high-order models of the underlying physiological processes when in fact no
tractable analytical models generally exist. This study also focuses on errors
within the hardware that occur due to unpredictable but inevitable technological
defects and variations, leading to high levels of errors in the data being
processed. These challenges are approached through algorithmic methods emerging
from the domain of machine learning that construct models for interpreting data
from the data itself. The large amount of data that is available through small-
scale sensors can thus be leveraged as an extensive knowledgebase; but the
problem is that these methods are not well supported by low-power electronics,
in terms of their computational energy, memory requirements, network
interactions, etc. This research starts with the kernel computations used in
machine-learning frameworks, and it investigates kernel formulations, structured
hardware architectures, and algorithms to overcome the physical complexities
associated with application signals and technological non-idealities. The
principles are studied through hardware and software experimental
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is to
enable greater value of electronic systems in critical applications and to
establish an interdisciplinary educational program that teaches students to
connect fundamentals from computer science, low-power electronics, and clinical
applications. While electronics presents tremendous capabilities, its impact on
real-world challenges such as in healthcare depends on high-value interactions
with physical systems. This program emphasizes clinical applications and
collaborations to understand the role that electronics can play in enabling
preemptive medical harm detection and chronic-disease management over large
patient populations: something that is infeasible with today's methods. This
program also emphasizes interactions with the semiconductor industry, to
transfer principles and architectures both for advanced sensing platforms and
for algorithmic approaches to hardware resilience; with hardware errors having
been identified by the industry as one of the critical challenges, methods that
overcome the need for traditional forms of design margining are being urgently
pursued. New interdisciplinary courses, student projects, and outreach
activities will expose students to external collaborators and will drive an
educational program that ties together engineering fundamentals from multiple
domains through an application-driven pursuit of systems to overcome critical
challenges in healthcare decision support.