* 1253302
* CAREER: Designing An Information Savvy Society: Assessable Participatory Information Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Andrea Forte, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2019
* USD 519,108.00

This project addresses the design of participatory systems to enable assessment
of information quality and to encourage contributions. It does so by designing
system interfaces that allow people to better see into processes of information
production to better assess their products and, by extension, to identify valued
forms of contribution. The project includes (1) construction of models of how
people with different kinds and levels of expertise in information production
understand and assess the quality of information in participatory environments
and how these understandings intersect with patterns of participation; (2)
creating experimental interfaces that support information assessment; (3)
studying these interfaces in iterative deployments to develop a design framework
and guidelines for assessable participatory information environments; and (4)
validating this design framework through summative evaluation in a novel
context. The project also includes the design and implementation of
participatory information literacy education activities for students that
encourage participation in public information production.

The results of this research will advance scientific understanding of
information assessment habits among users of participatory media. The
development of novel interfaces for well-known and familiar systems will provide
design framework and guidelines that are accessible and extensible from both a
scholarly and technical perspective.

The design framework and guidelines that result from this project will improve
design and educational practice in an area of critical national importance,
namely information literacy. Improving information literacy skills is important,
as they affect citizens' ability to function in a technologically rich, free and
democratic society and to make informed decisions about scientific, medical,
educational and other issues.