* 1253256
* CAREER:Dissecting the role of a putative blue-light photoreceptor in stomatal sensing and infection during fungal pathogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Burton Bluhm, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 778,000.00

Gray leaf spot of corn, caused by the fungus Cercospora zeae-maydis, is one of
the most important diseases of corn in the U.S. and other regions of the world.
The fungus infects corn through natural pores (stomata) of leaves, although the
infection process is poorly understood. Recent discoveries indicate that
infection by the fungus is governed by daily cycles of light and darkness, which
provide an important clue for genetic analyses. In this project, the genetic and
molecular basis of gray leaf spot will be investigated, with emphasis on
understanding how the fungus utilizes environmental cues (including daily
light/dark cycles) to coordinate its attack on corn. A blend of genetic,
molecular, biochemical, and computational techniques will be used to determine
how the fungus causes disease. Ultimately, this information will be used to
model genetic interactions linking the molecular clock of the fungus and other
environmental cues with infection and colonization of corn leaves. By providing
a genetic blueprint explaining how C. zeae-maydis causes gray leaf spot, this
project will provide important new information to a broad community of
researchers working to understand and control fungal diseases of corn and other
crops. Additionally, this project will provide training opportunities for
students in the U.S. and Africa who belong to groups underrepresented in science
research. Finally, participants in this project will work closely with growers
and producers in educational efforts to explain the crucial roles basic research
plays in U.S. agriculture.