* 1253944
* CAREER: Coordinated QoS-Driven Management of Cloud Computing and Storage Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Ming Zhao, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 314,818.00

Intellectual Merit:

This project addresses Cloud Computing.

To ensure that cloud users are comfortable with running their critical
applications on shared infrastructures and that cloud providers can support
economical performance-based service-level agreements, there is an increasingly
urgent need for virtualized systems to deliver performance guarantees. And, as
virtualization and cloud computing become pervasive, it is also important that
these topics are taught in a systematic manner; especially to minority students
served by this PI's university. In order to address these challenges, this NSF
CAREER project is creating a coordinated resource management framework that
optimizes the allocations of cloud computing and storage resources according to
application-desired Quality of Service (QoS).

Specifically, this project is accomplishing its objectives through the following
three research and education components: 1) A QoS-driven virtual machine
resource management framework that can coordinate the allocations of various
computing and storage resources and optimize them according to the virtualized
applications; 2) QoS-driven distributed virtual machine storage management that
allows the allocation of shared cloud storage resources, including the emerging
solid-state-drive-based virtual machine storage and caching, according to
application QoS needs; 3) Systematic education on virtualization and cloud
computing that harnesses the research outcomes to provide training in
virtualization and cloud computing, including new education activities for
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, as well as a new virtual-machine-
based online education system to facilitate these activities.

This project's research outcomes will enable virtualized systems to support
performance guarantees for modern applications with dynamic and complex
behaviors. As a result, a broader range of applications with different QoS
requirements will benefit from cloud computing, and cloud services will be able
to offer their users more economical QoS-based charging models instead of the
currently used resource-capacity-based models. This project's education outcomes
will enable systematic education on virtualization and cloud computing from K-12
to undergraduate and graduate classrooms and prepare a pipeline of students who
are equipped with the necessary knowledge and skills in these emerging
technologies and prepared to contribute in the coming cloud computing era.