* 1253358
* CAREER: Magnetic Imaging Guided Composite Materials Development
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2020
* Anna Cristina Samia, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This CAREER grant supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC)
program aims to develop a novel class of ultra-high molecular weight
polyethylene (UHMWPE)-based composites with special magnetic and mechanical
properties that will facilitate the in situ study of implant-type materials in
various chemical and biological fluid environments using magnetic particle
imaging (MPI) technologies. Linear, branched and cross-linked UHMWPE polymer
structures will be filled with specifically engineered iron oxide-based
nanoparticles to prepare new functional magnetic polymer composites. The
magnetic and mechanical properties of the fabricated composites will be
evaluated as a function of processing conditions, compositions, and resulting
microstructures in order to identify good processing approaches, and promising
composite formulations that have high magnetization sensitivity for imaging,
combined with good mechanical properties that are comparable to the matrix
polymer. The information gathered from these studies will provide valuable
knowledge on wear debris formation mechanisms of biopolymers and will contribute
to the fabrication of innovative composite material systems possessing highly
desired magnetic properties and good mechanical performance and reliability.
This work is expected to lead ultimately to the ability to track wear and the
generation of debris in real time inside the body, providing a transformational
tool for improving the performance of UHMWPE prostheses. Moreover, the design
and monitoring of the proposed magnetic composites will directly influence the
advancement of MPI technology and possibly enable the development of bench side
testing tools for polymer biomaterials that will be used for in vivo biomedical
applications.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polyethylene is widely used as a component in the fabrication of joint
prostheses. A major downside of this material is that it can undergo excessive
wear leading to premature loosening of the implant, which in turn can lead to
failure and complicated replacement revision surgeries. Studies have shown that
polyethylene wear in artificial joint replacements are not always identical and
are not easily explained by exclusively mechanical factors. In cases of
premature and excessive wear of polyethylene bearings, chemical degradation and
oxidation of the polymer can significantly lower its mechanical resistance and
result in an accelerated wear-off process. While ex vivo studies have been
conducted on previously used polyethylene acetabular cups to understand the
factors contributing to implant failure, the degradation mechanism is still not
completely understood. An improved assessment of the structural integrity of the
polyethylene material used in implants as subjected to mechanical and chemical
stress will provide valuable information on the material's durability, and can
help predict its wear and degradation over time. To study the real-time
degradation of implant materials in various chemical and biological fluid
environments, the proposed project aims to develop new polyethylene composite
materials that can be investigated using an emerging imaging modality called
magnetic particle imaging (MPI). The proposed research will transform the wear
debris monitoring of polyethylene implant materials and impact annually one
million people in the U.S. alone who undergo hip and knee replacement surgeries.
The educational impact of this project will build on current initiatives to
educate high school, undergraduate and graduate students through the development
of cross-disciplinary courses and hands-on research programs that will
incorporate the interplay between materials fabrication and imaging tools.
Moreover, a modular "Traveling Magnetism Show" will be developed for K-12
students at four adaptive levels and will be showcased in local schools and
science museums. In addition, a new "Women in Chemistry Workshop Series at CWRU"
will be established to provide a mentoring and training platform for graduate
and post-graduate female chemistry students. This program will facilitate
monthly discussions and workshops to tackle important aspects of career
advancement specific to women scientists.