* 1253906
* CAREER: Dynamic biomimetic materials with multiscale structural complexity for understanding tissue fibrosis
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* April Kloxin, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 02/28/2019
* USD 520,879.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1253906 PI: Kloxin, April ORG: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Dynamic biomimetic materials with
multiscale structural complexity for understanding tissue fibrosis
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Understanding the complex interplay
between cells and their microenvironment, the extracellular matrix (ECM), is
essential in designing new therapeutic approaches to mitigate disease
progression or direct tissue regeneration. Biomimetic materials have emerged as
tools to probe the role of microenvironment signals in cell behavior; however,
creating materials that fully recapture dynamic biological processes remains
difficult. This proposal addresses a critical challenge in designing and
applying materials that adequately mimic the spatiotemporal and multisize scale
complexity of the native ECM to determine the key signals that regulate tissue
homeostasis, disease, and repair. For example, in response to tissue injury or
chronic insults, fibroblasts activate into myofibroblasts, a wound healing
phenotype responsible for tissue repair and ECM remodeling. Misregulation and
persistence of myofibroblasts, through mechanisms that are not fully understood,
leads to deposition and accumulation of excess collagen, tissue stiffening, and
ultimately fibrosis. Innovative tools are needed to recreate microenvironment
changes that occur during fibrosis to identify the pivotal signals in
myofibroblast activation and persistence. To address this, the PI proposes to
establish a dynamic, structurally complex hydrogel using a combination of light-
mediated, multisize-scale biomimetic, and tunable responsive chemistries to
mimic temporally evolving collagenous tissue repair and disease progression. The
goal is to design a unique three-dimensional (3D) hydrogel culture system that
captures critical components of the native ECM, including nano- to submicron-
scale fibrils, nano-scale integrin binding sequences, and spatiotemporally
evolving biophysical and biochemical properties, to understand myofibroblastic
activation and fibrosis. To achieve this, she proposes to: (1) create hydrogels
with controlled biophysical and biochemical properties that mimic soft tissues
over multiple size-scales, from nano-, submicron-, to macro-scale; (2)
demonstrate increasing hydrogel modulus and incorporating integrin-binding
peptides in a spatiotemporal fashion to mimic fibrosis progression; and (3)
determine magnitudes and rates of increasing modulus that promote fibroblast
activation in both 2D and 3D culture within this model system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Biomaterials and bioengineering have the
potential to revolutionize our understanding and control of biological systems
through the development and application of novel tools to complex health-related
problems. However, students often have limited knowledge of these fields, owing
to insufficient exposure to related engineering concepts and educational and
career opportunities throughout secondary schools and college. The educational
goal of this proposal is to create a comprehensive program for increasing the
supply of students, especially underrepresented groups, participating and
trained in biomaterials and bioengineering through new educational efforts at
the secondary, college, and graduate levels. To address these needs the PI will:
(1) develop and implement a biomaterials and bioengineering museum kiosk and a
5-7th grade student Family Friday and Mini-camp; (2) mentor high school students
in biomaterials and bioengineering through research internships; and (3) develop
new Biomaterials &amp; Integrative Biology coursework within the engineering
curriculum. The kiosk will allow our team to reach a large and diverse audience
(&gt; 100,000 students over 5 years), while the targeted educational programs
will enable more in-depth training of students from 5th grade to graduate school
and continuing education. Integrating the proposed research within these
educational programs aimed at secondary and college curricula will enable
innovation at the interface of materials, engineering, and biology through the
increased participation, training, and diversity of workers in the field.