* 1253581
* CAREER: Toward Pervasive Wearable Technology: A Cut-and-Sewn, Textile-Integrated Smart Clothing Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/29/2020
* USD 439,160.00

Wearable technology has the ability to facilitate pervasive, continuous
understanding of and interaction with the human wearer through garment-
integrated wearable sensors and interface technology. However, clothing is more
flexible, mobile, and intimate than most electronic technologies, and presents
unique challenges for design and manufacture. Start-up costs of developing
garments for each application of wearable technology are high. The primary
objective of this project is the investigation of a flexible, adaptable garment-
integrated architecture for sensing and actuating technologies that will
facilitate the development of a wide variety of applications without the need
for new hardware development. In addition to flexibility of function, the
integration of hardware components into garment structures emphasizes the
methods of cut-and-sewn, mass-manufactured apparel. This focus lowers the
barrier-to-entry to smart clothing and wearable technology for apparel
manufacturers while simultaneously preserving the human factors of apparel
including aesthetics and physical comfort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread,
pervasive wearable technology would allow medical conditions to be continuously
and imperceptibly monitored without requiring a clinical visit or hospital stay,
and would allow personal devices to become context-aware, providing information
and alerts that are responsive to the activities, objectives, and social context
of the user. Smart clothing can shift the frontiers of healthcare and medical
monitoring, human-device interface, apparel consumption and use, and many other
fields. Innovation and expertise in the production of electronic textiles and
clothing offers strong competitive advantage to the US apparel industry.
Further, smart clothing development effectively bridges many interdisciplinary
fields, including the predominantly-female field of clothing design. Activities
supported by this project expand the participation of women in STEM disciplines
and encourage interdisiplinarity in education.