* 1253225
* CAREER:   Advancements in Spatio-temporal Modeling and Education in Support of NEON and Large-scale and Long-term Ecological Research
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2021
* Andrew Finley, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2021
* USD 996,282.00

The scientific community is moving into an era where open-access data-rich
environments provide extraordinary opportunities to understand the spatial and
temporal complexity of ecological processes at regional to continental scales.
Investment to collect, develop, and distribute data and tools to further large-
scale and long-term science is exemplified by the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and Data Observation Network for Earth (DataONE)
initiatives. These, and similar initiatives, represent a paradigm shift in the
way future scientific discovery will occur. This Career award will develop
theoretical, methodological, software, and instructional advancements that will
allow current and future scientists and educators to draw valid inference about
large and complex ecological systems by: assimilating disparate sources and
types of data; accommodating spatial and temporal dependence to satisfy
statistical model assumptions and improve predictive inference; partitioning and
propagating sources of uncertainty through fine spatial scale predictions over
large domains, and; scaling to effectively exploit information in massive
datasets. The research will develop new flexible spatio-temporal modeling
frameworks tailored to enable assessment of NEON's Grand Challenges in the areas
of climate change, land use, invasive species, biogeochemistry, biodiversity,
ecohydrology, and infectious diseases. Although development of the proposed
methods is motivated by substantive questions related to NEON's mission,
potential advancements in spatio-temporal data modeling will find use in fields
such as public and environmental health, meteorology, engineering, and
geosciences where the fundamental goal is the same -- use new findings to help
improve society.

The proposed educational objectives will enable students to explore their
particular research interests, exploit complex data to build new understanding,
and learn to collaborate to address challenges and opportunities within and
across their respective disciplines. The award will develop and deliver several
integrative education activities including: i) the development and
implementation of cross-college undergraduate and graduate degree programs in
Geo- and Eco-Informatics; ii) an undergraduate senior-level course in applied
environmental data modeling; iii) a graduate-level course focused on more
advanced topics in hierarchical Bayesian spatio-temporal modeling; iv)
enrichment of science instruction in 23 K-12 schools in 13 districts in
southwestern Michigan, and; v) graduate research symposia focused on
contemporary topics in environmental data analysis that will engage students and
experts from multiple institutions and serve as an opportunity for the graduates
to share their research, network, garner specialized skills, and learn about
NEON data products. Education activities will allow future and current
scientists to extend themselves in innovative ways and collaborate on problems.