* 1253172
* CAREER: Ultra-Low Power Radios for Energy-Autonomous Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* David Wentzloff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

It will not be long until vanishingly-small, ubiquitous sensors find their way
into the 1000?s of objects that people unconsciously interact with on a daily
basis. With half of the global population projected to have over 1000 sensors in
their lives by 2020, this translates into over 3 trillion sensors deployed ? a
number that easily dwarfs the entire semiconductor market today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy-autonomous sensors containing rechargeable local
energy storage, energy harvesting, and ultra-low power electronics are therefore
essential for enabling devices to be deployed at this scale. This CAREER project
addresses critical needs in the area of wireless communication for this growing
field of ubiquitous, energy-autonomous sensing devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing energy gap between the power consumed
by electronics in wireless computing devices, and the amount of energy that can
be stored and harvested considering the small form-factor of these devices. This
project is exploring new technologies to address the power consumption of
wireless communication, which typically dominates the total power consumption of
modern sensor nodes. The research addresses the needs for improving the modeling
of wireless channels for a wide range of applications and improving the means by
which these channels are measured. Additionally, new wireless communication
circuits and architectures are being developed, including wakeup and clock
harvesting receivers for the purpose of synchronizing sensor networks. Ultra-low
power radios are also being developed to address the tradeoffs between power
consumption of the radios, and their performance in dense wireless
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important because it
addresses an obstacle in scaling wireless sensor nodes -- drastic reductions in
the power consumption of wireless communication and innovations in RF energy
harvesting may enable new sensor network applications.