* 1253908
* CAREER: Robust Processing of Data Streams in Real Time
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Shrideep Pallickara, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2019
* USD 504,000.00

This project investigates the problem of scheduling the processing of
collections of streams of medical sensor data, with a goal of providing high-
confidence per-packet service guarantees that are robust to variability in the
stream generation and concomitant changes in the loads at the distributed set of
resources where streams are processed. Given the NP-Hard complexity of optimal
stream scheduling and the need to handle streams that are stochastic in nature,
the service guarantees are probabilistic. The approach makes use of statistical
and machine learning techniques, harnessing a mix of application-independent and
application-dependent features to adaptively orchestrate stream processing over
a collection of resources with dynamic utilization profiles while retaining the
ability to prioritize processing under heavy load, for multiple concurrent
applications. Data from clinical and assisted living settings are used to
evaluate the efficacy of solutions.

Health care and homeland security can benefit from this research, as well as
experimental science. Skyrocketing healthcare costs have coincided with the
proliferation of electronic monitoring devices in medical and assisted living
environments, which generate data streams of patient data. Timely monitoring and
analysis of these streams can detect emergencies early and improve patient
outcomes, but failure can be fatal. Improvements in the efficiency and
robustness of automated medical data stream processing translate to lower costs
and improved outcomes. There are analogous opportunities in homeland security,
where chemical and biological sensor data must be processed in real-time for
threat evaluation. Open-source software produced as part of this research, which
can be configured over an arbitrary number of machines to process a large number
of streams in a variety of settings, lowers entry barriers for scientists who
need to process observational data in their applications. The project will also
provide educational opportunities for students, and middle school outreach
activities targeted at improving assimilation of mathematical concepts among
Native American students.