* 1253927
* CAREER: Anonymous and Robust Multi-Recipient Communication: Foundations and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2021
* Nelly Fazio, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2021
* USD 459,019.00

Content distribution is an important application domain for cryptographic
techniques. Existing security solutions for multi recipient communication, like
broadcast encryption, focus mostly on the concerns of the content originator.
This project tackles the problem from a broader perspective that includes the
privacy concerns of the recipients, and develops cryptographic models and
protocols for content distribution that provide guarantees beyond the mere
secrecy of the data. The outcomes of this research will enable solutions that
address the privacy issues associated with cloud storage. The techniques
developed in the course of the research will be stimulating for researchers
across the cryptography and information-hiding communities, thus potentially
fostering collaborations between the fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has four specific research objectives: (1) the design of cryptographic
constructions for receiver-anonymous broadcast encryption that at once provide
transmission secrecy, afford anonymity to the receivers, and enjoy performance
comparable to standard broadcast encryption; (2) the exploration of the
relationship between receiver anonymity and ciphertext ambiguity, which refers
to the possibility that a given ciphertext might appear valid to multiple
decryptors; (3) the formulation of the concept of broadcast steganography to
enable the use of a broadcast channel as a medium for covert communication; and
(4) the investigation of applications like collaborative remote storage, whereby
a group of users accesses shared content in the cloud privately and obliviously.