* 1253285
* CAREER: Supporting Fast-Response Medical Teams Through Interactive Information Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Aleksandra Sarcevic, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2019
* USD 562,955.00

Modern society increasingly depends on the work of interdisciplinary teams using
information and communication technology (ICT) to control complex systems with
high reliability (for example, in airplane cockpits, traffic control rooms, and
nuclear power plants). Engineered systems such as these are deterministic, with
well-defined states and parameters of normal operation which allow control teams
to achieve their goals through direct interaction with ICT. But when the focus
is a natural (i.e., social or living) system rather than a machine, the control
task imposes quite different cognitive demands which make the design,
development, and integration of ICT more challenging. High-risk, fast-response
medicine is an example of a work environment that deals with a natural system
(the patient), where the need for effective ICT support is as high as for
engineered systems. The goal of this research is to develop innovative
approaches for real-time information presentation to support situation awareness
and collaborative work by fast-response, interdisciplinary medical teams. In
particular, the PI will examine how context-specific information should be
presented to support such teamwork while accounting for team members' perceptual
and cognitive limitations. To this end, she will focus on the team-dependent and
information-intensive processes of evaluating critically ill patients in the
high-risk medical domains of pediatric trauma and emergency resuscitation. The
research will involve field studies, video review of medical events, design and
development of display prototypes, and evaluation. Project outcomes will include
conceptual and empirical understanding of awareness in fast-response medical
teamwork, approaches for augmenting distributed cognition through interactive
displays, lessons from the development of display prototypes for improving
awareness of rapidly unfolding events and their progression, and lessons from
evaluating such prototypes in real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research will contribute to and inform diverse scientific fields,
including information presentation in dynamic environments that rely on
interactive information presentation, human-computer interaction where work
conditions limit direct interaction with information systems, and the automatic
capture and integration of data arriving from multiple sources. Because this
research crosses many disciplinary boundaries, it will serve as a platform for
an integrated and interdisciplinary education and outreach program.