* 1253197
* CAREER: Incorporating spatial heterogeneity to study predator biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships within the urban landscape of Cleveland, OH
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2020
* Mary Gardiner, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2020
* USD 909,200.00

The observed decline in global biodiversity has fueled rapid growth in research
linking biodiversity with measurements of ecosystem function. For example,
generally positive associations are observed between the total number of species
in an ecosystem (or species richness) and its productivity. However, studies
that examine subsets of species, such as predators and their prey, often do not
support these more general trends. Without greater knowledge of the mechanisms
at this finer scale, conservation of predators and their associated ecosystem
functions is difficult. This project will establish a large-scale field
experiment to examine how the species richness and spatial distributions of
urban patches combine to affect how predatory arthropods identify and capture
prey. There are three objectives. The first is to document how patch and
landscape heterogeneity affect overlap in arthropod diets, which will be used as
a measure of resource partitioning. The second is to test how changes in
heterogeneity affect predation amounts and patterns. The third is ultimately
aimed at informing conservation programs and city managers by focusing on how
predator arthropods disperse among urban patches and may serve a function as
biocontrol agents in cities.

Cleveland, Ohio is the city chosen as the model for this study. Cleveland
contains over 10,000 vacant city lots and the research activities of this
project will take place within 64 of these vacant parcels. Decisions regarding
vacant land management will shape the ecological and social quality of inner-
city neighborhoods for decades to come. Therefore, understanding the biological
composition of these habitats, how they are distributed, and how they influence
important biological groups is a critical task. This project will also provide
hands-on opportunities for high school students to conduct field ecology
research and become involved in a new Prey Buffet Program, along with learning
about more sustainable urban gardening and farming practices though the Ohio
State University Master Gardener Specialization Program.