* 1253196
* CAREER: Towards Extensible Performance Management for Cloud Data Services
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Olga Papaemmanouil, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,986.00

While existing cloud services reduce the application development time, data
management applications still require significant effort by cloud tenants, for
often their deployment involves a number of challenges including performance
monitoring, resource provisioning and workload allocation. These tasks strongly
depend on application-specific performance objectives, therefore developers
often rely on ad-hoc solutions for addressing them. However, such solutions
eventually hinder the application's implementation and
maintainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is developing declarative
mechanisms that allow application developers to express custom performance
criteria for data processing tasks and exploits the properties of these
mechanisms to design extensible resource, workload and Service-Level-Agreement
(SLA) management services for cloud databases. The project also includes the
design and development of an extensible cloud-based service platform, named
XCloud, which unifies these services into a usable cloud
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results include the design of
declarative interfaces for the specification of performance criteria and
performance models. Subsequently, by building upon properties of these
interfaces, it will result in new extensible services for resource provisioning,
workload allocation as well as in the support of customizable application-based
SLAs for cloud databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above results will have a
significant impact on the quality of cloud-based data management applications.
XCloud will allow developers to declaratively incorporate existing performance
modeling techniques. The combination of declarative specifications and
customizable modules will allow XCloud to act as a test-bed for new performance
models for cloud databases, as well as QoS-driven approaches for workload,
resource and SLA management, facilitating research and innovation in this
emerging domain. Finally, the research of this proposal will be integrated into
the development of courses and research projects for both graduate and
undergraduate students providing them with background on the fundamentals and
practices of building web information systems and cloud data services.
&lt;br/&gt;