* 1253189
* CAREER: Mechanical Biomarkers and Mesenchymal Stem Cell Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Eric Darling, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2018
* USD 437,792.00

1253189 Darling

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) pose exciting possibilities for repairing tissues
damaged by injury or disease. Their relative abundance and capability to become
many different cell types make them attractive as an alternative autologous cell
source. However, the cellular heterogeneity present in MSC harvests complicates
their therapeutic application since not all cells will behave in the same
manner. Individual stem cells respond to biochemical and mechanical stimuli in
their local microenvironment, which can direct differentiation along specific
pathways/lineages. While substrate compliance has been extensively investigated
in recent years as it relates to stem cell differentiation, little attention has
been given to how the mechanical properties of individual cells can influence
this process for themselves and their neighbors. Findings from the PI?s
laboratory indicate cellular mechanical properties correlate with biological
characteristics, such as gene expressions, and play an important role in
determining the differentiation fate of stem cells. Not all MSCs behave
uniformly, and this heterogeneity can dramatically impact the overall response
of a sample. Understanding how the biological and mechanical characteristics of
local cell populations relate to the larger group can provide clues to
optimizing future regenerative therapies.

The proposed project will investigate the heterogeneity of MSC samples at the
single-cell, neighboring (~101 cells), and population (~103+ cells) levels using
two complimentary strategies. First, live-cell, gene expression-based markers
will be used to identify differentiating and non-differentiating MSCs that have
been chemically induced for osteogenesis and adipogenesis. Second, single-cell,
elastic and viscoelastic testing will assess the mechanical heterogeneity in
undifferentiated, ?partially? differentiated, and fully differentiated stem cell
cultures. In addition to expanding knowledge of stem cell mechanics, this
research program has the potential to vastly improve experimental approaches
that strive to direct stem cell differentiation and improve regenerative
responses following implantation. Intellectual Merit: The proposed project seeks
to investigate the inherent heterogeneity present in mesenchymal stem cell
populations. MSCs are typically investigated at the population level, which can
obscure variations that exist among individual cells. Little is known about how
single-cell, mechanical properties change during differentiation, but this
knowledge is critical for fully understanding cell-substrate and cell-cell
behavior. Likewise, elucidating the spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression
in MSC samples can help determine optimal times and locations for biochemical
stimulation. To pursue these goals, this project will use custom-designed
molecular beacons to visualize mRNA molecules in live, differentiating MSCs.
Atomic force microscopy will be used to mechanically characterize the elastic
and viscoelastic properties of individual cells. Focus will be given to how
local cell populations behave, biochemically and mechanically, in relation to
the overall sample. Findings will be applicable to many fields, including stem
cell biology, cell mechanics, and tissue engineering. The PI is a pioneer in the
area of single-cell, mechanical biomarkers, an exciting new field that provides
phenotypic characterization akin to gene and protein expression. The proposed
research furthers the maturation of these transformative approaches by
investigating the role of mechanical biomarkers in stem cell differentiation.

Broader Impact: As a biomedical engineer conducting research at the cross-
section of math, biology, chemistry, and engineering, the PI is well-suited to
provide an environment that highlights the need for interdisciplinary
understanding. The outreach effort proposed here will provide primary and
secondary school educators at the Providence Public School District the
opportunity to conduct team-based research during the summer. Teachers
specializing in different subjects will work together on projects that
incorporate multiple areas of expertise. The goal of this project is to
facilitate interaction among teachers so that they can develop interdisciplinary
examples and experiments for their own classes. Students take many math and
science courses throughout their education, encompassing algebra, geometry,
biology, chemistry, and physics. However, these courses are almost always taught
as isolated subjects, whereas real-world applications are increasingly
interdisciplinary. The proposed project will be conducted as an extension of
Brown University?s established GK-12 program. In addition to this outreach
effort, the PI will refine his recently designed course on stem cell engineering
for graduate and undergraduate students that covers areas of stem cell biology,
regenerative medicine, and hands-on laboratory exercises. Experimental findings
from the research portion of this proposal will be directly applicable to this
course, which is the first of its kind at Brown University.