* 1253370
* CAREER: Reliable and Fault Tolerant Super Energy Efficient Nanomagnetic Computing in the Presence of Thermal Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Jayasimha Atulasimha, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 519,632.00

Nanomagnetic logic and memory have emerged as powerful alternatives to
conventional transistor based circuits because a multiferroic nanomagnet,
switched with electrically generated strain ("straintronics"), is a far more
energy-efficient switch than a transistor. However, nanomagnetic logic is
extremely error-prone at room temperature since thermal fluctuations can
seriously disrupt magnetization dynamics during switching. In order to make
nanomagnetic logic viable, the issue of high error rate must be addressed and a
solution found to mitigate its deleterious effects. This project pursues an
approach for reducing error rates without calling for impractical on-chip error-
correction resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research could enable
processors to be built with superbly energy-efficient technology that can lead
to implantable smart medical devices, button-sized face recognition systems,
structural health monitoring systems, and consumer applications such as wearable
electronics. A graduate course on nanoscale magnetism with an emphasis on
nanomagnetic computing will be created. With the support of the Richmond Area
Program for Minorities in Engineering, minority high school students will be
hosted in the Principle Investigator's lab every summer. The Principle
Investigator will develop innovative hands-on workshops to explain nanomagnetic
memory and logic to K-12 students from selected schools that have low
representations in Virginia science fairs and will also transfer this knowledge
and expertise to teachers from these schools. Science fair participation from
such schools will be analyzed to study the impact of this 5-year innovative
outreach effort in K-12 teaching.