* 1253775
* CAREER: Elucidating Light-Matter Interactions on the Nanoscale Using Quantum Many-Body Theory and the Electrodynamics of Swift Electrons
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* David Masiello, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2017
* USD 625,001.00

David J. Masiello of the University of Washington is supported by a CAREER award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop the first multiscale theory of nanoscale light-
matter interaction capable of correlating swift (i.e., relativistically moving)
electrons with photons to elucidate the structure and dynamics of quantum
emitters/absorbers embedded within extreme plasmon-supporting
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, Professor Masiello and his
research group will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Establish a first-principles,
multiscale theoretical framework capable of rigorously describing the severe
deformations of a molecule's electronic structure when coupled strongly to a
plasmonic environment, described by continuum
electrodynamics;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Numerically implement the
electrodynamics of a swift electron and its interactions with a complex
nanoscopic environment to characterize the relationship between electron and
photon-driven plasmonic excitations and their associated nanophotonic
properties;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Correlate electron- and photon-excitation
sources to learn about the redistribution of energy between near- and far-field
and nanoconfined heat in plasmonically active metal nanostructures in the
presence of quantum emitters/absorbers, with an emphasis on the achieving high
spatial and spectral resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will broadly
impact the next generation of cutting-edge experiments in nanophotonics and
nanoplasmonics by establishing rigorous and computationally tractable
theoretical methods capable of elucidating and predicting observation in a
first-principles manner. Significant impact will be made in understanding a
variety of plasmon-enhanced molecular-optical processes from linear and
nonlinear optical spectroscopy to sensing and catalysis, down to the single-
molecule level. The knowledge gained from this research will establish the basic
scientific underpinnings needed for future high-efficiency solar light-
harvesting devices and chemical sensors of use in the medical and defense
sectors. Professor Masiello and his group will also mentor under-represented
minority students at the high-school and college-level through the University of
Washington's Math Academy and Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
Bridge Program. The goal of these efforts is to stimulate interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics among under-represented minorities by
using advanced computational techniques to simulate the increased efficiency of
novel solar-cell architectures enhanced by the addition of plasmonic
nanoparticle assemblies.