* 1253534
* CAREER: Understanding the Growth Mechanisms and Properties of Metal Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Benjamin Wiley, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 585,924.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this CAREER proposal, sponsored by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, are to clarify the processes by
which metal nanowires grow in solution, use this understanding to improve
synthetic control over metal nanowire dimensions, and study the structure-
property relationship of metal nanowires in the context of practical
applications. Nanowire nucleation and growth will be visualized in real-time
with dark-field optical microscopy and transition electron microscopy. The
kinetic data obtained from visualization will be a powerful tool for addressing
several unanswered questions about nanowire growth, including: (1) Does the
species adding to the nanowire consist of metal ions, reduced metal atoms, or
metal clusters? (2) What is the chemical step that limits the rate of nanowire
growth? (3) How does the capping agent alter nanowire growth kinetics and
nanowire morphology? A deeper understanding of the role of the capping agent
will facilitate the discovery a new capping agents that enable the production of
nanowires across a broader range of dimensions. Measurement of the temperature-
dependent nucleation rate will facilitate the separation of nanowire nucleation
from nanowire growth in time by engineering the temperature profile of the
reaction, and thus allow for the production of nanowires with precisely defined
lengths and diameters. The well-defined nanowires obtained from synthetic
studies will be used as a platform for understanding the structure-property
relationships of nanowires in the context of a transparent, conducting film, and
an optical polarizer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanowires, which look similar to pine needles but are
10,000 times smaller, have the potential to reduce the cost and improve the
performance of touch screens, solar cells, organic LEDs, flat-panel displays,
electrochromic windows, augmented reality displays, lightning strike protection
for aircraft, battery electrodes, sensors, catalysts, and wearable electronics.
At present, the processes by which nanowires spontaneously grow in liquids are
poorly understood, and this is limiting the development of better ways to
control the dimensions of nanowires so as to understand and optimize their
properties in practical applications. This CAREER proposal, sponsored by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, describes an integrated research
and educational plan dedicated to discovering why nanowires grow, using this
information to grow nanowires with unprecedented precision over a wide range of
dimensions, studying the properties of these structures in the context of
applications with academic and industrial partners, and disseminating these
results to the public though an outreach program that aims to improve
participation of underrepresented groups. The research approach will focus on
the development of techniques that allow researchers to watch, in real-time, the
assembly of atoms into nanowires. Goals of this fundamental study include
finding (1) the processes by which nanowires form, (2) the factors that
influence the dimensions of a nanowire, and (3) how to control the dimensions of
nanowires with greater precision over a greater range of sizes. The structure-
dependent properties of nanowires will then be characterized in solar cells, and
in contact lenses for augmented reality glasses. The new discoveries generated
by this program will be integrated into hands-on activities by African American
high-school students working with graduate student mentors, and presented to the
broader public through science fairs, classroom demonstrations, museum exhibits
and online videos.