* 1253035
* CAREER:  Non-Equilibrium RNA/Protein Liquids and Intracellular Phase Transitions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Clifford Brangwynne, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

In this project, the PI will focus on elucidating two important aspects of RNP
liquids: 1) Their assembly from soluble components, and 2) Their material
properties, which strongly impact their biological function. The PI will study
the complexity of living cells by first taking a bottom-up approach, utilizing
an in vitro system of purified components. This will be complemented by
utilizing advanced microscopy and image analysis techniques, and novel molecular
dynamics measurements. These combined in vitro/in vivo studies will allow the PI
to understand the full complexity of RNP liquids, and test the hypothesis that
the assembly and properties of these droplets are tuned by ATP-dependent
biological activity. The broader impacts of this proposal include educating the
next generation of biophysicists by providing laboratory research training at
the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels; at the undergraduate level,
laboratory training for senior thesis research will play a key role. In the
classroom, the PI will develop new courses on Quantitative Biology and Soft
Living Matter. This teaching is part of the PI's broader effort to build the
infrastructure for growing Princeton's nascent Bioengineering community, and
couple it to the greater Biophysics community on campus and beyond. At the K-12
level, the PI has developed an outreach partnership with the Trenton public
schools, which focuses on inspiring under-represented groups of 8th grade
students from Kilmer Elementary School. The PI will visit the classroom for
hands-on presentations on Soft Living Matter, and these students will visit the
PI's laboratory. To evaluate the efficacy of this outreach, quantitative
evaluation tools based on the Test of Science Related Attitudes (TOSRA) will be
used, which the PI will implement and analyze together with a science education
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.