* 1253562
* CAREER: From Emergence of Collective Electronic States to Materials by Design in Layered Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Tyrel McQueen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Strongly correlated electronic materials have numerous
applications in energy production and storage, sensors, and a multitude of high
technology needs. the purpose of the proposal, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program is to explore the relationships between structure
and correlated electronic and magnetic properties in layered, two-dimensional
materials. This will be accomplished through systematic, synthetic variation of
electron counts coupled with detailed physical property characterization. The
broad questions that will be addressed are: (a) what is the role of metal-metal
bonding in switching between magnetic, charge-density-wave, and metallic
behavior in layered metal chalcogenides? and (b) do multilayers of topological
insulators and normal insulators/metals produce new, topologically distinct
electronic states (as has recently been predicted)? The former will be
accomplished by applying new soft chemistry techniques to highly reduced alkali
metal chalcogenides (KCo2(S/Se)2 and KCu2(S/Se)2). The latter will be addressed
through the synthesis and physical characterization - including angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy through collaboration - of well-known misfit layered
compounds. Misfits are attractive for this purpose because they 'naturally'
contain two chemically (and electronically) distinct layers that alternately
stack to form the desired multilayer structures, and each layer type can be
tuned to the desired chemistry and electron count. It is anticipated that this
research will allow for the development of improved techniques for the design
and control of solid state reactions, especially for the creation of materials
with new and exotic electronic states of matter, and possibly the future
development of methods to prepare bulk crystals of metastable materials (a
challenging feat).

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY Innovative materials underlie breakthroughs in virtually
all fields of study, from biocompatible materials in medicine to supersensitive
detectors and lightweight alloys for space exploration. Widespread adoption of
these material advances relies on rational design methods. This proposal seeks
to synthesize and characterize new layered materials which contain
electronically active two-dimensional sheets that exhibit the striking
phenomenon known as emergence: behaviors that appear to be more than the sum of
the parts. Such 'strongly correlated' electronic materials have numerous
applications in energy production and storage and sensors, but are among the
most difficult to model and predict; this proposal seeks to elucidate the
origins of such electronic emergence to allow us to harness and control such
behavior. Additionally, the proposal closely links research, education, and
community outreach. Both graduate and undergraduate researchers will play an
essential role in carrying out the proposed research, with each researcher given
his or her own project to encourage independence, exploration, and critical
analysis. Further, the idea that effective scientific education cannot be
limited to facts and 'bookwork', but must involve hands-on experimentation (a
form of active learning), forms the basis for a comprehensive program in
materials chemistry education from grade school to graduate levels. Community-
oriented efforts focus on bringing hands-on experimentation to high school
students in inner-city Baltimore schools and to elementary and middle school
students in area communities. These efforts are particularly focused on
instilling excitement and interest in science and engineering in disadvantaged
children, which are essential for encouraging the pursuit of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers.