* 1253692
* CAREER:Control of Radiative Thermal Transport Using Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Sheng Shen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

1253692&lt;br/&gt;Shen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiative thermal transport is of
primary importance in various applications such as thermal insulation, energy
conversion, thermal signature control and thermal management. Although near-
field radiative heat transfer, where the spacing between two surfaces is smaller
than the thermal wavelength given by Wien's law, has been demonstrated to exceed
blackbody radiation due to the tunneling of evanescent waves, maximizing near-
field enhancement between different materials remains challenging. Control of
near-field radiative heat transfer will offer significant potential for the
development of new radiation cooling and thermal energy conversion technologies.
In the far-field, where the gap between two surfaces is much larger than the
thermal wavelength, the spectral and directional control of thermal emission at
desired frequencies will create low-power coherent infrared sources and enable
novel thermal management strategies. The objective of this project is to control
radiative thermal transport using nanostructured materials (e.g., metamaterials)
in both near- and far-fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is in advancing the fundamental knowledge of radiative thermal
transport. The novel computational tools developed in this project will overcome
the theoretical obstacles in calculating near-field radiation for complex three-
dimensional structures, which is critical for accurately predicting the thermal
response of nanostructured materials in the near-field. The proposed ultra-
sensitive experimental platform, which can resolve a heat flux as small as 100
picowatts, will enable the near-field measurements on a variety of
nanostructured materials. For far-field radiation control, this project will
demonstrate two transformative scientific phenomena: (i) high-speed modulation
of radiative heat fluxes, and (ii) spectral and directional control of thermal
emission at desired frequencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of radiative
thermal transport in both near- and far-fields will impact a broad range of
applications in energy conversion and thermal management. The tunable
metamaterials described in this project will make it possible to design better
thermophotovoltaic energy conversion systems. The spectral and directional
control of thermal emission using metamaterials will create low-power infrared
sources and yield flexible, compact and efficient thermal management
technologies, especially for cooling spacecrafts. The heat flux modulator can
allow the opening and closing of heat transfer at a high rate, which will be
extremely useful for developing advanced thermal management strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate research and education via
interactive educational kits, curriculum development, and outreach activities.
Two interactive educational kits and their related educational program will be
developed to stimulate the students' interests in energy and nanoscience. The
local education focuses will be Pittsburgh Science and Technology Academy and
Allderdice High School, as well as students at Carnegie Mellon. Broader
audiences will be reached at the local events in Pittsburgh including the annual
Siemens Competition and the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair.
Curriculum innovation at Carnegie Mellon will introduce graduate and
undergraduate students to basic principles of energy conversion and the latest
research results in radiative thermal transport such as near-field radiation and
metamaterials.