* 1253641
* CAREER: Model-Guided Optimization and Autonomous Control of a  Synthetic Biodetoxification Pathway for Harnessing Lignocellulosic Feedstock
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Howard Salis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2019
* USD 419,991.00

CBET-1253641 Salis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a national objective to replace
gasoline, diesel, and plastic materials with biorenewable alternatives that do
not compete with our food supply. Engineered micro-organisms can convert sugars
into a broad cornucopia of biorenewable products, including fuels and materials.
However, the sugar must be very inexpensive to compete with existing petroleum-
based products. Non-food agricultural byproducts, such as corn stover and wheat
straw, and fast growing trees can be converted to inexpensive sugar through a
multi-step biomass conversion process. One of the most challenging aspects of
this conversion process is the generation of toxic inhibitors that kill the
micro-organism, and thus prevent them from producing a product. In particular,
furfural and hydroxy-methyl furfural (HMF) are two of the most toxic inhibitors
to micro-organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to engineer and
optimize a synthetic biodetoxification pathway that enables industrial micro-
organisms to consume furfural and hydroxy-methyl furfural, converting them into
useful cellular building blocks, and enabling the manufacturing of products
using inexpensive cellulosic sugars. This work will also combine furan
biosensors with genetic circuitry to automatically tune the pathway's activity
in the presence of changing bioreactor conditions. The living cell will only
activate the pathway when it needs it. Further, this work will develop new
biophysical modeling and computational optimization approaches to make
engineering cellular metabolism more efficient and reliable. The proposed model-
guided approach will substantially reduce the amount of experimentation that
will be necessary to optimize new metabolic pathways, and control their activity
according to a metabolite biosensor. New methods will be available through a
user-friendly web interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will promote
the scholarship and education of high school students, undergraduate students,
and graduate students through three targeted programs. The first program will
recruit high school teachers to create new design-build-test engineering labs
that will demonstrate key engineering principles while illustrating the
intersection between biotechnology and our daily lives. In the second program,
the PI will enhance the early-stage research opportunities for undergraduate
students, especially ones from under-represented groups, as a way to increase
graduation rates and encourage the pursuit of higher education. In the third
program, the PI will develop a new graduate-level course on Synthetic Biology.
This graduate-level course will be a higher-level version of an existing
undergraduate course that integrates a genetic, metabolic, and protein
engineering curriculum with research topics from the bioenergy and
biopharmaceuticals fields.