* 1253146
* CAREER: A Rigidity Theory for Multi-Robot Formations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Audrey St. John, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 09/30/2019
* USD 411,531.00

This proposal connects foundational research for multi-robot formations with the
development of empowering experiences for women undergraduates in the classroom
and beyond. The theoretical nature of the research is complemented by a firm
grounding in hardware and computer vision fundamentals, integrated throughout a
comprehensive education plan. The PI will develop an understanding of geometric
formations of multi-robot systems, such as swarms in both 2- and 3-dimensions.
Sensor and communication costs will be integral to modeling and algorithmic
considerations, as minimizing power consumption is increasingly important for
the design of lightweight and agile robot platforms. The PI will establish
mathematical foundations and develop algorithms in three fundamental directions:
(1) understanding a formation's structural properties, (2) producing optimal
control architectures, and (3) predicting a formation?s internal motions.
Developing a unifying theory from both theoretical and applied perspectives will
produce a wealth of new directions, such as actuating a formation as if it were
a single traditional robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributions have
the potential to significantly impact cutting-edge technology for the control
and coordination of multi-robot systems. The PI is junior faculty at Mount
Holyoke College, a liberal arts college for women, where a recent growth in
enrollments has led to an average of 15 computer science majors a year
(surpassing the peak of 2002). She will engage this vibrant community of budding
computer scientists through her proposed education plan. Two courses will be
developed, designed to simultaneously educate undergraduates through core
computer science principles and expose them to exciting research problems
challenging the field. Students will have additional opportunities for
experiences outside the classroom through highly visible robotics and computer
vision projects on campus, producing role models for generations to come. By
working closely with the student-run CS Club, the PI will establish a supportive
environment that fosters growing interest in technology from traditionally
under-represented groups. She will also actively involve students in research by
supervising two undergraduates each summer through a compelling research
experience.