* 1253293
* CAREER:   Massively-parallel single-cell genomics and transcriptomics with droplet microfluidics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Adam Abate, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2019
* USD 756,335.00

CAREER: Massively-parallel single-cell genomics and transcriptomics with droplet
microfluidics Adam Abate, UCSF

Abstract An award is made to the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)
to develop a new technology for analyzing single cells. Biological systems are
often heterogeneous, consisting of large numbers of cells with distinct genetic
and phenotypic properties. However, existing technologies for sequencing
populations of cells tend to treat them as though they were homogenous,
discarding individual cell information that is critical to understanding the
system's global properties. The objective of this project is to develop a
microfluidic technology that will allow heterogeneous populations of cells to be
sequenced with single cell resolution. In contrast to other single cell
sequencing technologies, this technology, based in microfluidics, will be
ultrahigh-throughput, allowing millions of cells to be sequenced in one run of
the system. The ability to acquire detailed, single cell information from
heterogeneous populations will be useful for a broad range of basic science and
translational applications, including in microbiology, immunology, and synthetic
biology. This work will have educational impacts by involving UCSF graduate
students, students from the City College of San Francisco's Bridge to
Biosciences program, and students from local high schools. These students will
be involved in the acquisition of samples, the development of opensource
software for data processing, and the dissemination of the data via an online
database. For scientific outreach, UCSF graduate students will lead expeditions
of local community college and high school students to ecologies in the San
Francisco Bay Area, where they will collect microbial samples for analysis. The
expeditions will provide the graduate students with opportunities to hone their
skills discussing science with the public, while the community college and high
school students will learn about the scientific process and the importance of
microbes in the environment.