* 1253506
* CAREER: Exploiting Sensing Diversity and Conquering Communication Reality to Meet User Requirements in Performance-Critical Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Gang Zhou, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2019
* USD 459,198.00

Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are an important new class of networked systems
that integrate sensing, communication, and computation capabilities on a single,
inexpensive platform. The significant scale and deep integration with their
environments enable WSNs to monitor the physical world and human subjects with
an unprecedented spatial and temporal granularity. WSNs designed for
performance-critical applications must achieve user requirements on both sensing
and communication performance, such as high detection probabilities, low false
alarm rates, and bounded time delays and throughputs. Failure to meet these
requirements often leads to undesirable or even catastrophic consequences. In a
real deployment, both the sensing diversity, i.e., the sensing capability
differences among individual sensors or sensor clusters in the deployment, and
the lossy, irregular, and heterogeneous WSN communication reality must be
addressed. In this project, three research thrusts with seven detailed research
tasks are proposed to exploit sensing diversity and conquer communication
reality so as to ensure user-requested sensing and communication performance in
performance-critical WSNs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable
meeting performance requirements in a number of critical application domains,
including homeland security and surveillance, healthcare and assisted living,
natural and physical hazard detection, etc., even when complexity and
uncertainty exist in the deployed environment. It will enable psychologists to
collect previously unattainable data for advancing their physiological and
mental health research. It will also benefit community and health providers for
their geriatric driving and aging projects. Benefits to senior residents and
local retirement communities will be delivered through collaboration with the
Center for Excellence in Aging and Geriatric Health. This project will also be
integrated into three courses to expose undergraduate and graduate students to
advanced sensor networking and system designs. It will bring students in
psychology and students in computer science together to work on applying WSN
technologies to physiological and mental health study of older adults. A series
of planned week-long day camps and annual open houses will provide hands-on
opportunities to a diverse group of minority students and high-schoolers.
Distributing the research-based outcomes of this proposal through NCWIT will
help increase the number of women in the field of computing.