* 1253424
* CAREER: Centaur: A Bio-inspired Ultra Low-Power Hybrid Embedded Computing Engine Beyond One TeraFlops/Watt
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Yiran Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,703.00

The objective of the research is to innovate an embedded computing engine named
?Centaur? to achieve ultra-high power efficiency by adopting the bio-inspired
computation model and the advanced memristor technology. &lt;br/&gt;Three
constituent elements are included to address the major technical obstacles: (1)
The power-efficient hybrid computing system that integrates memristor-based
synapse network and crossbar structure, targeting the flexible and intensive
data processing, respectively. (2) The robust design methodology for Centaur,
including the circuit and algorithm enhancements as well as the necessary EDA
flow. (3) The integration of Centaur into modern heterogeneous systems and the
prototype demonstration. Creative applications of critical importance to
nowadays mobile and embedded systems by taking the full advantages of Centaur,
including pattern recognition and video and image processing, will be also
explored.&lt;br/&gt;The research can benefit the embedded system community by
the revolutions in computing architecture and hardware design for functional
variety, power-efficiency, and cost. The results can further benefit the
semiconductor and neuromorphic societies at large by stimulating the interaction
between the advances in device engineering and computing models. The developed
techniques will be transferred to mainstream practices under the close
collaborations with several industry partners, and directly impact the future
embedded systems. The activities in the collaboration also include the tutorials
in the major conferences on the technical aspects of the projects and new course
development. The educational plan will enhance the existing standard curricula
by integrating new modules on emerging memristor-based computing architecture
and the relevant neuromorphic computing model.