* 1253731
* CAREER: Towards Context-Aware, Self-Organizing Wireless Small Cell Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Walid Saad, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 10/31/2014
* USD 191,250.00

Providing seamless, high quality wireless service anytime and anywhere requires
substantial structural changes in today's macro-cellular networks. One such
change, introducing small cell base stations, is seen as a highly promising
solution. However, it requires meeting fundamental challenges: 1) nodes? self-
organization, 2) network heterogeneity, and 3) high sensitivity of resource
allocation to the system parameters. The proposed research addresses these
challenges by exploring a dimension that has often been overlooked: the user's
context. To achieve this goal, first, machine learning techniques are proposed
to extract context from three dimensions: device, geo-location, and social
metrics. Then, context-aware resource management schemes are developed by
advancing novel techniques from matching theory - a powerful tool from economics
and game theory. Subsequently, the learned context is leveraged to devise
cooperative small cell models using new tools from coalitional game theory.
Comprehensive evaluation is done via testbed implementation and software
simulations.

The developed analytical tools will lay the foundations of context-aware, self-
organizing small cell networks and will impact multiple disciplines such as
communications, game theory, and social sciences. The generated results will
provide fresh ideas for developing new small cell products. The research is
fully integrated into the educational plan via incorporation in new and existing
courses as well as training students via mentoring, participation in testbed
development, and internships at industrial labs. A developed small cell
educational tool will foster this integration via new hands-on activities and
demonstrations to the community. Specialized outreach activities will contribute
to increasing the participation of minority high school students in science and
engineering.