* 1253440
* CAREER: Traveling Fires -- Do They Really Matter?
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ann Jeffers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to quantify the influence of fire progression on the fire resistance of
steel-framed buildings using a simulation-based approach. In particular, a high-
resolution fire model will be coupled to a 3D structural model, and parametric
studies will be conducted to assess the performance of a prototype steel-framed
building given variations in the compartment geometry and ventilation, the type
and distribution of the fuel, the location of fire origin, the structural
detailing, and other key parameters. The coupling of a fire model to a
structural model requires consideration for the transport of data across
disparate temporal and spatial scales, thus necessitating the use of novel heat
transfer finite elements, sub-cycling, and data homogenization algorithms to
improve the accuracy and efficiency of the simulation. Numerical studies of a
prototype building under various fire scenarios will provide new insight into
the mechanical actions that develop in buildings under non-stationary fires,
enabling improvements in the design process to account for detrimental effects
that may be attributed to progressing fires. Based on empirical knowledge in the
fire science literature and the trends observed in the numerical simulations, a
new design fire model will be proposed to more efficiently capture the
fundamental nature of progressing fires in the performance-based design of
structures for fire. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to
transform the manner in which buildings are designed for fire hazards by paving
the way for more realistic representations of fire behavior in the structural
simulation. Numerical studies of fires will shed new light on the sources of
conservatism and the potential pitfalls in current design practices, resulting
in recommendations to improve the safety and economy of building systems
threatened by catastrophic fire. While the focus of the research is on fire
safety engineering, it is expected that the research will yield advances that
may have applications in the broader context of hazard mitigation and
multiphysics simulation. The technical research is infused with a rigorous
educational and outreach plan that includes mentored undergraduate and graduate
research experiences for women and underrepresented students, the creation of a
hands-on museum exhibit regarding building fire safety that will be installed in
the Michigan Firehouse Museum, educational research to assess the learning
outcomes of a newly established international service-learning program at the
University of Michigan, and the coordination of an international
workshop/symposium that will facilitate cross-disciplinary collaboration
regarding issues that lie at the fire-structure interface.