* 1253269
* CAREER: Taking Sustainable Cements to the Next Level: New Routes to Control and Amplify the Chemical Reactivity of Cementing Phases
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Gaurav Sant, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 405,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project engineers portland
cements having enhanced reactivity, so as to substantially enhance efficiencies
associated with the use of cement in concrete. Reactivity amplifications are
provoked by manipulating: (1) impurity distributions (i.e., guest ions) and (2)
thermal processing (e.g., quenching) routes through cement synthesis. These
manipulations induce structural imperfections in cement minerals, and thus act
to elevate their reactivity. Reactivity is studied across quantum-to-continuum
scales using density functional theory and molecular dynamics calculation, by
synthesis of pure cement phases and their solid solutions, and by nanoscale
measurements of phase dissolution rates. The investigations are organized for
calculation and experiment to interact with each other, and guide the discovery
of highly reactive cementing phases through detailed considerations of phase
chemistry, properties and processing.

This research places emphasis on reactivity, to produce concretes using a
smaller quantity of highly reactive cement, which are performance-equivalent to
concretes produced today using larger quantities of traditional cements. Thus,
by reducing the use/wastage of cement in concrete, the outcomes of the work
conservatively target global cement (and CO2 emissions) savings of around 15%,
i.e., around 500 million tons. This is a translational paradigm in reducing
cement use, which will radically alter how sustainability is approached from a
materials perspective by the construction industry. The project develops
graduated training across levels of scientific maturity, from high-school
students to post-doctoral scientists. Diversity and high-school engagement
platforms at UCLA are leveraged to provide research opportunities to financially
disadvantaged minority candidates, while LA-high-school educators and YouTube
and Facebook ventures are engaged to incite interest in, and provide growth
opportunities to young scientists.