* 1253000
* CAREER:  Air-ecosystem-water interactions of reactive nitrogen in urban systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Emily Elliott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 01/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

As creation of reactive nitrogen (Nr) accelerates to meet global food and fuel
demand, the research challenges regarding the environmental and health effects
of excess N have become ever more pressing. While atmospheric deposition
chemistry monitoring networks in the U.S. are globally respected, these networks
were intentionally established in rural settings to monitor regional changes in
deposition chemistry. Despite studies documenting the relatively local impact of
vehicle emissions- and that vehicles are the largest source of nitrogen oxide
emissions in the U.S., the ecological and water quality impacts of these spatial
deposition patterns are rarely explored. Concomitantly, studies continue to
report surprisingly high rates of urban watershed Nr retention, bucking
expectations for high nitrate export from these systems, while nitrate export to
sensitive receiving waters continues to exceed targeted limitations. We
hypothesize that poor constraints on urban Nr deposition fluxes have translated
into an underestimation of the influence of atmospheric Nr as a nutrient source
to urban ecosystems, streams, and riverine systems. This research examines the
tight coupling between human activities and fluxes of Nr across atmospheric,
terrestrial and aquatic systems in urban environments using a unique suite of
analytical approaches. Research goals will fill major knowledge gaps in urban Nr
budgets and will: 1) compare Nr deposition fluxes, speciation, and sources in
urban and rural environments; 2) examine mechanisms for Nr retention in urban
ecosystems; and 3) evaluate the role of atmospheric nitrate as a eutrophication
source to streams and rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
understanding of interdisciplinary connections in Earth system science - with a
specific focus on interactions between energy, the environment, and society.
Broader project aims seek to improve regional resources for interdisciplinary
Geoscience education and to create new pathways for illuminating the relevance
of Geoscience disciplines to society. These aims will be accomplished with
educational activities focused on the following goals: 1) create new pipelines
to the geosciences for under-represented teens in the Pittsburgh region; 2)
advance Earth systems science literacy, focusing on synergies between energy,
environment, and society; and 3) develop sustainable alliances to promote
Geoscience education in the Pittsburgh region. These activities leverage
existing resources at the University of Pittsburgh including the Regional Stable
Isotope Laboratory for Earth and Environmental Science Research, the Mobile Air
Quality Research Laboratory, and a newly funded NSF initiative, ENERGY-NET.
ENERGY-NET links geosciences expertise at the University of Pittsburgh to one of
five Carnegie Museums in Pittsburgh, the Carnegie Museum of Natural History.
This project extends this collaboration to the Carnegie Science Center, located
in downtown Pittsburgh. The Carnegie Science Center receives 500,000 visitors
annually and will serve as the hub for planned urban deposition measurements. In
partnership with the Carnegie Science Center, this project will integrate
research and monitoring data into public exhibits and utilize popular outreach
efforts to engage and inform youth regarding geosciences career awareness and
societial relevance.