* 1253710
* CAREER:   Dynamic models of isolation and admixture for community-scale population genomic inference
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Michael Hickerson, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2019
* USD 677,074.00

The rate at which one can increasingly obtain large amounts of DNA data quickly
and easily has far outpaced the rate at which computational performance
increases over time (Moore's law). To bridge the gap between this impending
flood of data and our ability to analyze it, this research will develop
computational tools and models that can accommodate the complexity inherent in
analyzing genomic data at the level of multiple individuals across different
species. This will allow answering long-standing and previously intractable
questions about how communities of species form, what creates biodiversity, and
how groups of species respond to climate change. The modeling and tool
development will focus on the cyclical history of climate change that dominated
the Earth for the last two million years with an emphasis on how the resulting
cycles of species habitat retraction, expansion and extinction shape the genomic
patterns of whole communities.

The impending flood of genomic data will also transform society with the
increasing availability of personal genomics kits. To anticipate how the public
will increasingly become de facto scientific participants through personal
genomics, the research will demonstrate the power, complexities and cautions of
population genomic inference as applied to humans by implementing a genomic
participant-based human population genomics course and three public events.
Participants will optionally obtain vast amounts of non-medically relevant
genomic data from themselves and this experiential component will enable
communicating to the public about a wide array of complex issues relevant to
medicine, history, evolution, ethics, statistics and information literacy.