* 1253205
* CAREER: Information Theory Beyond Capacity
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Yury Polyanskiy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 625,238.00

Unprecedented technological progress in the last decades makes information
theory an ever more exciting and important discipline. The modern world is
swarming with information streams pervading the radio, wires, fiber optic
cables, and on-chip networks. Yet we are unable to answer the most basic
questions such as the impact of delay on the capacity of multiple-antenna
wireless channels, or the fundamental principles of protecting computation
networks from local process variation in silicon chip fabrication. As such, the
main purpose of this project is to advance the state-of-the-art in the
fundamental limits of delay-constrained wireless communication. Computation of
the impact of delay constraint in wireless communication will allow assessments
of the degree of suboptimality of currently employed systems and industry
standards, and likewise shed light on novel and higher-performing wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The progress on non-asymptotic information theory
is inseparable from understanding of non-Shannon information measures and their
data-processing properties on general (non-linear) graphs. The progress on this
topic is expected to provide the theoretical tools required for exploration of
complex information processing systems including non-communication ones, such as
fault-tolerant chips and noise-resistant circuits. Advanced converse techniques
and graph-based data-processing will open information theory to new fields and
is expected to reinvigorate the progress in the converse bounds for multi-
terminal (network) problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum will be broadly
disseminated through online resources, OpenCourseWare and MITx/edX. The analysis
of real-world communication systems also presents a rich field for undergraduate
research opportunities (UROPs). Popularizing finite blocklength results is
likewise expected to have industrial impact, especially in areas related to
wireless and time-critical communication. The compiled performance charts and
delay-constrained analysis will guide the design of next-generation mobile
standards and help in fair assessment of intellectual property.