* 1253544
* CAREER: Investigation of Non-Aqueous Single-Metal Redox Flow Batteries through Experiment and Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Charles Monroe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 07/31/2015
* USD 192,756.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal focuses on experimental and theoretical
studies of a new class of non-aqueous, single-metal redox flow battery (RFB).
These RFBs rely on disproportionation of metal coordination complexes into
oxidized and reduced products. Use of non-aqueous liquids to support redox
reactions makes it possible to raise cell voltages well above the range where
water decomposes. Our preliminary experiments using first-row transition-metal
complexes demonstrate some equilibrium voltages more than twice as large as
aqueous systems permit, suggesting that development of high-conductivity
solvent/support systems and highly soluble active-complex structures that
undergo multiple electron transfer could improve energy density by 200%-300%.
Non-aqueous, single-metal, disproportionation-based RFBs promise significantly
improved performance over aqueous chemistries, and our preliminary cycling
results suggest competitive coulombic efficiencies. We see comparatively low
energy and power efficiencies in non-aqueous RFB systems during cycling, issues
this research will address. The proposed research will perform and rationalize
experimental observations of non-aqueous RFBs. Our goal is to guide reactor
design and materials selection for next-generation nonaqueous RFBs on the basis
of sound fundamental principles. Three complementary projects will be executed
in parallel during the five-year research term. (1) Equilibrium electrochemical
properties of various non-aqueous RFB systems will be investigated by
potentiometric and spectroscopic methods. Several trivalent
&amp;#946;-diketonate metal active complexes will be studied in various support
and solvent systems. In addition to elucidating how activity and potential
depend on an RFB system?s state of charge, this work will inform future system
design by showing how solute/solute and solute/solvent interactions impact
efficiency of RFBs in general.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Transport phenomena in the liquid
and separator phases will be characterized with methods including DC
conductimetry, AC impedance spectroscopy, and UV-vis spectroscopy. The results
will be matched to advanced theoretical multicomponent transport models, and
used to underpin a property database for computer simulations of RFB operation.
RFB cells will be fabricated to corroborate numerical results with experimental
charge/discharge data. The model will also be used to predict how control
schemes and cell design can be varied to optimize RFB performance. (3) Reaction
rates and mechanisms in single-metal RFBs will be probed by electrochemical
experiments. Theoretical methods will be created to establish mechanisms for
several active-complex redox reactions. Kinetic models will be included in RFB
cell simulations. Ultimately, this research program will deliver a continuum-
scale model that rationalizes and predicts the transient current/voltage
response of RFB cells during practical charging and discharging between various
states of charge, and at various charge and discharge rates. Simulations will
permit studies of various electrode configurations, cell designs, and
electrolyte flow schemes. We will take a bottom-up approach, using studies of
bulk, interfacial, and phase exchange processes to support a holistic,
microscopically informed model of the entire RFB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Outreach activities will foster the natural connection that I believe to
exist between research progress and pedagogical activity. My central outreach
objective is to advocate multidisciplinary, collaborative electrochemical
engineering education in a diverse research environment. This objective will be
addressed by: (1) continuing development of graduate-level electrochemical
engineering courses that incorporate RFB research problems; (2) encouraging
undergraduate interest in energy-system design by participating in service
activities related to electrochemical engineering, offering undergraduate
research opportunities, and developing forums outside the classroom for the
exchange of ideas; and (3) taking part in the MI-LSAMP outreach program, which
aims to increase participation by under-represented minorities and women in
cutting-edge science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. I hope to move
electrochemistry away from the periphery of chemical engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the exposure of pre-college, undergraduate, and
graduate students from all walks of life to electrochemical engineering will
facilitate the innovation necessary to support a national shift to more diverse,
sustainable energy production.