* 1253713
* CAREER: Tracking the evolution of grasses and grasslands: using phytoliths to explore evolution-ecology links in deep time
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Caroline Stromberg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 604,020.00

CAREER: Tracking the evolution of grasses and grasslands: using phytoliths to
explore evolution-ecology links in deep time&lt;br/&gt;Caroline Stromberg,
University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands cover 40% of Earth's
land surface today, provide habitats for over a billion animals including
humans, and greatly influence global climate and the carbon and silica cycles.
Understanding the history of the grassland biome is essential for disentangling
its complex controls and predicting how natural grasslands and crop plants will
respond to ongoing human induced climate change. In recent years, analysis of
fossilized plant silica (phytoliths) has shed much needed light on evolutionary
and ecological events during the establishment of grasslands. However, gaining
further knowledge depends critically on refined methods for identifying specific
grass lineages in the fossil record. This CAREER research has two main goals.
First, the project will enhance the use of phytoliths for robust taxonomic (the
naming of species) and ecological interpretations through the first
comprehensive and detailed mapping of grass phytolith shapes in an evolutionary
framework, coupled with mapping of other, functionally relevant traits (e.g.,
photosynthetic pathway) and environmental preferences. Second, project will use
this "key" to fossil grass types and ecology to tackle two outstanding questions
in grass evolution: (1) When and in what environments did grasses originate and
diversify?; and (2) What drove the ecological expansion of grasses with C4
photosynthesis? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the first question, the project
will study Cretaceous-Paleogene (145-23 million years ago) phytolith assemblages
from Argentina to determine the evolutionary relationships between the grasses
present, and use this information to determine when the lineage split occurred.
Phytolith assemblage analysis and other paleobotanical evidence will help
determine what early grass habitats were like. To address the second question,
the project will analyze Miocene-Pliocene (23-2.6 million years ago) phytolith
assemblages from Kansas to document the ecological expansion of C4 grasses in
the Great Plains. The project will infer major C4 grass lineages present, and
reconstruct changes in vegetation structure. Direct comparison with stable
isotopic data from the section will permit testing of which factors influenced
the rise to dominance of C4 grasses. The results of this research program will
transform the study of ecosystem change during the last ~70 million years,
specifically the assembly of grasslands, and allow evaluation of what processes
control grassland evolution, in the past and in the future. It will also
contribute fundamentally to archaeology, where phytoliths have long been a
principal tool for tracking domestication of crop plants and land use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated themes explored in this research program--
evolution, ecology, and environmental change--will be incorporated into formal
and informal education at the middle-school- to graduate-school-level and public
outreach. This educational component will be accomplished through (1) inquiry-
based labs and activities in my undergraduate courses at University of
Washington, (2) research mentoring of one postdoctoral researcher, one graduate
student, and at least 7 undergraduates in the lab and field, (3) design of new
exhibits at the Burke Museum demonstrating evolution research in action, and (4)
an after-school program aiming to engage middle-school girls, which remain
minorities in STEM, in evolution-ecology science. The joint research and
educational activities proposed here aim to inspire a greater appreciation for
the processes that shaped and continue to shape our world, and more broadly, a
better understanding of the practice of science and critical thinking in
students of all ages.