* 1253475
* CAREER:  Advanced demand estimators for energy-efficiency in personal transportation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Ricardo Daziano, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2019
* USD 409,565.00

1253475 (Daziano). The long-term career goal of the PI is to contribute
significantly to both research and education in decision-making analysis to
better understand consumer behavioral response to energy-efficient engineered
technologies. In pursuit of this goal, the CAREER research objective is to
exploit microeconometric discrete choice theory to better inform engineering of
low emission vehicles. Aiming at the long-term goal of preparing engineers to
create technically sound solutions that society is willing to adopt, the CAREER
educational objective is to provide future engineers with a multidisciplinary
vision of engineering decision-making informed by consumer demand. The research
plan of this proposal seeks to: 1) generate new demand estimators of the
structural parameters of a large-scale simultaneous-equations discrete choice
system with heterogeneous consumers and decision rules for energy-efficient
automobile technologies, 2) derive nonparametric Bayesian estimators of
willingness-to-pay and consumer-surplus measures that account for behavioral
uncertainties, 3) formulate a systematic Bayesian cost-benefit analysis of
integrative counterfactual scenarios of low emission vehicle deployment for
informing policy, technology, engineering, and infrastructure planning
decisions. The three research tasks will be validated and tested using data on
consumer adoption of low-emission vehicles from different sources. The education
plan builds on and will contribute to the planned research, and comprises four
steps: 1) collaboration with sustainability research centers at Cornell to
foster multidisciplinary research and learning experiences for college students
with different backgrounds but with common interests in energy sustainability,
2) extensive outreach on sustainable travel behavior to educate the public and
to motivate socially-diverse future generations to pursue engineering careers,
3) enhancement of the curriculum at the senior undergraduate and graduate levels
through implementing and continuously improving three courses aimed at
integrating demand-side dynamics into engineering, and 4) mentoring graduate
students at the PhD and MEng levels. The main research outcome will be a
solution for the joint estimation problem of a complex system of structural
equations based on random utility maximization that can be applied to formulate
demand models for energy efficiency. Unsolved econometric challenges will be
addressed for deriving flexible Bayesian parametric and nonparametric
simulation-aided inference for identified reduced parameters. The simultaneous
equations demand model will account for interactions of consumer response with
the economic, environmental, energy, and transportation systems. The demand
model will also incorporate social symbolic values such as pro-environmental
preferences, energy security concerns, as well as consumers' awareness of
emerging sustainable technologies and their readiness to adopt them. To
represent choice among continuously evolving technologies, the demand system
will also account for energy diversification, choice dynamics, and measurement
of qualitative attributes. Access to data will be facilitated through
collaborations with Ford Motors, UC Berkeley, the Centre for European Economic
Research, and the University of Rome 3. The technical results will contribute to
fields where decision-making under uncertainty is needed. Decision-making
analysis tools derived from the demand estimators will serve to evaluate not
only pricing and investment strategies for advanced energy-efficient propulsion
technologies and infrastructure, but also public policies and incentives to best
promote industry conversion to and consumer acceptance of low-emission vehicles.
The results will be significant not only for US policymakers and transportation
planners, but also for informing auto manufacturers to improve how industry
engineers vehicles. Knowledge transfer will be achieved through
multidisciplinary collaboration within and beyond Cornell, including
international partnerships. Educational initiatives will be focused on
disseminating the relevance of consumer response for successful engineering
solutions. Cornell Engineering's Teaching Excellence Institute will assist in
creating innovative active choice experiments using personal-response systems.
Publicly discussed screenings of documentaries about electric vehicles and
yearly participation at the NYS fair will support outreach plans on sustainable
travel behavior to youth and college freshmen, with a special focus on
underrepresented groups.