* 1253564
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on the Electro-Mechanical Behavior of Multifunctional Structural Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Kenneth Loh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2016
* USD 407,039.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is an integrated research
and education study centered on carbon nanotube (CNT)-based multifunctional
coatings. Multifunctional coatings are material systems intentionally encoded
with multiple engineering functionalities. The main research objective is to
derive and validate the fundamental electromechanical behavior of
multifunctional layer-by-layer CNT-polyelectrolyte (PE) thin films. Their
coupled electrical and mechanical properties will be tested using experiments,
characterized by theory, and simulated numerically across different length
scales. First, CNT-PE thin films will be subjected to mechanical, fracture, and
viscoelastic tests. A micro-electro-mechanical model will then be derived and
validated for simulating thin film electromechanical response to different types
of applied loads. Next, the model will be used to evaluate the effects of
defects on bulk film linear/non-linear properties, as well as the effects of
inhomogeneity of large coatings. Finally, a finite element model that
incorporates spatial variations of electromechanical properties will be created
for assessing and comparing to experiments their spatial sensing and mechanical
behavior. This research will explain, from a physics standpoint, why these
nanocomposites possess such unique linear/non-linear and static/time-dependent
electromechanical behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research impacts will be
the derivation of new theory, numerical models, and experimental data that
describe, in a holistic sense and across different length scales, the
electromechanical behavior of these CNT-based multifunctional thin films. The
experimental methods, analysis techniques, and models developed are applicable
to a broad array of nanocomposites and coatings. New knowledge and innovations
in areas such as multi-physics modeling, mechanics, materials science, nano-
engineering, sensor systems, and multifunctional coatings will be generated. The
lessons learned will facilitate the implementation of future coatings in real-
world applications. Integral to this CAREER project is also an
education/outreach plan to equip future students/workforce with the knowledge,
skills, and business training for them to pursue and secure careers in
nanotechnology-enabled multifunctional materials. A nanoscience for sensing
course series will be developed at UC Davis and the Los Rios Community Colleges.
Students from underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups and female
students will be recruited for this new effort and for research. Course and
research results will be disseminated via a website, online videos,
presentations, and publications.&lt;br/&gt;