* 1253842
* CAREER: Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Rahul Mangharam, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

This project develops the foundations of modeling, synthesis and development of
verified medical device software and systems, from verified closed-loop models
of the device and organ(s). The effort spans both implantable medical devices
such as cardiac pacemakers and physiological control systems such as drug
infusion pumps that have multiple networked medical systems. In both cases, the
devices are physically connected to the body and exert direct control over the
physiology and safety of the patient-in-the-loop. The goal is to ensure the
device will never drive the patient into an unsafe state, while providing
effective therapy. The contributions of are in three areas: closed-loop patient-
device modeling; quantitative verification for optimized patient-specific
devices; platforms for life-critical systems. Integrated modeling methodologies
are developed to produce both the functional physiological signals, for
clinically relevant testing with a medical device, and also generate the formal
timing of device-patient interaction for formal verification. Starting with the
problem of verifying the safety and correctness of medical device software,
probabilistic patient models based on physiological data are then used to
develop quantitative verification techniques to maintain the therapy?s efficacy
on the patient and operational efficiency of the device. To facilitate
participation of the CPS community, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
physicians and manufacturers, open source libraries of device/patient models,
software tools for verification and model translation and hardware platforms for
testing with real medical devices are developed. The closed-loop design and
verification techniques for medical device software and patients, developed
here, have direct potential benefits on human health, and the quality and cost
of medical care. Design of bug-free and safe medical device software is
challenging, especially in complex implantable devices that control and actuate
organs who's response is not fully understood. Safety recalls of pacemakers and
implantable ?cardioverter? defibrillators between 1990 and 2000 affected over
600,000 devices. Of these, 200,000 or 41%, were due to firmware issues (i.e.
software) that continue to increase in frequency. There is currently no formal
methodology or open experimental platform to test and verify the correct
operation of medical device software within the closed-loop context of the
patient. If successful, this project has potential to not only increase the
safety of such devices, but also to accelerate the development and certification
process. The latter could reduce costs, and shorten the time to market for new
devices. The project also has an extensive education and outreach component,
including curriculum development in medical cyber-physical systems, involvement
of undergraduate and graduate students in research, and cooperation with
hospitals, makers of medical devices, and the FDA. The cross-cutting nature of
the project brings together communities involving clinical physicians,
electrical engineers, computer scientists and regulators of health care safety.