* 1253218
* EAGER: A Framework for joint optimization of power management and performance in virtualized, heterogeneous cloud computing environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Taieb Znati, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 187,950.00

The main objective of the proposed research project is to develop holistic
approaches to the design of power optimization strategies for heterogeneous
cloud computing environment. The focus will be on exploring the tradeoffs among
the cloud computing physical infrastructure, including power-managed servers and
cooling technology, virtualized infrastructure, and the middleware and service
infrastructure. Contrary to cross-layer designs for energy optimization, where
solutions are obtained through piecemeal approaches, the layered architecture is
used to cast cloud computing energy optimization as an extended monotropic
programming problem and derive a systematic analysis and design of global energy
optimization strategies, whereby energy policy at a given layer uses subsets of
the decision variables to achieve individual optimality and reduce the impact of
carbon footprint on the environment. The research project provides a unique
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students to gain deep understanding
of the basic science and engineering design principles of cloud computing and
energy consumption in data centers. The outreach plan builds on existing
minority and under-represented programs at the University of Pittsburgh to
recruit and retain a diverse population of undergraduate and graduate students,
and also seeks to establish collaborations with industrial institutions to
leverage their educational programs and cloud infrastructure to advance the
research project agenda.