* 1253138
* Workshop: Doctoral Symposium at the 2012 Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces Conference (ITS 2012)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Orit Shaer, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 21,987.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 12 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad
(up to 2 international students), along with 4 high profile faculty and
industrial researchers. The event will take place in conjunction with and
immediately preceding the 7th Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces Conference (ITS
?12), to be held November 11-14, 2012, in Cambridge Mass., and which is
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery. The technological advances
of the past decade have given rise to an increasing number of creative research
areas that seek to overcome the long-standing separation between the physical
and digital worlds. The ITS Conferences are a premiere venue for presenting
research in the design and use of new and emerging tabletop and interactive
surface technologies, bringing together about 200 top researchers, engineers and
practitioners who are interested in both the technical and human aspects of ITS
technology; so topics of interest include not only innovations in ITS hardware
and software but also expanding our understanding of design considerations for
ITS technologies and their applications. More information about the conference
may be found at http://its2012conf.org. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of the ITS Doctoral Symposium is to provide mentorship for future leaders in
this growing field. To these ends the event is designed so as to encourage young
scholars from diverse backgrounds encompassed by ITS to attend the conference,
meet with more senior researchers, and pursue a career in this field. The day-
long program will help establish a sense of community among the next generation
of researchers, while increasing the exposure and visibility of the
participants' work and at the same time fostering their research efforts by
providing constructive feedback and guidance from senior researchers in a
supportive and interactive environment. Student participants will each make a
formal presentation of their work to the group, with ample time allotted for
questions and feedback from the faculty panel as well as from the other student
participants. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Additional opportunities for more informal
discussion and networking will be during the doctoral symposium's lunch and
dinner events. Students' short papers will appear in the ITS Proceedings and
they will be indexed in the ACM Digital Library. Students will also be invited
to present their work at the main conference during the Poster Session; this
will also afford the opportunity for students to talk one-on-one with peers and
other more senior researchers, in addition to the focused mentoring of the
Doctoral Symposium itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Student
participants will be selected on the basis of written submissions in the form of
a six page ACM format paper submitted to the Doctoral Symposium chairs. These
will be reviewed by the faculty panel and external reviewers. Participants will
be expected to be pursuing a doctoral degree and will be selected primarily from
the field of human-computer interaction, which could span a variety of
disciplines including computer science, engineering, or a design background. The
review and decision of acceptance will balance many factors including the
quality of the proposals. The event organizers are committed to diversity across
backgrounds, gender, topics, and institutions, as well as to the inclusion of
students from underrepresented minorities. To assure broad coverage of topics
and backgrounds, no more than two students will be accepted from any given
institution and no more than one with any given advisor. NSF funds will be used
primarily to support student participants from U.S. institutions, with no more
than two educational institutions from abroad.