* 1253414
* EAGER: Prototype Validation of Surface-Reflected Acoustic Communication Links in Underwater Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Mohamed Younis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 99,144.00

This project develops and validates a novel technique for establishing acoustic
communication links among nodes in an underwater setup. Basically, acoustic
links have limited bandwidth and suffers from slow and multi-path signal
propagation. These issues make underwater communication a challenge and motivate
the use of directional antennas to establish line-of-sight (LOS) paths between
communicating nodes. However, the node mobility while serving an application or
due to water current will break LOS links and thus hinders effective
communication among nodes. To overcome this challenge, the team develops a novel
surface-based reflection (SBR) scheme that allows nodes to utilize reflected
acoustic links from the water surface or bottom as non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
communication links. A prototype modem is to be developed to utilize a
multimodal directional transducer for validating the feasibility of establishing
NLOS communication when using the SBR scheme. The prototype design could be
leveraged for networking protocols such as node discovery, localization, medium
access control and routing. The end result is an efficient directional acoustic
communication platform that mitigates the effects of multipath propagation while
fully utilizing the available spatial spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will boost the effectiveness of many civil and scientific applications.
Examples of these applications include search-and-rescue, coastal patrol,
oceanographic data collection, environmental monitoring, assisted navigation,
and security surveillance. The project will also help enrich the undergraduate
and graduate curricula in sensor networks, robotics, and embedded and
distributed systems while providing outreach opportunities to demonstrate the
prototype to local middle and high schools in order to stimulate interest in
this technology among the next generations of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;