* 1253393
* CAREER: On the identification of collections with complex objectives
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Evimaria Terzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,976.00

In many domains, there is an increasing reliance on Recommender Systems for
helping identify products, services and people that meet some user-specified
criteria. Given a pool of entities (e.g., movies, books, experts) and an
objective function such systems have to identify a collection (i.e., a subset)
of entities from the pool that optimizes the objective function. For example, in
movie-recommendation systems (e.g., Netflix) the goal is to identify subsets of
movies to recommend to registered users. Analogous problems arise in social
networks and social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook), where advertisers need to
identify a small set of targets for their advertisements. Finally, project
management teams in large organizations often use expertise management systems
to identify the subset of experts needed to complete a specific project.

Current Recommender Systems suffer from severe limitations in settings where (i)
the users multiple interactions with the system over time and the
recommendations provided to a specific user at any given time need to take into
account the past recommendations given to the same user or (ii) The entities
that make up the recommended collections are rational entities, e.g.,
participants in a social network, or members of a project team, that have their
own goals and preferences that influence their behavior as members of the
collection. This project aims to address these two shortcomings of current
Recommender Systems by designing, implementing, and evaluating combinatorial
algorithms for identifying (a) sequences of collections, rather than a single
collection and (b) collections of rational entities with individual goals,
preferences, or objectives.

In addition to developing a suite of novel combinatorial algorithms and
heuristics for recommending sequences of collections and collections of rational
entities, the project aims to develop and deploy two application-specific
testbeds: (i) a personalized meal planner provides to its users weekly meal
recommendations to guide them towards healthy eating choices; and (ii) A
crowdsourcing platform with support for virtual team formation to allow students
registered in some of the courses at Boston University, to form teams online to
collaborate on class projects (when appropriate).

Broader impacts of this research include: new models and methods that
signficantly advance the current state of the art in Recommender Systems, with
broad applications in a number of domains including social networks (e.g.,
LinkedIn, Facebook, etc.), online recommendation systems (e.g., Amazon, Netflix,
etc.), and daily-deal sites (e.g., Groupon, LivingSocial, etc.). The project
contributes to the education and advanced research-based training of graduate
and undergraduate students in Computer Science at Boston University. Wide
dissemination of software implementations of the algorithms can be expected to
benefit the larger research community.

Additional information about the project, including links to project personnel,
publications, and software can be found at:
http://www.cs.bu.edu/~evimaria/recommendations.html