* 1253059
* Meeting:   Workshop on Comparative Proteomics of Environmental and Pollution Stress, Cal Poly; December10-14, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Lars Tomanek, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 35,000.00

The proteome of a cell is made up of the set of proteins being expressed by the
cell at any one point in time. Proteins are the essential elements of a cell
that enable nearly all of its functional capabilities, from providing the
architectural elements that give the cell structure, facilitating cellular
construction, regulating cellular metabolism and energy production, to cellular
communication. The quantification of their synthesis patterns is critical to
characterizing the response of an organism to a changing environment. Proteomics
is the process of studying the dynamics of the proteome. While some studies have
demonstrated much potential in the use of proteomics to improve understanding
the response of organisms to potential climate change, few laboratories have
ventured deeply into the study of the proteome, especially in the context of
environmental stress. This is in large part due to the complexity and cost of
the sophisticated analytical instrumentation required to separate, quantify and
identify proteins. In addition, relatively few proteomics analyses exist of non-
model organisms for which there is limited genomic information, despite the fact
that they are often "model" systems in other biological disciplines, e.g., blue
mussels (genus: Mytilus) as bio-indicators for pollution stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five day workshop will introduce twelve participants
to the methodology involved in a proteomic analysis: from the separation of
proteins by their charge (isoelectric point) and their molecular mass by two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis and high-pressure liquid chromatography, the
quantification of proteins and subsequent statistical analyses, to the
identification of proteins through mass spectrometry, including matrix-assisted
laser desorption tandem time of flight (MALDI-ToF-ToF) and electrospray
ionization quadrupole time-of-flight (ESI Q-ToF) mass spectrometry. Importantly,
participants will have the opportunity to analyze their own samples, generate
their own data set, and will be exposed to the various tools that facilitate the
interpretation of their results. The goal of this workshop is to introduce
participants to proteomics methodologies and incubate several new proteomics
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has a track record of training a great
number of undergraduates, graduate students, and visiting scholars in proteomic
techniques, including mass spectrometry. He has collaborated with a number of
colleagues to build a community around environmental proteomics, and organized a
symposium on the topic at a recent conference. This workshop is a continuation
of his effort to build a larger research community around environmental
proteomics. Efforts will be made to recruit participants nationally. These
efforts include a number of communications specifically directed to recruit
participants from underrepresented groups in STEM, and therefore this project
aims to broaden participation in these state-of-the-art approaches. Overall, the
proposed workshop promises to build the capacity of the community to conduct
proteomic analyses and will help initiate a number of new proteomic projects.