* 1253418
* CAREER: Privacy Analytics for Users in a Big Data World
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Rachel Greenstadt, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 01/31/2019
* USD 494,747.00

Increasing amounts of data are being collected about users, and increasingly
sophisticated analytics are being applied to this data for various purposes.
Privacy analytics are machine learning and data mining algorithms applied by
end-users to their data for the purpose of helping them manage both private
information and their self-presentation. This research develops privacy
analytics that help users answer three interconnected questions about their
online persona (1) What data does the user consider sensitive, and in what
contexts should one share it?; (2) What does the data say about the user; and
(3) Who knows what? These privacy analytics introduce a novel, inverse data
mining problem where users analyze their data to estimate the conclusions the
data will produce when incorporated into larger data sets. This project designs
new algorithms for quantitative and automated methods to detect privacy-related
phenomena that have been observed qualitatively. These algorithms support the
development of usable privacy enhancing technologies and will give users tools
to cope with and manage their data in a complicated data environment. These
tools will provide awareness to users about how their data is being used. These
analytics will also help answer questions critical to the development of privacy
law and policy.

This work involves approximately twenty-five undergraduates in research
activities, exposing them to research methods and privacy issues. This project
also develops novel educational materials including course offerings for an
interdisciplinary master's program in security and educational tools for use by
the general public to bridge the digital divide.