* 1253443
* EAGER: Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Methane
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jean Andino, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2014
* USD 87,000.00

Sustainable generation of fuels through the catalytic conversion of CO2 is an
area of research that has the potential to enhance national energy security
while simultaneously providing a mechanism to minimize direct CO2 emissions.
Previous studies on CO2 photoreduction to fuels have utilized TiO2-based
catalysts. A major challenge that exists with utilizing TiO2 as a photocatalyst
for CO2 photoreduction is the fast recombination of electron-hole pairs which
are formed by light irradiation. Electrons are needed to generate products via
reduction of CO2. Efforts to minimize charge recombination are critical for
enhancing product formation. Despite past efforts at modifying the TiO2-based
catalysts using both metal and non-metal modifiers, published data shows
relatively low production rates for useful products. Typical products include CO
and valuable fuel products such as CH4 and CH3OH. Several of the catalysts
resulted in the formation of multiple products, resulting in the need for gas
separation technologies when the catalyst is implemented in a real-world
scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments in the laboratories of
Professor Jean Andino at Arizona State University have shown promise for a
composite catalyst of RGO-TiO2, reduced graphite oxide and titania. The RGO can
potentially assist in minimizing charge recombination when TiO2 is activated by
light, thereby making more electrons available for a surface CO2 reduction
reaction. A potential challenge with using reduced graphite oxide is whether the
interlayer spacing would be sufficient to allow TiO2 to reside between the RGO
layers. A modified RGO structure with increased interlayer spacing would
alleviate this concern. Moreover, if the modifier for the RGO is capable of
selectively attracting CO2 as compared to hydrocarbons, then this may allow for
enhanced functionality. Published data show that CO2 is strongly attracted to
ionic liquids. Andino hypothesizes that an ionic liquid (IL) functionalized RGO-
TiO2 would result in the attraction of CO2, sufficient charge separation within
the TiO2 (making electrons available for the CO2 photoreduction reaction), and
rejection of the produced hydrocarbons, such as CH4, thus reducing separation
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andino has performed preliminary work to synthesize
the IL-RGO/TiO2 catalyst and to test the characteristics of the catalyst for the
reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons in the presence of water vapor. The DRIFTS
studies showed the IL-RGO/TiO2 catalyst appears to lead to the selective and
fast formation of CH4 in the absence of any CO. The CH4 production rate from CO2
photoreduction is more than 30 times higher than that which was published by any
other research group. The results (taken in conjunction with literature data)
suggest that the newly developed IL-RGO/TiO2 catalyst produces CH4 at a rate
that is far superior to any other existing
catalyst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an ideal basis for this EAGER
award. Researchers typically use GC techniques to quantify the data and not the
DRIFTS IR spectroscopy technique. Furthermore the impact of oxygen presence on
product yield needs to be known. The proposed EAGER award will provide the
necessary data to confirm the observation and generate additional data to
support a full investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER is expected to
have several broader impacts in the catalysis area and will broaden
participation in the field. First, the data that will be generated will help to
establish the usefulness of the IL-RGO/TiO2 catalyst in the direct and selective
generation of a valuable fuel (CH4). This work could have significant impacts in
the areas of national energy security and the control of CO2 emissions. The
proposed project would be used to partially fund two traditionally
underrepresented chemical engineering graduate students. The experience of
working on the proposed project that has a strong connection to society?s grand
challenges has already inspired these students, and is expected to help retain
them in science and engineering. The expectation is that both students will make
sufficient progress so that at least one peer-reviewed paper will be submitted
and presentations made locally and also at annual meetings of either the
American Chemical Society, the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, or the
Air and Waste Management Association in 2013.