* 1253222
* CAREER:  The Influence of Desert Heat Lows on Monsoon Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,11/30/2017
* William Boos, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2017
* USD 643,465.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project to support a junior
faculty member in developing and conducting an integrated 5-year program of
research and education in atmospheric science. The research component examines
the connection between monsoons and the deserts typically found adjacent to
monsoon regions on the poleward side (as, for instance, the Sahara is poleward
of and adjacent to the Sahel). Previous work by the PI shows that variations in
precipitation in several monsoon regions including the Sahel, South Asia, and
Australia, are positively correlated with equivalent potential temperature below
the cloud layer over adjacent poleward deserts. One hypothesis for this
relationship is that desert heat lows produce shallow overturning circulations
in which outflow near the 700mb level has an equatorward component which reduces
monsoon precipitation by warming and drying the mid-troposphere over the region
of monsoonal deep convection. To advance understanding of such monsoon-desert
relationships, work under this award will address three main questions: 1) Does
shallow flow in desert heat lows alter monsoon precipitation primarily through
horizontal advection of moisture and dry static energy? 2) How important are
low-level transient eddies in interactions between desert heat lows and
monsoons? 3) Do heat lows interact with monsoon precipitation in fundamentally
the same way in West Africa, South Asia, and Australia? These research questions
are addressed through a three-part research agenda in which the tasks are 1)
characterize the monsoon-desert relationships found in observations, based on a
combination of in situ, satellite, and reanalysis datasets; 2) explore these
relationships using a simple theoretical model; and 3) conduct process studies
using a state-of-the-art numerical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this CAREER proposal involves the development of a monsoon
forecasting contest with three goals: 1) fostering education on weather,
climate, and relevant basic science; 2) enhancing recruitment and retention of
high-promise, underrepresented high school students in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields; and 3) creating an international community
for disseminating and discussing monsoon forecasts and research. The monsoon
forecasting contest is held through a website which allows participants to enter
forecasts of onset date and total seasonal precipitation for the monsoon regions
of West Africa, India, Australia, and North America. Participants are asked to
submit a rationale along with their predictions, and the website also contains
educational materials on monsoons, along with basic science explanations for
convection, generation of wind from pressure gradients, and other relevant
topics. Guidance for forecasters, including climatological monsoon onset date
and precipitation amount, the state of El Nino, and links to operational
products. As part of the forecasting contest, the project seeks the
participation of inhabitants of monsoon regions as forecasters and as bloggers,
to provide a real-world perspective on monsoons and their human impacts. The
forecasting contest is accompanied by an educational outreach effort to the New
Haven Public School system. The outreach is conducted through the Science
Collaborative Hands-On Learning And Research (SCHOLAR) program, in which
students take part in a three-week residential summer science program at Yale.
The PI is working with SCHOLAR staff to develop a short science module on
weather, climate, and monsoons. In addition, in the last three years of the
project, two students will be selected to attend a field trip organized by the
PI's department.