* 1253310
* Workshop to assess "Recent Changes in the Biogeochemistry of the Great Lakes System (BOGLS)"
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Mark Baskaran, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support a workshop to assess scientific research needs to
address major biogeochemical changes that have been taken place over the past
five decades in the Laurentide Great Lakes, an ecosystem particularly
susceptible to disruption by non-native species. The workshop will be held at
Wayne State University in Detroit on March 11-13, 2013. It will be the first of
its kind to assess the biogeochemical changes that have arisen since the
introduction of invasive species such as zebra mussels which arrived in
mid-1980s. Despite a long history of nearly 200 non-native invaders, the rapid,
extensive colonization and reengineering of the lower Great Lakes by dreissenid
mussels in the last 20-30 years has fundamentally altered the cycling of
biogeochemically important materials (BIMs) and resulted arguably in the largest
biogeochemical shift in the Lakes in recent history. The purpose of this
workshop is to document these changes and the fundamental scientific questions
associated with them in the form of a Science Plan, which will be widely
disseminated. A summary of the workshop will be synthesized and published in
EOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This is the first basin-wide
assessment of the changing biogeochemistry of the Great Lakes freshwater system.
The identification of the processes that have caused and are causing these
changes will be of broad interest to the global aquatic geochemical community.
The participation and sponsorship by eight universities that are actively
involved with freshwater research in partnership with at least three federal
agencies is a testament to the need and timeliness of the workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Approximately 37 million people live in
the Great Lakes basin and 26 million people rely on the Great Lakes for their
drinking water. The water quality has direct impact not only on human health but
also on jobs in agriculture, fisheries, manufacturing, shipping, and tourism.
The outcome of the workshop is relevant to the science and management of large
freshwater lakes around the world, such as the East African rift lakes, Lake
Baikal, Lake Tanganyika, and the Canadian interior great lakes (Great Bear,
Great Slave, Winnipeg, and Athabasca). The deliberations of the workshop will be
beneficial to the participating graduate students and the meeting may provide a
platform for linking graduate education across the Midwest.