* 1253575
* CAREER: Application-Agnostic, Distributed-Aware Cloud Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Timothy Wood, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 426,486.00

Cloud Computing has radically changed how businesses run their applications by
allowing a huge number of computers to be economically shared by many different
users. The applications running inside these cloud data centers are growing in
size and complexity. Even a relatively straightforward web application is likely
to be composed of multiple interacting service components such as a web server,
a database, and a data cache. The result is a complicated distributed
application that may exhibit performance bottlenecks or consistency requirements
between components. Unfortunately, existing resource management and reliability
tools consider these components individually, and are often unaware of the
important relations between them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work is predicated
on the belief that future data centers must be application-agnostic, yet
distributed-computing-aware. The goal of this research project is to enable
cloud platforms to balance this trade-off, improving performance, reliability,
and efficiency. Its contributions will be twofold: 1) tools for cloud providers
to better understand the applications running on their infrastructure, and 2)
new resource management and reliability algorithms that offer customers stronger
guarantees. These will be achieved with application-agnostic solutions built
into the virtualization layer, that are still capable of understanding the
structure and dependencies of distributed applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work will improve the efficiency and
reliability of data centers running web applications used by millions of people
daily. By attacking these challenges at the virtualization layer, we will
provide flexible solutions fit for a wide variety of environments. The project
also contains a significant educational component to enhance the understanding
of cloud computing challenges for students at the high school through graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;