* 1253613
* CAREER: Understanding the Interfacial Rheology of Carbon Nanotubes at the Fluid-Fluid Interfaces for Creating Ultra-stable Emulsions and Microcapsules
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Anson Ma, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

1253613&lt;br/&gt;Ma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been known for more than a
century that particles can stabilize emulsions by adsorbing at the fluid-fluid
interface and lowering the interfacial energy. Thermodynamics and earlier
experimental studies indicate that controlling the particle size and wetability
are two key factors to stabilize emulsions. However, the effect of particle
shape has remained largely unexplored and unexploited. The hypothesis of this
proposal is that particle shape matters and that rod-like and high-aspect-ratio
particles will increase the number of particle-particle contacts, leading to the
formation of a stronger layer at the interface and consequently more stable
emulsions relative to spheres. To examine this hypothesis, carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) with high aspect ratio (&gt;1000) will be investigated as a model system.
The objective is to establish a fundamental understanding of the physics of an
interface decorated with CNTs. The microstructure and the interfacial rheology
will be carefully examined and further linked to the mechanical integrity and
stability of a CNT-laden interface. The intellectual merit of this proposal
involves: (1) exploring the complex physics of CNTs at the fluid-fluid
interface, and (2) connecting the rheology with interfacial phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Exploiting the particle shape could be the
missing key to unlocking the full potential of nanoparticle-stabilized
emulsions. The proposed research may offer a general and yet relatively simple
strategy to improve the stability of emulsions and prolong the shelf life of
widely used pharmaceutical, agricultural, and personal care products. Secondly,
the findings may revolutionize the use of nanoparticles for enhanced oil
recovery, essential to ensuring national energy independence and addressing the
world's energy challenge. Thirdly, understanding the interfacial behavior of
nanoparticles will help comprehend the fate of both naturally occurring and
engineered nanoparticles in the environment and wastewater treatment processes,
such as flotation, which could have an impact on the sustainable use of
nanoparticles. Finally, the proposed research may also impact the creation of
technologically important materials such as: (1) novel microcapsules with
controllable permeability for drug encapsulation and delivery, (2) scrims and
polymer blends for composite and membrane applications, and (3) metamaterials
that can be further used in cloaking devices and light-based circuits that may
ultimately outperform electron-based computers in terms of speed, power
consumption, and costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and Outreach: The
proposed research will be integrated with educational and outreach activities at
all levels to maximize its impact. The graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this project will receive cross-discipline training across the
fields of rheology, interfacial phenomena, and carbon nanotubes. To engage the
younger generation and the local community, culinary foams and emulsions will be
used as the theme for the outreach plan. With the support of the CAREER award,
the PI and his team will continue their outreach efforts through several
programs (e.g., UConn's Mentor Connection Program and da Vinci project) and will
attempt a new initiative on introducing basic scientific concepts through
debunking cooking myths at high schools in inner-city Hartford and Willimantic
with high minority populations.