* 1253788
* CAREER: Genome-wide Approaches to Elucidating the Role of Nonsense-mediated mRNA Decay in Regulating Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Kristian Baker, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,307,163.00

Intellectual Merit: Cells have evolved elaborate mechanisms to ensure faithful
expression of the genetic material. In cases where DNA copies harbor mutations
that lead to expression of incomplete proteins, a quality control strategy
distinguishes and rapidly eliminates the aberrant material from the cell. How
the cell provides this critical safeguard while maintaining accurate gene
expression remains an important unanswered biological question. Using a
comprehensive set of emerging scientific technologies, this research will
identify and characterize the targets of this quality control pathway in an
effort to better understand how this level of protective gene regulation is
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research objectives outlined
in this project provide an ideal framework to educate, train, and mentor high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in critical thinking, scientific
method, and hands-on experimental approaches. The development of research skills
by junior scientists in the laboratory will be coupled with the launch of an
undergraduate course directed at preparing women and minorities pursuing careers
in science, engineering and mathematics for academic and institutional
challenges they might face and resources available to help maximize success in
these fields. Together, these classroom and laboratory opportunities will
strengthen the learning and enhance the competitiveness of young scientists at
various stages of their training.