* 1253913
* EAGER: Interfacial Design of Modular, Multifunction Peptide Amphiphile Hydrogels for Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Efrosini Kokkoli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,120.00

1253913/ Kokkoli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many cases, a single bioactive ligand or protein is
used to functionalize a biomaterial, and as a result, it fails to accurately
mimic the complexity necessary to support or promote desired biological
phenomena such as long term cell&lt;br/&gt;adhesion, survival and phenotype
maintenance. The ability to design multifunctional interfaces is therefore
becoming increasingly important as many biomaterials require the presence of
different ligands and chemical cues. Thus far, there is no study that has
investigated whether the benefits of scaffold functionalization with multiple
classes of ligands are significant or additive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
exploratory EAGER proposal, the PI proposes to design peptide amphiphiles that
will mimic various cell binding domains (fibronectin and type I and type III
collagen), growth factors, such as the basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF),
and a growth factor binding peptide, to be combined in a modular fashion and
produce defined, multicomponent hydrogel interfaces, optimized to support the
culture of different cells. This novel extracellular matrix (ECM)-mimetic
peptide amphiphile hydrogel scaffold, capable of reproducing sufficient
biochemical complexity via modular combinations of peptide mimetics from
multiple classes of signaling biomolecules will give rise to emergent
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The different peptide amphiphiles will be
evaluated as hydrogels individually, in pairs and in mixtures at different
concentrations. All gels will be characterized with rheology measurements to
evaluate their modulus and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images. Primary
human hepatocytes will be used as the model cell system and will be seeded on
the interface of the hydrogels as well as within the hydrogels (2D and 3D
evaluation). Cell proliferation, cell viability as well as hepatocyte function
will be evaluated using different assays at different time
points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design of
interfaces capable of presenting more complex signals will ultimately allow for
exploration of approaches which could, in turn, significantly contribute to
advances in the field of functional biomaterials with potential applications in
biosensors, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. The educational plan
is strongly integrated with the research plan. Educational activities will focus
on training of graduate and undergraduate students though lab exposure,
participation in group meetings and national meetings as well as publishing in
scientific journals. The goal of the PI is to attract and retain women and other
underrepresented groups to science and engineering. The PI has a strong record
in this area.