* 1253155
* CAREER: Understanding the Structure-Interaction-Reactivity Relationship between Small Molecules and Metal-Amyloid Species
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Mi Hee Lim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2014
* USD 110,000.00

With this CAREER Award the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting
Professor Mi Hee Lim at the University of Michigan to design and synthesize
chemical libraries to establish a relationship between structures and
interactions with metal-associated amyloid-beta species. In this research
program Professor Lim and her students will determine the structural moieties
and scaffolds required for interactions with metal ions, amyloid-beta, and
metal-amyloid-beta species. The research group will synthesize multiple chemical
series via systematic structural modifications of small molecules previously
demonstrated to interact and react with amyloid-beta or metal-amyloid-beta
species. The interactions of newly prepared molecules with metal ions, amyloid-
beta, and metal-amyloid-beta species will be characterized to full chemical
resolution using appropriate analytic methods, such as UV-Visible and NMR
spectroscopy, mass spectrometry (MS), and X-ray
crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research effort will
provide insight into the development of chemical tools suitable for
investigating the involvement of metal-amyloid-beta species in neurotoxicity
leading to neurodegeneration. Since it is not well understood how the
interactions of metal ions with amyloid-beta species could be associated with
neurotoxicity, it is necessary to have appropriate chemical tools that can
simultaneously target metal-amyloid-beta species and modulate their
interactions. In pursuing this research program, the Lim group will provide
opportunities for students from high school through graduate student level to
conduct interdisciplinary research in bioinorganic chemistry. Students with
diverse backgrounds who traditionally have not studied this field will not only
be taught the concepts of bioinorganic chemistry, but also will be introduced to
exciting chemistry research in the laboratory. Professor Lim will also create
professional development opportunities for female scientists (undergraduate to
postdoctoral), with special attention to outreach to local companies, dialogue
among different levels of female chemists, and continuous communication. Through
these efforts, future female scientists will be encouraged to enhance their
involvement in the sciences and pursue their career goals.