* 1254540
* CAREER: Scalable Processing of Novel Multi-scale Hybrid Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Erik Thostenson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The primary research objective of the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
grant is to establish the processing science for an environmentally friendly and
scalable processing approach toward integrating carbon nanotubes with
conventional micron-sized advanced fiber reinforcement to create novel multi-
scale hybrid micro/nanocomposites. The selective and intelligent integration of
carbon nanotubes by hybridizing with micron-sized textile fibers enables the
unique opportunity to form local multi-scale reinforcement architectures for the
tailoring of both mechanical and physical properties. Preliminary research has
established an efficient technique for producing extremely stable aqueous
suspensions of highly dispersed carbon nanotubes in a single processing step.
Through selective chemical functionalization of the nanotubes and controlled
deposition onto carbon fibers it has been demonstrated that carbon nanotubes can
fully penetrate fiber bundles and form chemical bonds with the fiber surface.
Advanced composite materials produced from the multi-scale hybrids show
remarkable improvements in shear strength and fracture toughness. The
significance of the processing approach is that it allows precise control over
the purity, structure and chemical functionality of the nanoscale precursor
materials. The process is also carried-out under ambient conditions and is
industrially scalable for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will expand the science-base for the
manufacturing of nanostructured materials and understanding the basic
interrelationship between manufacturing process parameters, the resulting micro-
and nano-structure, and the material properties. Environmentally-friendly and
cost-effective means for manufacturing carbon nanotube-based composites have the
potential to dramatically enhance the large scale applications of structural and
functional nanocomposites. Ultimately a fundamental knowledge of the processing-
structure-property relationships will enable the nanoscale design of
multifunctional nanostructured materials for new applications. The research will
provide potential enabling capabilities towards the integration of adaptive,
sensory, active and energy storage capabilities of nanostructures within
structural materials. The educational plan involves a synergistic undergraduate
research and design project to develop a lab-scale pilot facility for continuous
deposition. A working pilot facility will then be constructed as a follow-on
senior research project. As part of the CAREER educational plan the PI intends
to extend a nanotechnology course module to reach-out to local high schools to
help to build the pipeline of engineers interested in careers in materials and
nanotechnology.