* 1254238
* CAREER: Programming proteins by deep sequencing and design
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Tim Whitehead, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2019
* USD 451,920.00

1254238 &lt;br/&gt;Whitehead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are central to a
diverse set of fundamental activities necessary for cellular life. This same
versatility leads to tremendous potential for proteins as designable agents in
medicine such as monoclonal antibodies like Rituximab that can target and
destroy non-Hodgkin lymphomas, and in industry such as enzymes that can
deconstruct cellulosic biomass to simple carbohydrates. Yet natural proteins are
not always optimal for industrial or medicinal applications, and current methods
of improving proteins can be expensive and laborious. What is needed are new
ways to search through the vast combinations of mutations to find the few that
impart improvements to function. The primary research objective of this CAREER
award is to design and test a massively parallel, rapid DNA deep sequencing
method in order to quantitate sequence-function relationships for hundreds of
thousands of protein variants. This method enables the rapid determination of
those few beneficial mutations. The PI proposes to develop, apply, and integrate
this method with computational design to reprogram specificity in natural and
designed proteins. These optimized proteins will enable microbes to convert
cellulosic biomass to next-generation fuels and value-added chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational outreach of this CAREER award aims to
increase the retention of women in science and engineering majors by creating
additional opportunities for active participation in research. Towards this
goal, the PI will integrate his educational and research objectives by: (i)
utilizing existing MSU programs to place high school and undergraduate students
in research projects in the PI's laboratory; (ii) teaching a series of workshops
on biochemical engineering fundamentals for high school students; (iii)
developing a new synthetic biology lab/lecture course at MSU for undergraduate
students; and (iv) forming the first MSU team for the international genetically
engineered machines (iGEM) competition, in which undergraduates perform self-
guided research projects and present results at a national meeting. Women will
be aggressively recruited to participate in each of these
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is co-funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (DBI) through the Instrument Development for
Biological Research (IDBR) program, and by the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET).