* 1254602
* CAREER: Digital Microfluidics to Optimize and Screen 3-Dimensional Tissue-Based Analytical Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Hyejin Moon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2018
* USD 409,848.00

The primary objective of this CAREER proposal is to establish a strong
interdisciplinary program in micro/nanofluidic systems and
biochemical/analytical technologies. A novel microfluidic screening platform
integrated with multiple functional components for various biochemical and
analytical processes will be developed based on electrowetting-on-dielectric
(EWOD) digital microfluidic (DMF) principle. &lt;br/&gt;Multiplexing (e.g.
fluidic circuit) capability of EWOD DMF is a unique and attractive feature to
enable high throughput screening (HTS) platform. With this capability, HTS
platform for 3D cell/tissue based bioassay processes will be developed and
investigated. Various functions of EWOD DMF that never have been explored yet
will be investigated and enabled. Such novel attempts include on-chip 3D cell
and tissue culture solely by EWOD DMF, unit functions of bio-separation
including on-chip aqueous two-phase system extraction, and novel
detection/sensing methods enabled by EWOD DMF such as cut-off frequency sensor
and ion-selective sensor array. This CAREER project also aims to tackle current
limitations of EWOD DMF such as the volume accuracy and consistency in drop
dispensing, and operation of non-aqueous fluids. &lt;br/&gt;With a successful
integration of the proposed HTS, following important outcomes are expected.
First, various bioassay data can be analyzed in a single cell and tissue sample
with high reproducibility. Second, high-throughput of the bio-molecule
separation will be ensured. Third, the kinetic study of fast bio-reaction
process such as metabolomic reaction of metabolites will be enabled. In
addition, one can easily optimize the cell specific extraction/drug efficacy
conditions. The platform will enable a large number of samples in one analytical
run, which will remove the problems that arise when comparing data within
different batches of samples.&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of a successful result in the
proposed research will not be limited to bioassay optimization. These results
could bring transformations into wide range of chemical synthesis and analytical
techniques based on cells and tissues. Immediate applications are expected in
the field of drug discovery, catalyst development, disease biomarker
identifications and point-of-care devices but not limited. Due to the multi-
disciplinary nature of this project, educational endeavors will focus to nurture
and train graduate and undergraduate students as future work forces with
abundant experiences in bio- and nano- technology on top of solid foundation of
conventional mechanical and electrical engineering knowledge. Research outcomes
will be incorporated into the multi-disciplinary courses. Separate efforts will
be made to bridge K-12 students and teachers with microscale science and
engineering knowledge through outreach programs to inspire K-12 students to
pursue higher education in engineering. Disseminating research outcome through
various ways including interactive website/blog, peer-reviewed articles,
conferences, public media are proposed.&lt;br/&gt;