* 1254915
* CAREER: High-efficiency Regenerative Solar Energy Storage by Photoelectrochemical Redox Reactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Fuqiang Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 416,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches - The objective of this research is to
explore high-efficiency regenerative solar energy storage, by using
photoelectrochemical redox reactions and advanced semiconductors. The approaches
are to obtain key fabrication parameters of the doped highly active
photocatalysts; to study photoelectrochemical stability, activity, and storage
capacity and efficiency; to design and set up a photoelectrochemical continuous
flow reactor and investigate continuous energy conversion efficiency and
kinetics; and to conduct computational fluid dynamic simulation of the
continuous reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit - The proposed
multidisciplinary research will resolve the three major challenges that have
hindered the development of efficient solar energy storage in the past, i.e.,
active and stable materials, high-capacity energy medium, and reversible
conversion kinetics. This project strives to establish a methodology for the
systematic design and effective integration of high-efficiency regenerative
solar energy storage, as an alternative to H2 production from water splitting.
It can provide new perspectives that would elevate our understanding of the
photocatalytic mechanisms, allowing us to effectively predict the photo-
electrochemical functionality and stability of potential
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts - Successful execution of the
proposed research will have profound impacts on broad research areas such as
solar power, renewable energy, energy storage &amp; generation, and many other
sustainable and energy research fields. The proposed research will transform
solar energy storage with better efficiency, improved storage capacity, and easy
scale-up capability. Educational program will be integrated into the
multidisciplinary research, aiming to shift the paradigm from lecture-based
single-discipline teaching to student-centric multidisciplinary learning.