* 1254086
* EAGER: Securing Wireless Network Coding against Pollution Attack at the Physical Layer
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sang Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 08/31/2014
* USD 74,999.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to address the fundamental imbalance
between the attacker and the communicator in wireless network coding system by
(1) detecting the falsely injected packet at the physical layer; and (2)
separating and removing only the falsely injected packet from the polluted
packet to extract (restore) the true coded packet. The program thus provides two
transformative perspectives: (1) exploiting the physical signals that are
available for free in detecting the falsely injected packet; and (2) recycling
the polluted packet instead of discarding it, thereby dramatically improving the
spectrum efficiency.

Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit of this research lies in the new
perspective (signal processing) in addressing the security problem facing
current network coding technology. The novelty of the proposed approach is the
integration of communication and security aspects, which traditionally have been
studied separately. The fundamental tradeoff among the security, rate, and
reliability is investigated to develop a theoretical foundation for integrating
communication and security issues in network coding systems design.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this project are: (1) broadening the
participation of minority and women in engineering programs by developing an
experimental demonstration program for local high school students; (2) impacting
on emerging secure embedded/sensor/ad-hoc networks that will be applicable to a
wide range of applications, including surveillance and security, health and
environmental monitoring, and public safety and emergency response.