* 1254258
* CAREER: New Scheduling Models for Supply Chain Restoration, Construction, and Redesign
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Thomas Sharkey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 415,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate innovative optimization models and algorithms for problems in
restoring supply chains after significant disruptive events, constructing supply
chains to support humanitarian relief efforts, and transitioning supply chains
to their next-generation redesign. These application areas have in common that
the supply chain is operational as efforts are implemented to change its design.
Therefore, the optimization models will focus on scheduling when and how the
supply chain will change over time. In particular, limited resources will be
allocated to perform tasks that change the characteristics of the components of
the supply chain. The project's optimization models and algorithms specifically
recognize the temporal aspects of the application areas and are innovative in
the area of scheduling, since they focus on the interactions of the completed
tasks within the supply chain. The educational program of this award will
experiment with teaching methods that help to customize the learning experiences
of engineering students based on their own interests and projected career paths.

If successful, the results of this research will provide tools that enable
companies and organizations to propose and analytically assess strategies for
their restoration, construction, and redesign efforts. This will help lessen the
economical and societal impact of extreme events, since decision-makers in
supply chain restoration and construction will be able to benchmark existing
strategies and the impact of policy shifts in responding to the event. These
tools will further help companies to understand how to integrate advanced
manufacturing capabilities, including energy-efficient components, into their
existing supply chains. The educational program will promote undergraduate
research and develop new methods to better prepare students to apply
optimization models in their projected career paths. These educational
activities will help to promote the diversity of future options available to
industrial engineering students.