* 1254864
* CAREER: Multiscale Investigation and Mimicry of Naturally-Occurring Ultra-High Performance Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Pablo Zavattieri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 06/30/2020
* USD 408,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project investigates the
structure-property relationship of extremely tough biological composites through
a combined computational/experimental methodology. It will particularly focus on
the synergetic role of geometry and length scales by investigating specific
features such as hierarchy, periodicity and patterning in the microstructure and
interfaces observed in some extraordinarily strong natural materials. The
research approach consists of: i) exploring, identifying and quantifying the
contributions of the individual multiscale deformation mechanisms of the natural
composites using a multiscale computational approach aided by specially designed
experiments, ii) a biomimetic effort following a combined computational and
prototype modeling approach that employs advanced 3D printing techniques, and
iii) developing design guidelines, validated later by constructing materials
that incorporate the most important microstructural features identified in (i)
and (ii). Achieving these insights will uncover design rules to develop impact
and damage tolerant materials.

There is a strong demand for new paradigms of design and development of advanced
high-performance structural materials with high strength and durability, low in
cost and renewable with novel combinations of properties and qualities. We will
study biological composite materials that can achieve high toughness without
sacrificing stiffness and strength by control of nano- and microstructural
features that significantly improve the mechanical performance of otherwise
brittle materials. Additionally, this research will provide the rational
mechanics framework for the development of high-performance and multifunctional
materials for a wide range of technologically relevant applications in the areas
of energy, defense, homeland security, civil, industrial safety, medicine and
automotive industry. The educational component is closely integrated with the
research, to inspire and attract students to the STEM field by its
multidisciplinary nature. Undergraduate and graduate students will be mentored
in an interdisciplinary setting. Additionally, the integration between research
and education will improve engineering undergraduate and graduate education by
including components of biology in material related courses through the infusion
of cyberlearning tools and hands-on experience. The PI will introduce a new
multidisciplinary course entitled "Materials and structures inspired by Nature
for infrastructure applications and beyond" with special guest lecturers from
Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Materials Science and other engineering
disciplines.