* 1254662
* CAREER: Optical and Nanostructural Control of Visibly-Transparent Small-Bandgap Excitonic Semiconductors for Integration in Highly-Efficient Transparent Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Richard Lunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2017
* USD 425,816.00

PI: Lunt, Richard Proposal Number: 1254662 Institution: Michigan State
University Title: CAREER: Optical and Nanostructural Control of Visibly-
Transparent Small-Bandgap Excitonic Semiconductors for Integration in Highly-
Efficient Transparent Photovoltaics

The solar cells that are integrated in the building itself are an enticing
energy pathway to utilize a large area for solar energy and while achieving a
high building energy-efficiency. However, this effort is hampered by the need
for mounting tradition photovoltaic (PV) cells in the built environment due to
the cost and architectural impediments. The development of light weight and
flexible solar cells that are transparent can address this problem. This project
will perform research that will lead to the development of transparent PV.
Specifically this project will utilize the excitonic character of small-bandgap
molecules and organic semiconductors that leads to "oscillator bunching" to
produce selectively near-infrared harvesting. The transparent PV architectures
with power production from infrared photons alone have the potential to exhibit
theoretical and practical efficiencies of 35% and 21%, respectively, while
leaving the visible part of the spectrum completely unaffected.

Intellectual merit: In this project, the foundation for the transparent solar
cell will be crystal-orientation-controlled and nanostructured donor-acceptor
hetero-junction blends integrating near-infrared excitonic semiconductors of
small-molecules and J-aggregating molecules, which can be utilize to capture
650-1200 nm wavelength infrared light. Routes to tailoring the crystalline
ordering, orientation, and microstructure of neat layer and blends will be
established to realize the connection between morphology and the photo-physical
response to maximize the exciton harvesting. To guide experiments, photo-carrier
generation and photoconduction using multi-dimension morphological, optical-
field, and electrical device simulations will be modeled and incorporated into a
framework for evaluating the efficiency, transparency, and color rendering to
assure full optimization for window integration.

Broader impacts: Transparent PVs have potential to impact the US energy
production and building energy utilization by reducing the energy cost for PV
deployment, reducing cooling demand, and imparting a net-negative carbon
footprint. To complement the research work, the PI will establish a coordinated
outreach and educational effort by (1) organizing workshops, (2) working with a
local-area museum, (3) advising student-run initiative to retrofit buildings
with renewable energy solutions, and (4) supporting students from under-
represented groups.