* 1254156
* CAREER: A Hydrologic Thermostat for the Global Carbon Cycle?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Katharine Maher, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The chemical weathering of minerals moderates the concentration of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, the supply of key nutrients to terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems and the release of naturally occurring contaminants. As such,
chemical weathering is a critical component of the Earth system. The movement of
water through soils and hillslopes is an important control on overall chemical
weathering rates, and the resulting connection between the movement of water and
chemical reactions in the subsurface is thus critical for understanding not only
Earth's history, but also how Earth's systems will respond to future climatic
and anthropogenic changes. However, current models cannot predict the observed
export of dissolved solutes from landscapes. To address this problem, this
project will use a combination of field studies and reactive transport modeling
approaches to determine (1) how the competition between the rates of chemical
reactions and solute transport dictates concentration-discharge relationships in
rivers and the resulting chemical fluxes, (2) the consequences of weathering
reactions and fluid mixing on the stable and radiogenic isotopic composition of
waters, and (3) the operation of a 'hydrologic thermostat' that governs global
scale chemical weathering rates, and by extension atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels, over geologic timescales. Evaluation of the latter is an overarching
goal of this project that has the potential to provide new information about the
mechanism underlying one of the most profound features of Earth's history: its
long-term temperature stability. Students from diverse backgrounds and across
different levels will benefit from the exposure to field measurement, data
synthesis and numerical modeling during the course of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reactive transport approach is powerful tool for
understanding the chemical evolution of Earth's environments. Nevertheless,
there are very few opportunities for professional training in this area at or
beyond the graduate school level, although reactive transport approaches are
widely used in both industry and research. A major educational goal of this
project is to build a solid conceptual understanding of reactive transport
approaches and models by offering a yearly short-course on reactive transport at
Stanford University for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty from
a broad spectrum of U.S. institutions. The course will serve as an introduction
to key reactive transport concepts and their application to biogeochemical
systems, and will thus provide an entry point into the field and access to a
growing community of people that use and develop these models. Each year the
course will include several instructors and provide an opportunity for
participants to discuss their research and receive feedback and recommendations.
The research proposed here will also be featured as examples, and the graduate
students from my research group will play key roles in continuing to develop and
improve the course, gaining experience as instructors that will carry over into
their future careers.