* 1254535
* EAGER: A Prototype WorldWide Telescope Visualization Lab Designed in the Web-based Inquiry Science Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alyssa Goodman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,658.00

The PIs are developing and testing a prototype visualization lab designed to
help middle schoolers understand why the moon appears to have phases when
observed from Earth. The work is being done through a partnership between (i)
astronomers who have developed the WorldWide Telescope Universe Information
System (WWT) and the World Wide Telescope Ambassadors program as a way of
bringing the big data and visualization capabilities of astronomers to children
and schools and (ii) learning scientists on the WISE team who have a long
history of using what is known about how people learn to develop technology-rich
middle school science curriculum. Astronomy data and tools for visualization
developed by the WWT team is being integrated into WISE's technological
infrastructure, which, for curriculum developers, scaffolds the development of
curriculum that promotes learning, and for learners, makes available tools and
resources for collaboratively making sense of what they are experiencing. Data
is being collected that will show the potential of bringing these two projects
together for promoting astronomy learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WorldWide
Telescope computer program, with 9 million downloads, and the WISE environment,
funded by NSF since 1998, are both freely available and held up as examples
showing the promise of cyberlearning approaches. This project holds the
potential to demonstrate the power of formally combining two modern
technologies, one developed in industry and the other with public funds, to
enhance online learning and educational research. The approaches developed under
this EAGER grant will offer an example for future private/public partnerships
and a model for engaging students and promoting learning through access to the
big data and tools of scientists, and it will result in free software for the
public to use in learning about moon phases and catalyze a long-term partnership
with potential for dramatically impacting the ways middle schoolers and high
schoolers are exposed to and learn about astronomy and how astronomers do
science.