* 1254763
* CAREER: Balancing Rheology and Filtration: An Experimental and Probabilistic Approach for Suspension Flow and Sustainability in Heterogeneous Granular Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Chadi El Mohtar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2019
* USD 489,166.00

Grouting, particularly, permeation grouting, can be a very cost-effective
solution for significant infrastructure challenges and ground improvements. The
use of grouting is becoming increasingly important as existing dams and levees,
and other aging infrastructure, are upgraded to meet new performance design
criteria. The current state of practice in grout, however, relies heavily on the
field operation experience, whereas the science behind grout flow is not well
understood from a fundamental perspective. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will build on the extensive field experience from practitioners
to develop new grouting models that can transform grouting from its current
state of practice to more scientifically-based engineering design. This goal
will be achieved through a comprehensive material characterization and element
testing program along with physical and numerical modeling to investigate the
flow of suspensions in heterogeneous granular media. The effects of the
rheological and filtration properties of suspensions on their flow through
heterogeneous granular media will be investigated through element testing under
controlled conditions. The mechanisms governing the stability and persistence of
the grouts in the pores will be addressed for post grouting analysis and long
term evaluation of grouts. The research will lead to developing better models
that can predict the groutability, filtration, penetration depth and long-term
behavior of grouts based on the engineering properties of the grout and porous
media. The impact of this study is expected to be wide-reaching to various
environmental, geotechnical, agricultural and petroleum engineering areas.
Moreover, the outcome from this research will have a significant impact on the
application of permeation grouting in the field. The flow and filtration
properties, along with the sustainability of suspensions, will be instrumental
for understanding grout flow in porous media and beyond (such as rock fracture
grouting, short-term support for tunnels and excavations, contamination
transport, and NAPL mobilization, etc.) and will pave the way for engineering
?smart? grouts that can be tailored to site-specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is committed to integrate this
research into his education and outreach activities at UT-Austin through: 1)
collaborating with the UTeachEngineering program where the PI will mentor a K-12
teacher for two years, including active participation in the ongoing research
over two summers, to develop presentations and activities for in-class use in
high schools; 2) developing educational web-based and physical modules for
graduate/undergraduate/high-school classes. These models will be hosted on the
UTeachEngineering library website and will be made available to the public; 3)
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students and helping recruit under-
represented students into the engineering program; 4) adding a new graduate
class covering ground improvement from the basic science governing success of
ground improvement to field applications; and 5) incorporating the research in
other undergraduate/graduate classes. The PI will also work closely with the
grouting community through ASCE Grouting Committee to translate the research
outcomes to practitioners in addition to disseminating the findings in the
appropriate research outlets such as scholarly journals and conferences.