* 1254200
* CAREER: Expanding the Dimensions of Computational Epigenomic Modeling and Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Jason Ernst, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 990,861.00

Every cell type within an individual essentially shares the same DNA sequence,
yet different cell types can have very different functions. Modulating the
interpretation of the DNA sequence in different cell types are epigenetic marks
on the DNA and on the tails of the histone proteins around which that DNA is
wrapped. Massively parallel sequencing has enabled genome-wide mapping of
multiple epigenetic marks across a number of cell types. The research will
advance computational approaches for modeling and analyzing epigenomic data in
several important new dimensions. One dimension involves developing
computational methods for modeling epigenomic changes over time. A number of
important biological processes are now being studied by mapping multiple
epigenetic marks at multiple time points raising the need for new computational
approaches to model and analyze this data. Another dimension involves
computational approaches to predicting the genome- wide signals of epigenetic
marks in cell types in which a mark is not mapped. This is a key computational
problem because it is unfeasible to experimentally map every epigenetic mark in
every cell type of interest. A third dimension of the project involves
computational methods to associate putative distal regulatory elements
identified by epigenomic maps with the target genes they regulate by integrating
multiple partially informative data sources to these interactions.

As part of the CAREER project Jason Ernst will contribute to the creation of a
computational biosciences collaboratory at UCLA, aimed at simultaneously
increasing the training of biological researchers in computational approaches
and facilitating collaborations between computational and experimental
researchers. A new research- focused graduate seminar that covers research
topics in computational epigenomics will be created. Course projects for an
undergraduate bioinformatics course based on the research will also be created.
Undergraduate students, under-represented minority students, and women computer
science students will be recruited to participate in research. All instructional
material created will be disseminated on the internet. Computational methods
developed under this project will be broadly disseminated as open source
software and will likely be used by a wide range of biological researchers for a
number of important biological applications.