* 1254035
* CAREER: Banalytics: Behavioral Network Analytics with Data Transparency
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Augustin Chaintreau, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2019
* USD 539,998.00

Data from customers become central to many companies' business, and tomorrow's
society's progress critically depends on scientists and public decision makers
accessing citizens' data. But how to reconcile progress with privacy? This
dilemma, everyday, is getting worse, because we lack an abstraction where
analytics -- the science of identifying and exploiting individual types and
trends -- are transparent to users and they can effectively own and trade their
data. Today's analytics on proprietary data, and its highly debated need for
regulation, seems a necessary evil for a lack of credible alternative. This
project aims at unlocking this tussle by (1) building behavioral analytics that
are compatible with distributed systems of personal data, (2) showing how
context and social influence can be better leveraged, and (3) enabling
incremental deployment along mutual benefits to make privacy economically
efficient.

The principal investigator will explore a new abstraction -- Behavioral Networks
-- and show its tractability using recent results in matrix factorization,
algorithms exploiting social influence, and analysis of networked incentives.
Banalytics will demonstrate its applicability to various analytics tasks,
including data collection, behavioral targeting, content rating and
recommendation.

Broader Impact:

The need to regulate proprietary access to personal data is heavily discussed
towards a new Privacy Bill. Unfortunately, controlling personal data used behind
closed doors is highly complex, making enforcement of top-down regulation either
ineffective or potentially disastrous for the free and thriving life of the web.
The Banalytics project explores and makes available alternative designs
empowering users, to inform this important societal debate towards better self-
regulation.

Not only are sound solutions to reconcile privacy and progress essential, but
they need to be disseminated and understood broadly. Banalytics aims to impact
the education of students at large -- not only future engineers but also the
future journalists informing our citizens -- on the management of personal
information and its technical, economic and societal aspects. Through close
collaboration with the Columbia School of Journalism, the principal investigator
will promote a unique interdisciplinary education program to allow all students
and citizens, especially those who might not otherwise express interest in
computer science, to be engaged in this effort.