* 1254287
* CAREER: Additive Manufacture of Copper Cellular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Christopher Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 408,000.00

The primary research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project is to test the hypothesis that copper cellular materials can be realized
via three-dimensional printing (3DP) of copper oxide powders followed by a
reduction/sintering post-process to convert it to metallic copper. The secondary
research objective is to test the hypothesis that jetted nanosuspension binder
(i) will fill interstitial voids in the part bed, thus increasing part density
and (ii) will effectively bond neighboring powder particles during sintering to
provide continuous bonding strength, thus enhancing final part properties. The
primary educational goal of this program is to prepare a new generation of
engineers for the design and fabrication of complex systems via additive
manufacturing (AM). This will be achieved by providing learning experiences with
AM technologies across a broad educational spectrum, including (i) an
undergraduate/graduate AM course, (ii) a "3D Printing Vending Machine" that
provides students open access to AM, and (iii) AM summer workshops for K-12 STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will result in a
manufacturing process capable of fabricating copper cellular materials and an
understanding of how 3DP of nanosuspension binders affect the process and its
resultant parts. Components resulting from the proposed manufacturing process
could be useful for thermal management of many mechanical and electrical
products. An understanding of how nanosuspension binder affects 3DP will provide
a basis for addressing material constraints of this, and other, AM processes.
This program's integrated manufacturing and engineering education research
activities will result in inquiry-based learning interventions targeted at
educating future engineers in designing systems with AM. A combination of
qualitative and quantitative engineering education research methods will provide
an understanding of how the proposed interventions affect teacher/student
perceptions of manufacturing. The proposed summer workshop will provide 15
teachers with 3D printers as well as AM instructional modules for their
classrooms, which will be shared on a dedicated Wiki website. Changes in teacher
and student perceptions of engineering and manufacturing will be explored via
the High School High School Students' Attitude to Mathematics, Science and
Engineering Survey and the Deloitte and the Manufacturing Institute's
Manufacturing Attitude Survey. The design of the "3D Printing Vending Machine"
will be openly shared for other universities and public spaces (e.g., museums,
libraries, etc.) to leverage. Assessment, in the form of in-line usage
statistics and surveys, semi-structured interviews, and the Engineering Design
Self Efficacy Instrument will provide opportunity to explore how students engage
in technology-infused informal learning settings.