* 1254928
* EarthCube GEO Domain Workshop: Cyberinfrastructure for Paleogeoscience
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Anders Noren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,994.00

EarthCube is a joint venture between the Directorate of Geosciences and the
Office of Cyberinfrastructure at the National Science Foundation. It is a
community-driven effort to design and implement an effective data and knowledge
management system for the geosciences that will integrates disparate data sets
and web services and serves all members of the geoscience community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for a workshop to be convened in Winter
2013, organized around a scientific domain (theme) called ?Paleogeoscience?. The
defining characteristics of this broad domain are 1) its focus on past earth
system processes and 2) that all scientific inferences in this domain are
ultimately based on the collection of physical samples in the field, from which
many kinds of geochemical, geobiological, and geophysical measurements are
extracted. This domain includes scientists working on paleorecords from: cores
drilled in the seafloor, lakebeds, peatlands, continental crust, glaciers or ice
sheets, or trees; rock samples hammered from outcrops; fossil remains retrieved
from various depositional environments; speleothems; and
corals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will consist of key individuals
already working on EarthCube activities, as well as those from this newly formed
special interest group. Special efforts will be made to reach out to all members
of this diverse community in order to gather as much information about user
requirements and other aspects of EarthCube relevant to the ?long tail? of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts involve the potential to change
dramatically the way paleogeoscientists interact with data, whether through
discovery of existing data, providing context for new data, characterizing and
comparing disparate datasets, or archiving data, in ways that will enable new
questions to be answered and existing challenges to be addressed. The impact
will likely be at least as great, and possibly greater, for students at the
graduate, undergraduate, and even secondary levels (and their teachers), as the
simplification of data discovery, visualization, and comparison will allow
people with less training to interact with paleogeoscience data in a meaningful
way. These tools will facilitate the communication of scientific findings even
to policymakers and the public at large.