* 1254244
* CAREER: An Integrated Hybrid Forecasting Framework for Increased Wind Power Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Mrinal Kumar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of the proposed research is to develop the next generation of
algorithms to achieve significant improvement in short-term wind forecasting.
Our inability to accurately capture non-Gaussian uncertainty of wind in high
dimensional spaces translates to low predictability; high risk and the need for
expensive balancing power resources. It is thus a primary objective of the
proposed research is to significantly improve wind forecasts upto 48 hours in
advance, leading to enhanced dispatch, scheduling and unit commitment operations
in the day-ahead electricity market.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will develop an integrated framework
of randomized algorithms for scalable nonlinear uncertainty propagation.
Algorithm output will be combined with measured on-site data in the sense of
Bayesian fusion, leading to a hybrid forecasting structure. The main technical
challenges are: (i) complex wind dynamics due to multiple temporal and spatial
scales, turbulence and orographic effects; (ii) non-Gaussian wind uncertainty;
(iii) need for scalable algorithms due to high dimensionality; and (iv) need for
fusion of information arriving from multiple algorithms and heterogeneous
measurement sources. The proposed framework will have the following key features
to meet these challenges: (1) formulation of the wind state as a stochastic
hybrid process, governed by multiple reduced order micro and mesoscale models;
(2) a novel randomized particle uncertainty propagation approach based on the
method of characteristics, Markov chain Monte-Carlo and the Karhunen-Lo`eve
expansion. Practical effectiveness of developed algorithms will be measured
against data from two wind-farms: the Cohocton Wind Farm/NY and the Roscoe Wind
Farm/TX.

Broader Impact: The proposed forecasting framework will lead to increased
penetration of wind power by reducing the risks currently associated with it;
and enable us to achieve our global targets of reducing dependence on fossil-
fuel based electricity. The education plan includes training high school
teachers in the multidisciplinary area of sustainable energy who will in turn
reach thousands of students.