* 1254804
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: Instrumented Diamond Window for Synchrotron Beamlines
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Erik Muller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2015
* USD 244,764.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the structure and dynamics of
biological molecules and their interactions has proven to be critical in
understanding, and even influencing, their functions. National synchrotron
facilities provide a powerful array of tools for such structural biology
studies, including a variety of x-ray techniques such as macromolecular x-ray
crystallography, small-angle x-ray solution scattering, x-ray microscopy, x-ray
absorption spectroscopy, x-ray fluorescence and x-ray footprinting. Many of
these technologies, as they are developed to take advantage of next-generation
synchrotron sources, are trending toward use of high flux beams and/or beams
which require enhanced stability and precise understanding of beam position and
intensity. An award is made to an integrated collaborative team from Case
Western Reserve University, Stony Brook University and Brookhaven National
Laboratory to develop instrumented diamond-based vacuum windows capable of
simultaneously measuring the volumetric flux, position and morphology of a high
flux x-ray beam to address the needs of these upcoming facilities. Because the
instrument is integrated into a vacuum window, these devices are expected to
offer a robust replacement option for the fragile, toxic beryllium windows
nearly ubiquitous in current x-ray beamlines, while also providing beam
monitoring capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly
enhance the research infrastructure at current and next-generation bioscience
beamlines, with capabilities applicable across many scientific disciplines. Our
national synchrotron user facilities are critical resources both for research
and education, serving many thousands of users from nearly every scientific
discipline every year, thus the potential user community for these devices is
quite profound. These facilities also serve as training grounds at all levels of
education, with programs for community outreach, K-12 programs, undergraduate
internships, graduate dissertation research, postdoctoral training, and
workshops to introduce established scientists to new research tools. In addition
to active participation in these programs, this project directly supports the
training of a graduate student who will learn a broad range of experimental
techniques, taking advantage of the diverse expertise of the collaborative
group. Recruitment of undergraduate students from the REU program is also
expected to enhance the program. The multi-institution collaboration established
to develop the instrument is comprised of researchers from the fields of
biophysics, accelerator physics, and materials science, and the project includes
academic, government and industrial participation. This diverse set of
backgrounds will provide a breadth of experience for student training through
the project. The instrument design and software developed during the project
will be disseminated through publication, participation in conferences and
workshops as well as seminars specifically directed toward educating the
synchrotron community. Upon successful completion of this project, it is
expected that funding will be pursued to move these devices into a broadly
applicable format appropriate for commercial production.