* 1254205
* CAREER: Integrative Synthetic Biology: A Scalable Framework for Modular Multilevel Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Ilias Tagkopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 600,000.00

There have been recent and notable advances in the field of computer-aided tools
for synthetic circuit design at the system level. While most approaches focus on
providing visualization and simulation capabilities for the users to explore,
there is a lack of a much needed end-to-end integrated framework capable of
automated optimization of synthetic circuits based on user-defined constraints.
The goal of the proposed project is to develop an integrated synthetic biology
framework and tools for the automated systems-level design of mixed-signal
synthetic circuits. This framework will serve as a computational tool for
synthetic biologists and will lay the theoretical foundations for system level
synthetic circuit design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore a
global optimization platform with both approximate and exact techniques for
finding the optimal set of parts for any given configuration, which will provide
guarantees on the optimality, reproducibility or bounds of the solution. This
work will explore matching past validated designs to the circuit at hand, by
employing graph-querying and graph partitioning algorithms that will transform
the original design to equivalent graphs which can be solved efficiently. This
will promote modular and reusable designs, and result in an increase in the
level of achievable complexity and a decrease in the cost of construction.