* 1254192
* CAREER: A Data-Driven Uncertainty-Guided Architecture for Energy Management in Sensor Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Alberto Cerpa, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 01/31/2018
* USD 309,437.00

The dramatic growth of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) in the last few years has
seen the emergence of a variety of applications and pilot deployments that span
scientific, engineering, medical and other&lt;br/&gt;disciplines. This project
addresses an important research problem in sensor networks: energy management.
By using hierarchical WSNs with different resources at different proxy and
sensor tiers, as well as novel machine learning methods, we plan to develop
DURACEM, a data-driven uncertainty-guided architecture that addresses energy
efficiency across many sensor network services in a unified manner. Our
architecture is built around (a) prediction models of phenomena, energy usage,
and communication and the uncertainty in these models, (b) a slew of services
that can exploit the uncertainty measures to save energy and&lt;br/&gt;(c) an
overall energy optimization framework that combines the different models and
services at both the proxy and sensor tiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DURACEM has
the potential for broad social impact. Our proposed research will provide
fundamental services and tools to build next generation hierarchical sensor
networks. DURACEM will provide a suite of efficient&lt;br/&gt;prediction models,
as well as a variety of energy-optimized services built over these models. Our
source code for our tools, libraries and prototypes will be made available to
other researchers via an open-source software license. The project also focuses
on building an inter-disciplinary teaching lab that can spur adoption of sensor
networks by educating students across engineering and sciences. The project
includes the development of a comprehensive curriculum that provides graduate
and undergraduate students with core systems and analytical skills in sensor
networks. The DURACEM project will enhance the research experiences of minority
groups at University of California, Merced (UCM), which is one of only few
research universities in the nation with a Hispanic student population greater
than 40% and it is considered a Hispanic Serving Institution. The project
includes an outreach undergraduate component specifically targeted to the
minority&lt;br/&gt;students.&lt;br/&gt;