* 1254830
* CAREER: Process, Voltage, and Temperature (PVT)-Tolerant CMOS Photonic Interconnect Transceiver Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Samuel Palermo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The photonic interconnect architectures and design
techniques proposed here aim to significantly improve interconnect robustness,
energy efficiency, and bandwidth density, which is necessary for continued
scaling of future computer systems. While progress has been made in photonic
interconnects, the optimal interconnect architecture which most efficiently
leverages these optical devices for off-chip and network-on-chip applications is
still an open question. This work?s research goal is to develop robust energy-
efficient transceivers for a unified inter- and intra-chip photonic interconnect
architecture based on integrated ring resonator modulators and waveguide
photodetectors. To accomplish this goal, an ultra-fast system-level optimization
framework for photonic on-chip networks and inter-chip links that investigates
trade-offs in bandwidth density, energy efficiency, and interconnect throughput
will be developed to compare photonic interconnect technologies and leveraged in
the design of the proposed architecture. Novel circuit topologies will be
developed that address challenges imposed due to nanometer transistor scaling
properties, such as transistor reliability constraints conflicting with voltage-
swing requirements of optical source devices and shrinking transistor gain and
growing mismatch having a large impact on receiver sensitivity. The combination
of system level optimization with circuit-level accuracy and new ultra-efficient
circuit topologies enables architectures capable of leveraging photonic
interconnects? properties of extreme low latency and high bandwidth to realize
completely new computing models with orders of magnitude performance
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The explosion in interconnect bandwidth
capacity provided by this photonic interconnect architecture will allow the
realization of numerous transformative applications, such as future smart mobile
devices capable of Tflop/s performance, multi-channel high-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging, and exascale supercomputers. Interconnect architectures
developed with the proposed optimization framework will have a broad impact on
not only the US semiconductor industry, but also on the sustainability and
security of the nation as a whole, as it will dramatically reduce the energy
these integrated systems demand. This project will include an interdisciplinary
educational program involving 1 Ph.D. and 5 undergraduate students, with a
commitment in several engaging outreach activities to foster the representation
of women and minority groups. These activities include participating in a four-
week summer workshop for K-12 school teachers and also annual one-week summer
camps for high school students. Project results will be broadly disseminated by
inclusion in the syllabi and website of a new graduate course entitled ?Optical
Interconnect Circuits and Systems? and through publication in national and
international journals and conferences.