* 1254936
* CAREER:Single-Molecule Spectroscopy as a Mechanistic Tool for Studying Catalyst Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Randall Goldsmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2018
* USD 629,158.00

This award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B Program
of the Division of Chemistry, will enable Professor Randall H. Goldsmith of the
University of Wisconsin Madison to develop and apply tools that enable the
observation of unsynchronized chemical dynamics of individual molecular
catalysts under turnover conditions. These methods will enable determination of
the kinetics of formation and depletion of transient intermediates and temporal
fluctuations of catalyst behavior, including shifting rate constants and
enantioselectivity. The impact of these microscopic behaviors on bulk reaction
dynamics will be explored. Measurements will be made via time-resolved
fluorescence microscopy. Fluorophore design, chemical synthesis, and fabrication
and deployment of plasmonic nanostructures are critical elements of this
approach. Taken together, these activities will allow determination of a
chronology of the molecular dynamics of catalysis that will add new insights on
reaction mechanism and guide strategies for future catalyst development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underneath all macroscopic observations that humans can
make in everyday life is a churning, vibrant, and dynamic world at the
microscopic level of single molecules. By making measurements on single
molecules, this proposal endeavors to remove the disconnect between the macro-
and micro-world for two purposes. First, the chaotic nature of single molecules
hides molecular behavior that has important consequences for industrially useful
chemical reactions. Revealing the molecular dynamics of individual catalyst
molecules, molecules that enable challenging chemical reactions, will allow
greater understanding of their mode of operation, leading the way to the design
of new and more effective catalysts and cheaper and "greener" chemistry. Second,
removing this disconnect has important consequences for chemical education, as
understanding chemical behavior on the macro-scale flows naturally from
understanding chemistry at the micro-scale. Few educational experiments exist
that can allow students and non-scientists to truly "see" single molecules. This
proposal contains a closely integrated outreach activity to build a robust and
portable microscope that will allow users to see single molecules with the naked
eye. This educational tool will be built and used for new chemical education
initiatives in museums and schools, including those with large components of
students under-represented in science and technology careers.