* 1254794
* The Eighth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Thiab Taha, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2015
* USD 18,000.00

The Eighth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution Equations and
Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory will be held at the &lt;br/&gt;University
of Georgia from March 25 to March 28, 2013. More information is available on the
conference website: waves.uga.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference
will focus on the derivation, theory, numerical simulation and application of
nonlinear wave equations. Despite several decades of intense activity, this
general area shows no sign of abating nor of calcification. Indeed, two of the
recent Fields medalists are cited for their work in this area, and major new
forays into geophysical modeling and high-speed communication have made use of
nonlinear wave equations. The conferences in this series are well known for
bringing together researchers in theoretical and computational mathematics, the
applied sciences and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
feature several invited, one-hour presentations on some of the most topical
aspects of the area and an estimated 180 shorter talks, most of which will be in
a focused session format. Past experience suggests that well over 200
participants will attend. At the most recent conference in 2011, 229 research
papers were presented. In addition to 161 participants from the USA, there were
68 international scientists and students from 36 countries. We had 41 graduate
and undergraduate students, 3 junior faculty and 27 women who attended the
conference. This conference we will have 20 organized sessions, 3 keynote
speakers, and two tutorials for students and young faculty. The requested
support is for the expenses of the invited speakers and to defray the costs of
younger participants, with special attention paid to students, women,
minorities, persons with disabilities, postdocs and junior faculty. As of mid-
November, 2012, more than 50 applications were received from students, women,
underrepresented groups, and young faculty requesting financial support to
attend the conference.