* 1254968
* CAREER:  Algal Biofilm Cultivation for Sustainable Biofuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Halil Berberoglu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2018
* USD 417,992.00

PI: Berberoglu, Halil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Algal Biofilm Cultivation for
Sustainable Biofuel Production&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
CAREER project are (i) achieving energetically and environmentally sustainable
production of algal biofuels through high cell density cultivation of algae as
biofilms and (ii) integrating this interdisciplinary research effort to educate
and inspire students, in particular of underrepresented groups, to pursue
careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Cultivation of algae has been considered as a promising method for
producing carbon neutral hydrocarbon feedstock for biofuel production. However,
conventional technologies, such as open ponds and closed photo-bioreactors,
prove to be energetically, economically and environmentally unfeasible owing to
cultivation of dilute concentration of biomass. This necessitates the use of (i)
large volumes of water during cultivation, (ii) high energy for pumping the
dilute algae suspension, and (iii) high energy for dewatering and concentrating
algae. A promising method to cultivate algae is in the form of a biofilm for
which the net energy return on investment could be as high as 6 fold.
Development of novel algae cultivation methods based on high cell density
systems can transform the algae based biofuel production technologies. This
project will (a) characterize and minimize photo-inhibition, mass transport
limitation, and thermal management issues of algal biofilm cultivation through
system design, (b) evaluate the feasibility of algae biofilm cultivation with
wastewater resources to supply and recycle nutrients such as nitrogen and
phosphorus, and (c) conduct a life cycle analysis on the proposed process to
assess its energetic, economic, and environmental
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will advance the understanding and technological applications of
sustainable algae cultivation for biofuel and bioproduct generation while
providing interdisciplinary education and research opportunities for students.
The research results will be useful for design and use of manufacturing machines
and equipment related to algae biofuel and wastewater resource coupled high rate
high cell density algae cultivation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and
outreach components of this CAREER project will expand the participation of
females and minorities in engineering and will focus on renewable energy
technologies and biofuels. These activities will include (i) My Introduction to
Engineering (MITE) summer camp reaching over 100 minority high school seniors
per year, (ii) Girls Exploring Science summer camp reaching 70 girls per year
between the ages of 7 and 10, (iii) the Crockett High School Science Research
Program providing research opportunities for 5 minority high schools seniors
encouraging their enrollment in college, and (iv) Texas Research Experience
(TREX) program recruiting 5 minority undergraduate researchers for encouraging
their retention, enrolment in graduate school and ultimately for seeking Ph.D.
degrees in engineering.