* 1254123
* CAREER: Characterizing feature selectivity and invariance in deep neural architectures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Tatyana Sharpee, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 528,000.00

The goals of this CAREER proposal are to help elucidate the principles that make
robust object recognition possible. Object recognition is a problem that must be
solved by all living organisms, from single-cell organisms to humans. Although
the physical signals for recognition based on chemical events, light or sound
waves are different, the computational requirements for analyzing these events
appear to be similar. Specifically, there are two main properties that any
system that mediates robust object recognition must have. The first property is
known as "invariance." It endows neurons with a similar response to the same
object observed from different viewpoints. The second property is known as
"selectivity." Selectivity requires that neurons produce different responses to
potentially quite similar objects (such as different faces) even when presented
from similar viewpoints. It is straightforward to make detectors that are
invariant but not selective or selective but not invariant. The difficulty lies
in making detectors that are both selective and invariant.

This CAREER project will develop statistical methods for simultaneously
characterizing both the invariance properties of neurons and their selectivity
to specific features in the environment. The developed methods will have three
distinguishing characteristics. First, it will be possible to recover new types
of invariance without any prior assumptions of what the dominant type of
invariance is for any given neuron or brain region. Second, they will make it
possible to characterize imperfect and approximate types of invariance. Third,
the methods will be geared towards stimuli typical of the natural sensory
environment that are rich in objects and elicit robust responses from neurons
from all stages of sensory processing. These three properties of the developed
methods will make it possible to simultaneously study multiple neurons both
within and across different regions, without the need to adjust stimuli to a
particular neuron or brain region. Application of the developed methods to
responses of neurons that mediate visual and auditory object recognition in the
brain will help reveal the common principles of sensory processing in the brain
and may ultimately lead to improved designs of artificial recognition systems,
including sensory prostheses.

This research will be integrated into education and outreach activities
involving K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate students. The educational
component will help integrate knowledge acquired in computer science, physics,
and neuroscience, training a new generation of scientists that are proficient in
these disciplines. Outreach to local schools and museums, as well as the
creation of an online course will help reach a diverse range of students both
locally and worldwide.