* 1254609
* CAREER: Hierarchical Mechanical Models of Cell Constructs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Delphine Dean, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 415,000.00

PI: Dean, Delphine Proposal Number: 1254609

The long-term goal of this project is to improve understanding of how mechanical
variability at the nano- and micro-scale affects macroscale properties of
tissues. In pursuit of this goal, this project seeks to use clustering and
machine vision algorithms to build mechanical models of vascular smooth muscle
cell constructs with tunable levels of geometric complexity. Validation of the
models uses a combination of traditional soft tissue mechanical testing with
novel methods that utilize ink-jet printing and concurrent probe and optical
microscopy to assess dynamic structural and mechanical properties of cells
living inside 3D-cultures. These tunable models can then be used to assess the
level of structural detail that is required for accurate prediction of
biomechanical behavior observed in specific sets of experimental conditions.

The long-term educational goal of this project is to increase South Carolina
student and parent awareness of the applications and benefits of skills in
engineering and computation and thereby, increase the number of students who
choose engineering as a career. For this proposal, her educational objectives
are: 1) to involve high school, undergraduate, and graduate students directly in
the research activities, 2) to increase the number of students from
underrepresented groups in the PI's research lab, and 3) to develop new
workshops and videos designed to increase SC student and parent enthusiasm for
engineering careers by highlighting the broad societal impact of engineering and
computation. Meeting these objectives will include leading an interdisciplinary
"Creative Inquiry" team of undergraduates, who will develop workshops and video
vignettes for South Carolina students. Students from underrepresented groups
will be recruited to the team through established campus minority recruitment
programs.

Intellectual Merit: This study addresses one of the grand challenges of
biomedical research: how to create and assess in vitro cell cultures that
accurately reflect in vivo cell responses. Success here will require overcoming
numerous technical challenges in machine vision, experimental design, and
mechanical modeling and in the fusion of these domains. To assess mechanical
properties of cells inside 3D cultures in response to different stimuli, we will
adapt a new and novel technique, band excitation atomic force microscopy (BE-
AFM), for use in fluids with living cells. By overcoming several of the
obstacles the field now faces in characterizing the biomechanics of 3D cell
cultures, these studies will result in better characterization of the mechanical
properties of vascular smooth muscle cells than has been accomplished to date.
The novel methods proposed here are expected to advance the state of the art in
modeling of biological tissues. The results can be used to assess the level of
biological structural complexity that is required for accurate prediction of
mechanical behavior, a necessary step for any multiscale cell-to-organ modeling
strategy. By quantifying the effect of structural detail on living cell and
tissue mechanical properties in 3D cultures, these studies will bridge the
knowledge gap between actual cell and tissue structure and the simplified
mechanics models currently used to describe them.

Broader Impact: As medicine shifts focus from macroscale treatments to
molecular- and cellular-based therapies, this work will help guide future
medical treatment by enabling researchers to better assess how these new types
of therapies may influence large-scale tissue function. The BE-AFM and confocal
microscopy technique that we will develop to assess the mechanical properties of
cells inside thin 3D cultures will enable researchers in a broad range of fields
to answer numerous questions beyond those tackled in this proposal. The research
plan directly involves graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students. The
planned outreach workshops, videos, and curriculum activities will help SC
students and parents become more aware of the applications and benefits of
skills in computation and engineering. The PI meets year-round with directors of
campus programs that support recruitment and retention of minority students and
women. Her commitment to providing research opportunities for these students is
the foundation of her integrated research and education plan.