* 1254214
* CAREER:  Natural enemies, chemical defenses and the diversification of Amazonian trees
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Paul V. Fine, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 999,996.00

Biologists have long hypothesized that insects and pathogens are directly
involved in the origin and maintenance of plant diversity, especially in the
extraordinarily diverse tropical rainforests. The evolution of novel chemical
defenses that deter insects and pathogens has been thought to allow plants to
expand their geographic ranges, thereby promoting the formation of new species.
Very little is known about the identity or distribution of the enemies that
attack tropical plants or how host-specific they are. In this research,
populations of 45 species from a common, diverse genus of tropical rainforest
trees (Protium) in Peru, Brazil and French Guiana will be studied to learn about
which insects and pathogens attack the plants and how the plants defend
themselves. By simultaneously studying natural enemies, plant defenses, and the
evolutionary history of plants, insects, and soil pathogens the investigators
will gain new insights on the processes that generate high biodiversity in the
Amazon basin.

This project will train scientists both in Peru and the United States, with a
focus on promoting opportunities for students from underrepresented
socioeconomic groups. A summer field course in Peru will be developed for
Peruvian and US students at the University of California at Berkeley, that will
teach ecology, evolutionary biology, taxonomy of plants and insects,
experimental design and research methods. This project will integrate research
and education with international field biology and involve minority and
socioeconomically disadvantaged students. Students will be recruited from an
existing program at Berkeley that mentors first-generation college students,
providing critical field biology opportunities for students who are generally
offered only lab-based research positions.