* 1254185
* CAREER:   Mechanotyping Platform for Studies of Soft Biological Matter
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Amy Rowat, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2018
* USD 860,233.00

An award is made to UCLA to develop a high throughput Mechanotyping Platform
(MTP). Mechanical properties of cells and nuclei are implicated in a wide range
of biological contexts: they are central for determining how physical forces
alter gene expression, and more broadly they can signal a transformation in a
cell?s physiological state, such as in malignant transformation. However, to
advance our fundamental understanding of the mechanisms underlying cell/nuclear
mechanical properties requires probing the mechanical properties of cells and
nuclei across genetic and physical phase space; this demands measurements of a
large number of samples and single cells which cannot be achieved on a feasible
timescale using existing methods. MTP offers dramatic improvements over current
techniques in time, cost, and user-accessibility, and is comprised of two
independent technologies: (1) High Throughput Mechanical Screening (HTMS)
instrumentation simultaneously probes the deformability of hundreds of
individual samples by subjecting them to external stresses, forcing them to
deform through micron-scale pores, and determining the number of passaged cells;
this provides a physiologically relevant assay to detect relative mechanical
changes that have direct implications for the circulation and perfusion of cells
through vasculature and tissues. (2) A Mechanical Probing System (MaPS) measures
elastic moduli directly from single cells and nuclei at rates of 100 per second
by flowing cells through a microfluidic channel, poking the cell with a force
probe embedded in the channel, and determining the resultant deformation; this
will enable reproducible measurements of the mechanical properties of single
cells at unprecedented speeds. The proposed research will establish a framework
for mechanotyping that will be accessible to biological researchers in fields
ranging from stem cells to cancer biology. Probing the mechanical signatures of
cells can also provide an alternative approach to classify and treat a wide
range of diseases. In addition, this research will provide critical insight into
the molecular origins of mechanical phenotype, heterogeneity within a population
of single cells, and more broadly, will transform the search for crucial
information in biological research by exploiting the inherent texture or
mechanotype of individual cells.

The educational objective of this project is to engage undergraduate and high
school students, as well as general audiences, in science using food and cooking
as pedagogical tools. Communicating sophisticated scientific and technological
concepts using food is a tactile, innovative, and tasty approach that is proving
to be popular and effective in promoting the public understanding of science and
technology. Curricula will be disseminated through online modules and
interactive lectures to populations of high school students, especially groups
underrepresented in science. Undergraduate students will be engaged in learning
science in a classroom setting through inquiry-driven projects, such as
engineering an apple pie. The public understanding of science will be promoted
through interactive events, including a Scientific Bake-off. These education and
outreach activities will pioneer methodologies in multisensory science education
using food and cooking. Promoting knowledge of science and food also addresses
America's pressing need to improve eating and health issues for socio-
economically-stratified communities. More information is available at
www.scienceandfood.org.