* 1254453
* CAREER: Strain Engineered Mixed Ionic Electronic Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Anode Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Jason Nicholas, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

1254453&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas, Jason D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuels cells are
electrochemical devices used to convert the energy stored within the chemical
bonds of the fuel into electrical energy and/or heat. Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
(SOFCs), which have efficiencies of 60-85%, highest of the hydrocarbon-based
electricity production technologies, achieve this by allowing oxygen ions to
pass through an electronically insulating solid membrane; and in the process
producing electricity by forcing the oxygen electrons to circumvent the membrane
via an external circuit. By electrochemically oxidizing fuel in this manner
instead of combusting it, SOFCs have demonstrated combined heat and power
efficiencies more than twice those obtained in conventional fossil fuel-fed
power plants. Unlike other types of fuel cells that can only run on hydrogen,
SOFCs can operate on a variety of fuels such as hydrogen, biogas, gasoline,
natural gas, jet fuel, and methane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With their ability to
run on both hydrocarbon and hydrogen fuels, why have SOFCs not become a primary
energy conversion solution? Two of the most daunting obstacles to SOFC
commercialization are 1) a lack of SOFC electrode catalyst materials with
desirable surface properties at operating temperatures less than 600C, and 2) a
lack of catalytically active, high conductivity, redox stable, coking resistant,
sulfur tolerant, SOFC anode materials which will allow SOFCs to operate on dry,
commercially-widespread hydrocarbon fuels. Professor Jason Nicholas of Michigan
State University believes that the pool of available materials may already
contain those which will do the job, including mixed ionic electronic-conducting
lanthanum strontium chromium magnesium oxides. The National Science Foundation
is awarding the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program Award to
Nicholas to systematically evaluate the hypothesis that the necessary surface
properties and the catalytic activity and selectivity of these mixed ionic
oxides can be enhanced through the application of an external biaxial stress.
Although thin film catalysts will initially be studied, the PI intends to
fabricate and elucidate the behavior of nanocomposite SOFC anodes containing
strain engineered catalysts by a number of standard methods. In addition, the
investigator will develop a novel curvature relaxation measurement technique
which will allow oxygen surface exchange measurements to be performed in situ
and in operando without the distortions caused by electrodes, yielding data not
previously available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will advance the
field of catalysis by systematically elucidating, for the first time, the full
relationship between stress, structure, electrochemical properties, temperature,
and oxygen partial pressure in a SOFC anode electrocatalyst. The investigator
plans a wide program of educational outreach activities as a feature of the
CAREER award, extending to high school students, undergraduates and teachers. A
specific activity will be to provide mid-Michigan Girl Scouts with an annual
Michigan State University visit day aimed at introducing K-12 girls to the
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) disciplines.