* 1254382
* CAREER:   An Integrated, Metabolomics-based Method for Metabolic Engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Mark Styczynski, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 03/31/2019
* USD 545,022.00

Intellectual Merit Understanding and controlling cellular metabolism is crucial
to applications ranging from industrial biosynthesis to bioenergy production,
but is significantly hindered by limited information about the dynamics and
regulation of metabolism. This CAREER project aims to use a computationally-
driven approach to engineering cells to produce valuable chemicals, to be
derived from cell-wide measurements of metabolite levels within the cell. To
achieve this, a new metabolic model that includes regulation will be developed
and used in an iterative experimental/computational manner for optimizing
production of the valuable chemical succinic acid in the yeasts Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and S. mikatae. This work will be the first of its kind to directly
use cell-wide measurements of metabolites to drive metabolic engineering. Its
successful completion will support the refocusing on rational design in
metabolic engineering, and also increase the scope of chemicals that could be
produced biosynthetically.

Broader Impact This project has the potential to enable more efficient and
effective engineering of metabolism, with applications ranging from the low-cost
production of useful chemicals that become affordable to developing countries,
impacting the quality of life for millions of people, to the facilitation of
economically feasible production of biofuels for sustainable energy.
Additionally, models that will be constructed for multiple species could help
elucidate mechanisms of metabolic evolution. The integrated research and
education plan of this project seeks to foster quantitative, whole system-level
thinking in children, and to encourage the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering. To do so, existing educational programs that promote this
mindset will be implemented in local socioeconomically-disadvantaged and
predominantly minority schools. Also, a synthetic biology team will be assembled
at a local high school to stimulate interest in systems biology, synthetic
biology, and bioengineering, with targeted recruitment of females
(underrepresented in engineering).