* 1254600
* CAREER: Developing Novel Biomimetic Heterostructured Ceramics for Water Splitting
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Alexander Orlov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 530,817.00

NON-TECHICAL DESCRIPTION: Development of new methods for converting solar energy
into fuels offers tremendous potential to address both sustainable energy and
environmental issues. Producing hydrogen from water using sunlight and light-
activated materials is an attractive strategy for solar energy storage and
conversion. Despite tremendous progress in the design of new materials, the
efficiency of this conversion process is still very low. To address this
challenge, this project focuses on overcoming several bottlenecks in materials
science and chemistry by adopting a process that occurs naturally in biological
systems. The experimental strategy uses novel composite materials, where oxygen
and hydrogen are produced on different semiconductors coupled together. This
approach, inspired by natural photosynthesis, is called the
Z-scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Previous studies employing
a Z-scheme for water splitting typically involved the use of two different
semiconductor powders in aqueous solutions, which are coupled by redox agents
that act as an electron shuttle between the two components. In this work,
Orlov's group is using an all solid-state Z-scheme system which has the
potential advantage of using individual components that are optimized for only
one of the water splitting half reactions (water oxidation or water reduction),
and placing them in intimate contact to promote charge transfer between them. By
eliminating the need for a redox shuttle, an all solid-state Z-scheme
photocatalyst offers the potential of higher efficiency and is more amenable to
fundamental investigations of atomic and electronic structure using surface
science probes. Specifically, the experimental design involves working with
systems that combine two metal oxide materials that act as oxidation and
reduction photocatalysts that can be prepared both as a powder and as a thin
film with well-defined surface properties. The transformational aspect of this
research is in development of a new class of composite systems with potentially
higher activity for hydrogen production as compared to any single catalyst. The
development and characterization of the model photocatalyst presents many
challenges, which this project addresses by an interdisciplinary approach with
broad range of characterization techniques, solid-state synthesis, activity
characterization and surface science tools. The project-related activities also
expand the curriculum and cutting edge research opportunities in materials
science and engineering with significant inclusion of underrepresented students.
In addition, the educational part of the project introduces high school students
and teachers to nanotechnology research using their newly developed
photocatalytic testing kit. The project also includes several other innovative
elements, such as the development of on-line educational tools designed to teach
students the concepts of sustainable materials.