* 1254324
* CAREER: Interfacing Remote Quantum Dot Nanostructures by Resonant Light Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Andreas Muller, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 595,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the
demonstration of an elementary quantum interface between two spatially separated
solid-state quantum systems by using resonant light scattering, with the purpose
of producing entanglement. It will be shown that InAs quantum dot
nanostructures, with outstanding quantum-coherent optical properties, can
generate single photons suitably-tailored for this purpose. In a phased approach
indistinguishable photons from remotely located quantum dots will be produced
using monochromatic continuous-wave, multichromatic and finally pulsed laser
excitation. A tomographic analysis will be implemented to verify the generation
of entanglement once a sufficiently large degree of two-photon interference has
been obtained. Unique advantages of this approach lie in the relaxed
requirements for frequency matching of photons as well as in reduced dephasing
when compared to non-resonant excitation. A quantitative understanding of
phenomena expected to hinder the manifestation of entanglement, in particular
spectral diffusion, will be sought out. This research which lies at the boundary
of condensed matter physics, nanoscience, and quantum optics will be an
invaluable multidisciplinary experience for graduate and undergraduate students.
A comprehensive outreach effort is designed to disseminate excitement and
knowledge to a larger public by organizing professional development for
teachers, high school senior student projects, campus tours, and classroom
demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Quantum mechanical methods to encode, process and
transmit information are expected to replace one day the current classical
architecture of information technology. Quantum mechanical states produced by or
encoded in condensed matter systems are particularly attractive to achieve this
goal because of their intrinsic scalability and compatibility with existing
micro and nanofabrication technology. The goal of this project is to use
resonant light scattering from laser-driven InAs quantum dot nanostructures for
the purpose of creating quantum mechanical superposition states between remotely
located entities. The resulting quantum entanglement, in which the measurement
of the state of one entity determines with certainty the outcome of the
measurement of the state of the other entity, is a central resource in quantum
information science. This project provides a previously unexplored route to
entanglement in solids, relying on a resonant light generation mechanism that
produces indistinguishable photons. Combining unique expertise from materials
science, quantum optics and photonics engineering, this work will offer hands-on
research experience to undergraduate and graduate students in a
multidisciplinary environment. The project includes a comprehensive plan to make
this knowledge accessible to a larger pubic, via professional development for
teachers, high school senior project student participation, campus tours, and
classroom demonstrations.