* 1254313
* CAREER: Multiobjective Learning Control Strategies for Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Sandipan Mishra, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to create system-theoretic design and analysis tools for high-throughput and
high-precision control of additive manufacturing. Despite their tremendous
potential, additive manufacturing have not yet delivered functional parts at a
production scale due to poor process reliability. A key reason for the low
reliability is the lack of accurate process models coupled with open-loop
process control. To counter this challenge, the unique layer-by-layer material
deposition mechanism of additive manufacturing will be exploited by learning
algorithms that rely on iterative refinement based on sensor data in conjunction
with partial model information. Inspired by multi-objective optimization, the
proposed layer-to-layer learning control algorithm will simultaneously address
multiple conflicting objectives to deliver acceptable part geometry and
mechanical properties, in the presence of modeling errors and uncertainties in
operating conditions. Deliverable of this project include (1) design and
analysis tools for multi-objective learning control algorithms tailored towards
jet-based printing and selective metal melting processes, (2) verification of
proposed algorithms on experimental test beds, (3) development of hands-on
experimentation and interactive course modules on additive manufacturing and
automation at the K-12 level, and (4) training of undergraduate and graduate
students for careers in automation, manufacturing, and control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this project will make a
strong positive impact on the rapidly expanding billion-dollar additive
manufacturing industry by increasing reliability, repeatability, and production
rate. Specifically, enhancing reliability and performance of polymer-based
additive manufacturing process can have a significant impact on the fabrication
of one-off mass-customized parts including biomedical implants, opto-mechanical
components, and tissue engineering. On the other hand, reliable metal-based
additive manufacturing processes can produce parts for safety-critical
applications such as in aviation industry. Through the proposed outreach and
education plan, this project will spread awareness about the importance and
opportunities in advanced manufacturing, train students in critically needed
skills, and inspire talented young engineers to pursue careers in automation,
control, and advanced manufacturing.