* 1254846
* CAREER:The role of nuclear biomechanics during cell migration in 3-D environments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Jan Lammerding, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2020
* USD 415,000.00

PI: Lammerdng. Jan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1254846&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: While cell migration on
2-dimensional (2-D) substrates has been studied for many decades, the physical
challenges cells face when moving in 3-D environments are only beginning to
emerge now. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that deformation of the
large and stiff nucleus presents a rate-limiting step during migration through
tight constriction encountered in 3-D environments such as extracellular
matrixes or during intra- or extravasation. This project will address to what
extent the deformability of the nucleus governs the transit of cells through
narrow constrictions by monitoring cells as they migrate through microfluidic
channels with defined constrictions while visualizing subcellular deformations
and transit efficiency. In addition, ablation of cytoskeletal filaments with
femtosecond laser pulses as cells pass through narrow constrictions will be used
to determine whether the nucleus is being pulled or pushed by the cytoskeleton
to overcome its resistance when squeezing through constrictions smaller than the
size of the nucleus. Complementing these experiments, molecular sensors
engineered from modified nuclear envelope proteins that report tensile forces
and localized compression at the nuclear envelope by changes in fluorescence
intensity or fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) efficiency will be
applied to cells during 3-D migration to quantify the cytoskeletal forces acting
on the nucleus during 3-D migration and visualize their distribution along the
nuclear periphery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The research
activities will be complemented with a comprehensive education and outreach
program that builds on simplified models of the proposed research to introduce
middle and high school students to biomedical engineering, with the goal of
increasing participation of female students in science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) subjects. Tapioca pearls, the key ingredient of the popular
bubble tea, will be used as safe, easily accessible, and inexpensive stand-in
for biological cells, while simple 'millifluidic' devices replace technically
demanding microfluidics designs to probe cellular biomechanics. These 'tapioca
millifluidics' experiments, along with accompanying lectures, will be introduced
to students from underserved middle and high schools as part of existing and
novel outreach programs at Cornell University that target high school girls and
underrepresented minorities to provide them with hands-on experiences in
biomedical engineering to boost confidence, meet role models, and overcome
gender stereotypes. An additional education component is the creation of an
online portal for self-directed learning to address the challenge of teaching
interdisciplinary biomedical engineering courses to students with diverse
academic backgrounds.