* 1254929
* CAREER: Degradation and Deactivation of Extracellular and Intracellular Antibiotic Resistance Genes during Disinfection Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Michael Dodd, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2019
* USD 408,493.00

CBET-1254929&lt;br/&gt;Michael Dodd&lt;br/&gt;University of Washington ?
Seattle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevalence of antibiotic resistance traits has
increased dramatically amongst bacterial populations within health-care settings
during the last several decades. Concurrently, it has also become clear that
antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) and their associated antibiotic resistance
genes (ARGs) are widely distributed within aquatic environmental systems (e.g.,
municipal wastewaters, agricultural waste streams, and even treated drinking
waters). Within this context, the use of disinfectants (i.e., chemical or
physical agents applied to aqueous matrixes or inanimate surfaces) and
antiseptics (i.e., chemical or physical agents applied to living tissues) to
inactivate ARB present in water supplies, in municipal wastewater, or on
contaminated surfaces can provide a critical means for mitigating dissemination
of antibiotic resistance. However, even if ARB are fully inactivated during
disinfection processes, intact segments of their ARG-containing DNA may remain
within the resulting cell debris and confer antibiotic resistance traits to
temporally- or spatially-separated bacterial populations by means of horizontal
gene transfer processes not requiring live DNA donor cells, such as natural
transformation. This research project is being undertaken to: (a) quantify the
likelihood of intact, biologically-active ARGs ?surviving? disinfection
processes even after ARB inactivation, and (b) to provide the data necessary to
evaluate and mitigate risks posed by such ARGs in promoting dissemination of
antibiotic resistance amongst environmental and clinically-relevant bacterial
communities. A suite of conventional and molecular microbiological analytical
tools will be utilized to examine the fate of free (extracellular) and cell-
associated (intracellular) chromosomal and plasmid-borne ARGs from a variety of
bacterial species during exposure to the disinfectant and antiseptic agents most
commonly applied in water treatment and health-care settings. The results
obtained from these investigations will enable quantitative modeling of
extracellular and intracellular ARG deactivation during disinfection processes
currently applied in water treatment and health-care practice, in turn making it
possible to design disinfectant and antiseptic applications specifically for
deactivation of ARGs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide the first
systematic investigation into the use of disinfectant and antiseptic agents
expressly for the degradation and deactivation of ARGs. The resulting data will
not only facilitate optimization of disinfection processes for minimizing the
transfer of intact ARGs amongst natural and engineered aquatic environments and
health-care settings, but will also greatly improve fundamental understanding of
DNA reactivity toward various disinfectants and antiseptics and the mechanisms
by which bacterial cells are inactivated during disinfection processes. Because
of high public awareness as to the societal importance of antibiotic resistance,
this topic also represents an exceptional opportunity to engage K-12 teachers
and students in strengthening STEM curricula. The project will therefore be
utilized as a platform from which to partner with groups of STEM teachers and
underrepresented students from regional high schools, in order to develop suites
of instructional laboratory modules focusing on concepts relevant to the project
scope. These laboratory modules will subsequently be implemented within regional
high school curricula, as well as utilized by the PI to aid in the training of
new undergraduate and graduate research assistants. The project will also
support the career development of a graduate student and several
underrepresented undergraduate students.