* 1254318
* CAREER: Engineering cellular clearance pathways using nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,003.00

1254318&lt;br/&gt;Segatori&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles are now being
engineered for a variety of important applications, ranging form diagnostics and
therapeutics to energy production and materials. A number of nanoparticles of
different size, shape and composition enter the cell through endocytosis and
activate cellular clearance mechanisms and, particularly, autophagy, which is
the main catabolic pathway that eliminates cellular waste and foreign material.
Interestingly, impaired or inefficient autophagic activity is linked to
accumulation of cellular waste material and development of a number of cancers,
ageing and metabolic diseases. The project team recently developed a set of
analytical tools to quantify the cellular clearance capacity and cell model
systems to measure the accumulation of cellular waste. The overall research goal
of the proposed project is to engineer the cellular clearance pathway using
nanoparticles. To achieve this goal, the research team will identify
nanoparticles that enhance clearance of toxic cellular waste material and will
use these nanoparticles to investigate the molecular mechanism involved in
regulation of autophagy. This study will lay the groundwork for developing novel
therapeutic strategies to treat pathologic conditions associated with autophagy
dysfunction, ranging from ageing and metabolic diseases to cancer.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide the basis for the development of
educational and training platforms, with the ultimate educational goal of
diversifying the pool of students interested in biomolecular engineering and of
increasing the retention of underrepresented groups - particularly girls and
women - in STEM disciplines. To this end, the project integrates educational
objectives relevant to high school students, undergraduate students, graduate
students, and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is co-funded by
the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) through the Instrument
Development for Biological Research (IDBR) program, and by the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET).