* 1254032
* CAREER: Together We Rise: A Unified Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) - Full Duplex Network Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Kannan Srinivasan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2019
* USD 546,604.00

This project seeks to unify the capability of full duplex (FD) communications
and multi-input multi-output (MIMO) communications to allow a flexible way of
using the available RF chains to increase the capacity and reliability of
wireless networks. Recent advancements in multi-antenna wireless systems have
allowed wireless nodes to use either all of their antennas for transmission (or
reception), or to use half of them for transmission and the other half for
reception. The first system is called a MIMO system and the latter is called a
full duplex system. Traditionally, MIMO and full duplex have been seen as
competing technologies. This research shows that they can be combined in
innovative ways to fundamentally increase the capacity of a wireless link
compared to the case when they operate separately. This combination allows a
node to dynamically allocate radio resources for transmission and reception. It
further shows that informing routing and scheduling protocols about this
flexible radio resource feature can significantly improve network capacity. The
research proposes innovations in the hardware, protocols and software needed in
the current wireless network architecture to achieve significant network-wide
capacity increases. Thus, this research will produce highly flexible radios that
will combine full duplex and MIMO. This flexibility will allow future wireless
nodes to dynamically allocate radio resources for simultaneous transmissions and
receptions. Second, it will develop MAC and network layer protocols that can
fully reap the benefits of this flexible system. Third, it will develop a new
network simulator that incorporates the fundamentally new wireless features
proposed by this research so that advanced network protocols can be effectively
and more realistically studied.