* 1254573
* CAREER: Numerical Investigation of Controls on Megathrust Earthquakes Along the Japan Trench Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Benchun Duan, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This career project is to integrate research in controls on megathrust
earthquakes along subduction zones with teaching in earthquake generation and
complexity. A better understanding of the 2011 M9 Tohoku (Japan) earthquake is
critical for us to do a better job in forecasting future megathrust earthquakes
worldwide. This project aims to address two categories of questions about the
earthquake. First, why did the 2011 event happen in the way it did? What
physical conditions on the subducting fault control features in rupture
propagation and slip distribution inferred from seismic/geodetic data? Second,
what is the relationship between the 2011 event and previous large events of
M7~8 on the subducting fault? What control generation of large earthquakes of
different sizes along the subduction zone? We hypothesize that geometrical
complexities on the subducting plane, including bends/kinks of the subducting
plane and subducted seafloor features such as seamounts, play the primary role
in controlling the 2011 event and megathrust events of different sizes along
this subduction zone. We propose to use computer models with constraints from
observations to address these questions. We will use a dynamic finite element
method code to perform dynamic rupture modeling of the co-seismic process of the
2011 event to address the first category of questions. For the second category,
we will use the code to perform earthquake cycle simulations at the subduction
zone, with the dynamic relaxation technique to obtain solutions for the quasi-
static processes between two adjacent earthquakes by the dynamic solver.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What we learn from the 2011 M9 event and the subduction
zone in this project can be applied broadly to subduction zones worldwide,
including the Cascadia subduction zone along the west coast of the North America
continent, to mitigate hazards from future megathrust earthquakes and tsunamis.
Addressing the two categories of questions from a physical point of view as we
propose is extremely important in advancing our understanding of generation of
megathrust earthquakes, and thus in forecasting future megathrust earthquakes
along subduction zones. The procedure for earthquake cycle simulations along
subduction zones may serve as a powerful tool to assimilate large datasets and
to address difficult questions in earthquake science. Course modules on
earthquake generation processes and complexities to be developed will bring
cutting-edge research results into classrooms of colleges and high schools
across the nation. Installation and operation of a seismometer and setup of
physical models of spring-slider systems at Texas A&amp;M University will
provide hands-on resources for teaching and outreach activities at various
levels, and promote awareness of earthquake hazards and understanding of
earthquake phenomena.