* 1254610
* CAREER: Ultrahigh-Frame-Rate Compressively-Sensed Imaging using Ultrafast Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Mark Foster, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to overcome the current
limitations in ultrahigh-frame-rate optical imaging through the development of a
photonic imaging architecture that incorporates the benefits of compressive
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is that current record-high frame-rate optical imaging architectures are
severely burdened by the need to transfer and record massive amounts of
information. This program will make transformative advancements to the state-of-
the-art approach through the use of a photonic imaging architecture designed
specifically for compressive sensing; building data compression directly into
the measurement process. Thereby, this new architecture will enable high-speed
image acquisition with a greatly reduced information capacity requirement as
well as increased signal strength and will form a new generation of ultrahigh-
frame-rate imaging systems for use in all areas of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
are that recent research into high-speed imaging suggests that the incorporation
of ultrahigh-frame-rate imaging into flow cytometry will greatly increase the
information extracted from the measurements. This is critical to applications
such as identifying the presence of extremely rare disease-predicting cells
within a largely healthy population. Such an application can have a broad impact
on society through improved medical diagnostics and will be a focus of this
research program. Additionally, the program will benefit the educational
objectives of the PI through the development of hands-on laboratory activities
for high school and undergraduate students, a new introductory undergraduate
photonics course, and seminars and poster sessions for undergraduate and
graduate students to gain experience disseminating their research.