* 1254993
* CAREER: Bio-Adaptive Wireless Power Transfer and Signal Acquisition for Implantable Medical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Stephen O'Driscoll, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 01/31/2016
* USD 80,165.00

Intellectual Merit Implantable medical devices (IMDs) can greatly assist in
managing health and preventing disease. Anatomical constraints limit the size of
IMDs and many applications are infeasible due to the large required batteries or
inductive powering antennas. The proposed work seeks to improve wireless power
transfer efficiency and reduce power consumption in IMDs thereby increasing
achievable implant depth and decreasing device size. Two major innovations will
allow improved power transfer efficiency: (1) Electromagnetic IMD Location
Estimation and (2) Directed Power Transmission. The location of the IMD will be
estimated by extracting spatial information from variations in the backscattered
signal across an external antenna array. It is proposed to: recover that
backscattered signal by exploiting amplifier unilateralism and differential
antennas; investigate how many antennas are required to estimate the location of
the IMD; and to devise efficient algorithms to perform that location estimation.
Circuits and algorithms to direct power to an IMD in the intermediate field
which has been shown recently to be the optimum field regime for powering a
broad class of IMDs are proposed. Power consumption in IMD applications is often
dominated by signal acquisition. Two signal acquisition circuit thrusts will
enable lower IMD power consumption: (1) Bio Signal Adaptive Amplifier and (2)
Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) Architectures for lower power at moderate
resolutions. Thus far information lossless power adaptation has been
demonstrated only for ADCs in motor neuron sensing applications. Circuits and
algorithms to generalize the method to amplifiers and to broader classes of
applications are proposed. Capacitor mismatch in a successive approximation ADC
will be reduced through a reconfigurable capacitor array leading to a
substantial decrease in ADC area and power. Additionally, a low power ADC
architecture based on binary search of time delays is proposed.

Broader Impacts The primary broader impact of this program will be to enable
smaller IMDs at greater implant depths thus enabling a broad class of new IMDs
such as sub-mm implanted drug delivery devices and distributed neurosensors
which should have very positive impacts in health care. The IMD location and
orientation estimate will allow better interpretation of sensed data. The
proposed ADC architectures will be useful in much of electronics, whenever
moderate resolution low power ADCs are required. The findings will be published
in leading journals. A major part of this proposal is the STEM outreach plan to
expand Prof O?Driscoll?s previous K-12 outreach, which has received written
commendation from the California State Legislature.