* 1254484
* CAREER:Three Dimensional Cell Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Hayden Huang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2015
* USD 33,467.00

1254484 Huang

Cell properties have been extensively examined in two-dimensions (2D), yielding
fruitful information regarding focal adhesions, migration, the establishment of
polarity, traction forces and mechanotransductive responses. However, with few
exceptions, most cells in vivo exist in a threedimensional (3D) environment,
where their behavior is considerably different compared to when they are plated
on a petri dish. Not only are there significant geometric differences, but there
are also omnidirectional cell-cell interactions as well as cell-matrix
interactions. As disease and tissue engineering research advance, it is
imperative that cellular behavior and properties are established in detail.
However, achieving this goal has been slow, in a large part because imaging and
otherwise probing cells embedded within other cells and/or matrices is difficult
due to scattering and inaccessibility. Thus there is a need for transforming
techniques to derive information from three-dimensional cellular constructs.

The scientific objectives of this proposal are (1) to design and implement a
microrheometer to characterize cellular properties that can remove out-of-plane
noise and perform three-dimensional tracking, (2) to use the microrheometer to
assess changes in cell rheological properties under resting conditions as well
as under mechanical stimuli, in a variety of 2D and 3D environments, and (3) to
model 2D and 3D rheological changes using a novel 9-parameter computational
model based on a Monte Carlo simulation which will be used to interpret the
results from the experimental parts of the project. Preliminary work
demonstrates that cell behavior in layered 2D arrangements are already more
complex than simple 2D plating can predict. These results further demonstrate
the effectiveness of new techniques for acquiring microrheological measurements
in a variety of conditions. The next logical step is to deploy more advanced
techniques to 3D, and to carefully examine cell behavior and response in more
realistic environments, and to create computational models to help interpret the
results. Thus, this project will provide the groundwork for years of research in
basic cell biomechanics, tissue engineering, as well as imaging techniques that
may rely on these measurements for diagnoses or treatments.

Intellectual Merit: The driving goal of this project is to characterize cells in
threedimensional environments by designing advanced imaging setups, coupled with
computational models to help interpret the results. Because 3D is the next major
area of cell-based research, and because tools for examining biomechanics and
mechanotransduction are currently lacking for 3D experimentation, the work
proposed here will help advance the field of biomechanics, tissue engineering
and imaging. Ultimately, a vastly improved and more realistic model of cell
behavior in vivo will be established and better models of cell regulation and
physiology can be created.

The overall merit of this work lies in the ability to precisely characterize
cell properties under realistic but controlled conditions, where one can vary
the extracellular matrix constituents, the mechanical stresses acting on the
cells, and the degree of cell-cell interactions. Thus, these results can be
transformative for the field of cell mechanics and mechanotransduction, which
themselves are relevant for a broad range of other fields. Because of the fast
development of 3D tissue-engineered constructs and the need for characterizing
cell properties, this proposal seeks to fill a large gap in current knowledge.
For example, is it true that in response to mechanical stimuli, cells first
fluidize their interior to permit remodeling? Do cells plated in 3D exhibit
different anisotropy from cells plated in 2D? Does altering the adhesive ligand
engaged by one layer of cells affect a second layer of cells plated on top of
the first layer? This proposal seeks to answer these, and other, questions.

Broader Impact: Because of the breadth of this project, there is considerable
opportunity for having broader impacts on many aspects of biomedical engineering
education and outreach. Because knowledge of contemporary biomedical engineering
techniques and stem cell biology are not yet widely available to educational
programs and the public at large, part of this project is dedicated to outreach.
This outreach program is based on expanding a remote lab program by creating
freely available videos along the line of the "Minute Physics" videos, but with
a focus on biomedical engineering topics and techniques, posted to YouTube and
other high-traffic video sites. Additionally, a broader selection of
undergraduate students will be provided the opportunities to engage in
laboratory research. Finally, courses in tissue and molecular engineering and
biomechanics will be enhanced by the topics explored in this proposal, with
plans for supplementary material stemming from a textbook that is currently in
press.