* 1254060
* CAREER: Glycosylation as a primary contributor to cell fate-specific membrane capacitance
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Lisa Flanagan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2018
* USD 830,000.00

Neural stem cells in the central nervous system form specialized cells (neurons,
astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes) to build the brain and spinal cord.
Unfortunately, studying the cells that make each of these specialized cell types
has been complicated because they are difficult to distinguish from one another.
Through interdisciplinary studies combining biology with biophysics, Dr.
Flanagan's group has found novel differences defining these cells, which can be
used to obtain pure populations of each cell type for further study. The project
will use cell biological, biophysical, and molecular experiments to identify key
characteristics of cells forming neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.
These studies will uncover important differences in these cells and help
scientists understand how the formation of the brain and spinal cord is
controlled. A firm grasp on the mechanisms driving the development of the brain
and spinal cord will lead to a better understanding of central nervous system
disorders. Truly interdisciplinary studies such as these have the potential to
unlock many biological mysteries. While interdisciplinary research has been
recognized as important, it has been harder to accomplish.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is firmly committed to interdisciplinary
science, and the proposed activities will contribute to preparing the scientists
of tomorrow that will need to be trained to think beyond disciplinary
boundaries. This project will expose students at multiple levels (K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate) to the importance of interdisciplinary research
since studies coupling biology with fields such as engineering and biophysics
will be critical for future progress in the biological sciences.