* 1254559
* Bioenergy crops on marginal lands: Investigating strategies for remediation, stormwater management and nutrient load reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Amy Landis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 129,386.00

0933249&lt;br/&gt;Landis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofuels are currently derived
from corn and soybeans in the US to make ethanol and biodiesel, respectively.
While energy and greenhouse gas savings are realized, several significant
tradeoffs have arisen including a) increase in food prices and b) a shift in
environmental burden to impacts manifesting as eutrophication and hypoxia (i.e.
the Dead Zone in the Gulf of Mexico). Cultivating biofuels on marginal lands may
alleviate these problems and may serve to contribute additional environmental
benefits in the form of soil remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to quantify the benefits of growing bioenergy crops on
marginal lands. Throughout this project they will: (i) quantify on-site
phytoremediation of biofuel crops, (ii) evaluate runoff related to biofuel
crops, and (iii) compare the life cycle environmental impacts of biofuels grown
on marginal lands to petroleum fuels and traditional biofuels (i.e. soy
biodiesel, corn ethanol).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs at the University of
Pittsburgh will partner with Alcoa Corp and a local nonprofit, GTECH Strategies,
to form a unique collaboration. Alcoa Corp is involved in a mine reclamation
demonstration at the Mather Mine site in PA. Alcoa is aiding in the evaluation
of the use of alkaline clay to assist in reclamation. GTECH Strategies
cultivates biofuel crops on vacant urban lands; their mission is to foster
community growth in underserved communities through the creation of "egreen
collar" jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is unique not only for
Pennsylvania, but for the water resources, water quality, and biofuels research
community at large. The findings of the proposed research will inform the
research community about the life cycle environmental benefits of alternative
uses for marginal and vacant lands, and will also contribute to the literature
and understanding of phytoremediation. The findings of the life cycle assessment
will also contribute to the ever growing and highly debated body of LCA research
on biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will have broad
reaching impacts that serve the purpose of energy production, storm water
management, nutrient management, water conservation, reclamation, and job
creation in underserved communities. The impacts of the proposed research extend
from contribution to the scientific study of biofuel crops to community
engagement and empowerment through the collaboration with GTECH Strategies. The
proposed project will directly aid in the increase of job opportunities in
environmental justice communities through GTECHs green job corps program and
will foster the growth of GTECH as a sustainable nonprofit. Clearly, the
development of new strategies for sustainable biofuel production will aid in
addressing national security issues and help the nation meet national 2010 fuel
standards. In addition to the outreach inherent in the collaboration with GTECH,
they also propose to continue to include a diverse set of students (REU, grad,
and high school, via GTECH's green job corps) in the proposed research. They
also have outlined an extensive plan for integration of the research partnership
into the sustainability curriculum at Pitt.