* 1254842
* CAREER: Towards An Optimization-Based and Experimentally Verified Predictive Theory of Human Locomotion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Manoj Srinivasan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Develpment (CAREER) award is
to obtain a sufficiently accurate, and broadly applicable, predictive theory of
how people walk, run, and stabilize their movements. It is already possible to
predict some aspects of human walking and running, by computing motions that
minimize energy consumption. However, it is not known if such minimization can
simultaneously predict the results of many different experiments, or the
differences between different subjects. The PI will use large-scale inverse
optimization to try to deduce a single objective function, perhaps loosely
correlated with energy use, which, when minimized in the context of a computer
model of the human-body, predicts the outcomes of many different experiments.
The proposed project has four inter-related pieces: (1) Consolidation of
locomotion data under a variety of situations: different speeds, inclines, body
changes like addition of masses, etc; (2) Inverse optimization to infer the
objective function which when minimized, simultaneously explains a substantial
fraction (but not all) of the collected data; (3) Forward optimization to
predict behavior in locomotor situations not used in the inverse optimization;
and (4) Predict responses to perturbations using optimality and compare with
perturbation experiments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An accurate and broadly
applicable theory of human locomotion will, for instance, enable the systematic
model-based design of prosthetic and orthotic devices, and inform the diagnosis
and treatment of movement pathologies, including possibly guiding surgical
interventions. The project will integrate the research into a number of
educational activities, aimed at different student groups, from K-12 to graduate
students. The PI will work with OSU's Women in Engineering program to create an
educational module for female high school students, targeted at increasing their
likelihood of pursuing further education in the STEM disciplines. These
educational modules will emphasize the interplay between mathematical theories,
computer simulations, and experiments in science and engineering, and in
improving the quality of human life.