* 1254206
* CAREER: A Novel Framework for Knowledge Discovery from Time Series Data in Biology and Climate Science
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2021
* Yan Liu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2021
* USD 510,385.00

Recent advances in sensors and high throughput data acquisition technologies
have made it possible to collect massive amount of data, and especially time
series data in a number of domains (e.g., climate sciences, biological
sciences). While a wide range of techniques have been developed for clustering
and mining such data, there has been limited progress on scalable algorithms for
extracting causal relationships from time series data. This project aims to
develop novel machine learning models based on Granger causality to uncover the
complex dependence structures from high-dimensional time series. The resulting
algorithms will be evaluated in the context of two real-world applications
(climate change, computational biology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to address three fundamental challenges of data analysis from time series data,
including: (1) developing the theoretical foundations of causality analysis from
time series data to quantify the gap between Granger causality and true
causality, (2) developing a unified framework to incorporate different types of
domain knowledge in data analysis, and (3) examining effective solutions to
important but usually overlooked practical issues, including irregular nature of
the time series and scalability. The resulting algorithms will be evaluated on
two real applications, i.e., gene regulatory network discovery in immune systems
and climate change attribution, by collaborating with researchers in biology and
climate science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research could impact
multiple application domains where discovery of causal relationships from high
dimensional time series data is of interest. The project is expected to advance
the theoretical foundations of data analytic techniques for time-series data and
provide a unified framework that can easily integrate domain knowledge. The
results of this project can be expected to significantly advance the current
state of the art in eliciting insights regarding causal relationships from time
series data. In addition to the core research advances, this project contributes
easy-to-use software based on workflows for teaching machine learning to
students, researchers and practitioners with a broad range of backgrounds.
Educational and outreach activities include new interdisciplinary courses,
workshops, tutorials, and high-school visits. Software and data resulting from
this work will be freely disseminated to the broader research and educational
community. Additional information about the project can be found at: http://www-
bcf.usc.edu/~liu32/uscTimeSeries.htm.