* 1254899
* CAREER:Carbonyl Inhibition of Butanol Production from Biomass Hydrolysates by Clostridium acetobutylicum
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Maobing Tu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 10/31/2015
* USD 401,155.00

PI: Tu &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1254899 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Butanol is one
of the promising advanced biofuels being pursued by industry for the next
generation of alternative fuels. However, cost-effective production of butanol
from lignocellulosic biomass is still challenging. In particular, hydrolysate
inhibition limits butanol fermentation efficiency. The overall objectives of
this project are to identify fermentation inhibitors in biomass hydrolysates, to
elucidate the alkaline detoxification mechanisms, and to improve butanol
fermentation rates and yields. The specific research objectives of this CAREER
project are to: (1) Establish quantitative structure-activity relationships
(QSAR) between the molecular structure and inhibitory effects of model carbonyl
compounds on microbial fermentation; (2) Identify carbonyl compounds in real
biomass hydrolysates and predict their inhibitory effects on microbial
fermentation; and (3) Design carbonyl-based selective chemical reactions for
detoxifying biomass hydrolysates to improve butanol fermentation with
Clostridium acetobutylicum. The PI?s long-term educational goal is to train the
next generation of scientists and engineers with advanced knowledge and research
experience that will reinvigorate the national forest and biorefinery
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental understanding of carbonyl inhibition in fermentation of
biomass hydrolysates. The results forthcoming are critical for cost-effective
biofuels production from biomass. The central hypothesis of this research is
that the inhibitory effects of biomass hydrolysates on microbial fermentation
are governed by the electrophilic reactivity of carbonyls to the biological
nucleophiles, with that reactivity dominated by physicochemical properties that
are controlled by molecular structure. This hypothesis is based on preliminary
findings, which show an aromatic carbonyl compound can be detoxified through
carbonyl aldol condensation between carbonyl aldehyde and glucose elonate. The
understanding the structure-activity relationships between the molecular
structure and inhibitory effects of biomass-derived toxic compounds would
establish a scientific framework for removing inhibitors cost-effectively in
biofuels production. By integrating computational study and experimental
determination, new information will be generated to correlate carbonyl molecular
structure to their reactivity and inhibitory effects on microbial fermentation.
Building QSAR models to predict these effects makes an important contribution to
biomass processing chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses the national interest of developing
sustainable alternative fuels from renewable resources. This research is
complemented by multi-faceted educational activities involving interdisciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduate students, with a special emphasis on
underrepresented groups, and bioenergy curriculum development. The research
results will be useful for design and use of manufacturing machines and
equipment related to butanol biofuel. The results of this research will be
disseminated through publications and conference presentations, and will advance
scientific discovery of biomass-derived carbonyls and the fundamental
understanding of carbonyl reactions in biomass processing. Successful
undertaking of the proposed work is expected to lead to significant promotion of
biofuels production, which will benefit the nation?s economy, energy security,
environment and society.