* 1254527
* CAREER: Modulation of Kinetic Dispersion at the Single Molecule Level on Individual Catalytic Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Robert Rioux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 425,000.00

Technical/Scientific Merit

The impact of catalysis on the economy and technology of industrialized
countries is impossible to overstate. It is surprising that our current
knowledge of catalyst design that leads to a catalyst capable of desired product
formation with minimal environmental impact is often quite rudimentary.
Heterogeneous catalysis is extremely complex and the dynamics at the catalyst
surface sites during catalytic turnover influences the kinetic outcome of the
reaction. Studying nanoparticle catalysts a single particle at a time with
single turnover resolution will improve our molecular level understanding of the
origins of kinetic dispersion, and will provide insights on how to utilize this
information to design catalysts with optimized activity and selectivity. Robert
M. Rioux of The Pennsylvania State University will provide this level of study
under a NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program Award. Rioux
analogizes the situation to that in biological systems. Single molecule
measurements have revolutionized how biologists think about structure and
function since it was revealed structure is dynamic rather static with changes
in structure occurring while functioning. In heterogeneous catalyst systems,
experimental studies have also provided direct evidence that surface atoms
responsible for catalytic turnover are dynamic, rather than static. However,
measured reactivity is due to an ensemble of surface atoms, and structural
dynamics have not been coupled with reactivity measurements. Understanding how
dynamic structural changes (fluxionality) couple to function is critical to the
design of next generation catalysts since this is direct insight into the
catalytic entity responsible for catalytic turnover.

Rioux will investigate structure-function relationships utilizing single
nanoparticle methods with single turnover resolution coupled with
characterization of the catalytic solid-liquid interface with novel calorimetric
methods and chemical titration. Experimental studies utilizing pro-fluorescent
molecules which convert to fluorophores will be utilized to examine the
relationship between dynamic structural changes ? whether these changes are
associated with the nanoparticle itself or the primary solvation layer -- and
single molecule turnover trajectories. Catalyst variables such as particle size
and their subsequent modification with adsorbates of varying affinity and
chemical character will be examined. The rate of reaction is influenced
drastically by temperature and the influence of temperature-dependent
fluxionality on the catalytic processes will be evaluated. Distribution of
kinetic and thermodynamic parameters associated with proposed rate expressions
will be assessed at the single molecule level and compared with ensemble
equivalents. This work will additionally examine the spatial dependence of
simultaneous turnover on activity and selectivity using a non-fluorescent
reactant that produces two products with different emission characteristics. The
relationship between reaction selectivity and location on the catalytic
nanoparticle will be assessed with correlative microscopy.

Broader Impacts

The results of the proposed research will provide the catalysis/nanoparticle
community with unambiguous structure-function relationships regarding the
kinetics and dynamics of catalytic turnover. The fundamental insight into
catalytic processes gained from single nanoparticle measurements should enable
more efficient catalyst design by providing a dynamic, rather than static
picture of the influence of structure on function.

Educational activities supported by this NSF CAREER proposal focus on the
development of a first year seminar (FYS) to attract and retain particularly
undergraduate female students in the chemical engineering major. The newly-
developed FYS will integrate the PI?s current involvement in AIChE ChemE car
project and provide a ?hands-on? mentored experience for freshmen/sophomore
female students. The FYS will include a component of outreach to the
commonwealth campuses of Penn. State, where female (and male) students do not
have the opportunity to participate in a chemical engineering themed FYS. The PI
along with his graduate students will travel to the commonwealth campuses for
on-site, ?hands-on? demonstrations.