* 1254892
* CAREER: Vector bundles, rational points and homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Aravind Asok, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2020
* USD 479,000.00

The Principal Investigator will study problems regarding projective modules over
commutative unital algebras over a field, and existence of rational points on
special classes of algebraic varieties by transposing ideas from the classical
algebro-topological theory of obstructions to the context of algebraic geometry
by means of the Morel-Voevodsky A^1-homotopy theory. Together with J. Fasel, he
will, for example, attempt to study splitting problems for projective modules of
rank below the dimension by better understanding A^1-homotopy sheaves of
punctured affine spaces. Together with C. Haesemeyer, he will attempt to produce
computable new obstructions to existence of a rational point on smooth algebraic
varieties over a field, again using A^1-homotopy theory. By their very nature,
these problems draw together several branches of mathematics and thus illustrate
the fundamental unity of the subject. To make the techniques used in the above
study and related areas accessible to a new generation of researchers, the PI
will organize a series of summer schools devoted to introducing graduate
students to A^1-homotopy theory and related subjects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry, one of the oldest branches of
mathematics, is at its core concerned with the study of algebraic varieties,
i.e., solutions to systems of polynomial equations in many variables. Algebraic
topology studies the problem of attaching invariants, e.g., numbers or, more
generally, abstract algebraic structures, to spaces in a manner independent of
the way they are pulled and twisted (without being torn). Solutions to systems
of polynomial equations are not obviously amenable to the tools of algebraic
topology, especially when such systems arise from arithmetic. Nevertheless, the
relatively recently introduced subject of A^1-homotopy theory provides a
framework in which one may apply the full power of techniques of algebraic
topology to objects of interest in algebraic geometry---one can treat spaces
having deep arithmetic structure, but a priori limited geometric structure, on
equal footing with spaces that are more inherently geometric. This project aims
to study two general classes of problems by transplanting a very successful
method from algebraic topology (the theory of obstructions) to the setting of
algebraic geometry by means of A^1-homotopy theory. With the goal of making some
ideas involved in the above pursuits accessible to a broader audience, the PI
will collaborate with artist Lun-Yi Tsai to organize public ``dialogues" between
artists and mathematicians to explore some common themes between the
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Algebra and Number
Theory and the Topology programs.