* 1254545
* CAREER / SusChEM: Bio-inspired synthesis of conformationally flexible analogues of the biological oxygen evolving complex: A redesigned approach to manganese cluster molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Zdilla, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Synthesis Program will support the research
of Professor Michael J. Zdilla of Temple University on the oxygen evolving
complex (OEC) of photosystem II that is nature's solution to the most
energetically taxing component of solar water splitting. This catalyst is a
manganese-calcium-oxo cluster which undergoes structural rearrangements via a
5-stage catalytic cycle whereby it oxidizes water to oxygen, pumps protons
across the thylakoid membrane, and harvests reducing equivalents for energy
storage in sugars. In this area there is relatively extensive model chemistry of
manganese clusters but the rearrangement chemistry and cluster flexibility, key
components to the action of the OEC, are not well represented in the literature.
Prof Zdilla's research program has two main foci: 1) the design and preparation
of manganese clusters of enhanced flexibility via the avoidance of stabilizing
chelating ligands, which lock cluster cores in place, and 2) study of reaction
and rearrangement chemistry of these systems, especially in comparison to the
well-established, more stable chelate clusters.

Global energy demand continues to grow exponentially while fossil fuel reserves
continue to be depleted. To meet world energy demands, new solar energy
technology must be developed. Nature's selection of a manganese cluster cofactor
to achieve the difficult water oxidation reaction of photosynthesis suggests
these molecules possess enormous transformative power for solar-powered water
activation. The proposed work will pursue these goals in work that affords the
opportunity for training of graduate and undergraduate students, and also
provides minority training opportunities at Temple, one of the most ethnically
and culturally diverse urban schools in the United States. The PI will continue
his involvement in science outreach in the Philadelphia area through
organizations like the Chemical Heritage Foundation, Nerd Nite Cafe, and the
Philadelphia Science Festival. He will also pursue, along with the worldwide
crystallographic community, the development of a much needed database of X-ray
crystallographic educational resources, accessible to all teachers and students
of crystallography, with the aim of providing extensive educational resources
for this multi-field discipline.