* 1254688
* CAREER: End-of-life material flows from emerging lithium-ion battery systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Callie Babbitt, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,355.00

1254688 (Babbitt) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify and
characterize projected end-of-life (EOL) flows and attendant resource
implications associated with deployment of lithium-ion batteries required for
broad adoption of electric vehicles. While these batteries are a promising
energy storage solution, their potential environmental tradeoffs are not well
characterized. Recent work has focused on supply side issues, such as lithium
availability, but key uncertainties surround the emergence and management of
these batteries in the waste stream and the ability of domestic recycling
infrastructure to recover scarce and valuable materials from a highly variable
mix of discarded batteries. A proactive approach is required to prevent
potential impacts of EOL battery generation and management. This project will
generate a comprehensive assessment of EOL battery flows and material recovery
potential, and to do so, will combine novel industrial ecology models with
empirical approaches. The integrated research and education plan will address
four challenges: (1) The volume and rate that lithium-ion batteries will reach
the waste stream are unknown and not easily estimated with existing industrial
ecology methods like material flow analysis (MFA), due to the "mismatch" between
life spans of batteries and vehicles in which they are used. This project will
adapt age-structured population models from biological ecology to create a
"mixed lifespan material flow model" to forecast future waste flows of lithium-
ion batteries; (2) Implementing this model is dependent on estimates of battery
and vehicle life spans and future adoption rates, which are not fully
characterized. Surveys, scenario modeling, and empirical methods will be used to
parameterize the MFA and create fundamental data that can inform future study on
batteries and sustainability; (3) The extent to which critical minerals and
other valuable metals can be recovered to the global supply chain through
battery recycling is unknown. This project will combine material flow results
with empirical characterization of EOL battery material content and an
assessment of domestic lithium-ion battery recycling capacity. This "reverse
supply chain" will be evaluated against estimates of material demand required
for battery adoption; (4) Systems-level sustainability considerations are often
absent when new technology is developed. An integrated education program on
"Life Cycle Thinking for Energy Storage Systems" will be built from research
findings and shared with key stakeholders. The approach and industrial ecology
models applied here provide insight to EOL batteries, but are translatable to
other sectors (e.g., renewable energy systems). Research will be integrated into
educational modules developed for a series of summer enrichment programs aimed
at engaging K-12 students, primarily from underrepresented groups, in battery
and sustainability research and inspiring them to pursue a sustainable
engineering career.