* 1254934
* CAREER: Physics-based modeling techniques to enable high-performance nanoplasmonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Georgios Veronis, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop physics-based modeling techniques to enable high-performance
nanoplasmonic devices for optical information processing. The approach is to
first develop physics-based models for plasmonic waveguides and devices. These
models will then be used to develop efficient optimization techniques of multi-
parameter nanoplasmonic devices which greatly reduce the required number of
computationally expensive full-wave device simulations. In addition, modeling
techniques for nanoplasmonic devices which calculate the effect of random
manufacturing imperfections will be developed. These techniques will also be
utilized to design robust nanoplasmonic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
physics-based modeling techniques could lead to the development of both active
and passive novel nanoplasmonic devices with optimal performance and minimum
size for high-density optical information processing. The realization of such
devices would tremendously expand the applicability of plasmonics, and would
have profound implications for computing and
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will represent important breakthroughs in integrated optics,
optical information processing, and renewable energy sources, which have broad
impacts on modern technology and human life. As part of the proposed educational
activities, a new course on modeling techniques for nanophotonic devices will be
introduced. In addition, the simulation tools and course materials will be
globally disseminated. Special focus will also be placed on local outreach and
recruitment of minority students. Through outreach to three local high-schools
with a strong science curriculum, students will be introduced to the field of
nanophotonics to generate excitement for careers in science and technology.