* 1254213
* CAREER: Investigation of thermal phonon scattering processes in solids
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Austin Minnich, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2018
* USD 417,352.00

1254213&lt;br/&gt;Minnich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat conduction is central to
numerous and diverse technologies, ranging from power generation, to
electronics, to lasers. Increasingly in these applications, heat conduction
occurs at scales much less than a micron, comparable to the fundamental length
scales of the heat carriers themselves. For example, nanostructured
thermoelectrics may contain engineered structures as small as a few nanometers;
these nanoscale materials are 50% more efficient at converting heat to
electricity than their macroscopic counterparts. However, further advances are
difficult to achieve because of a poor understanding of the lattice vibration,
or phonon, scattering processes that largely determine a material?s thermal
conductivity. Despite over 50 years of investigation, the mean free paths (MFPs)
of phonons, which describe how phonons scatter when they interact with other
phonons, defects, and nanostructures, are unknown in most materials. This
experimental and computational investigation will provide a comprehensive
understanding of thermal phonon scattering. Novel experimental methods that have
been developed only recently will be used to measure MFP distributions across
length scales ranging from nanometers to millimeters. The effect of different
scattering mechanisms on specific phonon modes will be obtained by observing the
changes in the MFP distribution as mass defects, grain boundaries,
nanoprecipitates, and other nanostructures are systematically introduced into
the material. Analytical expressions for the MFPs, which are of great utility to
researchers in the field, will be created and validated against the experimental
results using numerical solutions of the Boltzmann transport equation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our scientific knowledge of heat
conduction and enable many applications, particularly in the energy field.
Scientifically, the investigation will provide a comprehensive understanding of
the complex thermal phonon scattering process, which has eluded scientists for
decades, as well as experimentally validate fundamental computational
predictions of thermal phonon scattering rates. Practically, this research will
enable engineers to design materials with precisely tailored thermal
conductivities before fabrication rather than by trial-and-error, a major
advance over present capabilities. This ability would lead to many applications,
such as highly efficient cars that harvest useful electricity from wasted heat
in the tailpipe, environmentally friendly refrigerators that do not use any
harmful fluids, and electronic devices with reduced power consumption.