* 1254594
* CAREER: Novel Engineered Nanostructured Complex Oxide Thermoelectric Materials for High Temperature Power Generation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Xueyan Song, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 613,560.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Industry power plants, exhaust from
turbine engines and automobiles generate an enormous amount of heat that is
unproductively released into the environment, thereby wasting vast amount of
thermal energy. A potential way to improve the sustainability of our energy
infrastructure and electricity base is through waste heat recovery using
thermoelectric power generators that possess the ability to directly transform
temperature differentials into electrical power. Oxide materials, such as newly
developed non-toxic calcium cobaltite (CCO) are particularly promising for
applications in thermoelectric power generators because of their stability in
air even at high temperatures. The current challenge for developing
thermoelectric oxide is to improve the energy conversion efficiency, which is
currently lower than that of the conventional thermoelectric materials. This
CAREER project explores the key nanostructure science and engineering processes
necessary to improve the energy conversion efficiency of thermoelectric oxide.
The educational aspect of this project involves training both graduate and
undergraduate students, and broadening the participation of underrepresented
student groups in materials science and engineering research. To introduce the
novel concept of thermoelectric materials and energy sustainability to the
broader society, high school teachers are involved in the project through the
existing Teachers Research Experience for the Advancement of Knowledge program
at West Virginia University. The high school teachers are collecting their lab
experiences in a journal, and designing and developing teaching materials about
advanced materials for energy application for their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The current
challenge for developing thermoelectric oxide is to improve the conversion
efficiency, which is currently lower than that of the conventional
thermoelectric materials. The objective of this CAREER project is to improve the
energy conversion properties of oxide CCO, through nanostructure engineering
approaches. This project explores novel doping and thermal transport tailoring
strategies in CCO with engineered nanoscale inclusions, through experimental
synthesis/measurement and transmission electron microscopy. In particular, this
project utilizes the synergetic combination of different defects including
dopants, and nanoscale inclusions in CCO to enhance the electrical transport
properties and minimize thermal conductivity simultaneously. The successful
completion of this project is expected to identify the key nanostructure
engineering processes necessary to improve the energy conversion efficiency of
oxide ceramics that could be utilized for high temperature applications, such as
applications in fossil energy power plants and automobiles. While the above
research will have direct impact on the development of thermoelectric oxide, the
fundamental knowledge on the nanostructure engineering of ceramic materials
gained from the research will be instrumental to many other ceramic systems.
Those systems include oxide refractory materials and oxide thermal barrier
coatings for gas turbines that can benefit significantly from engineered thermal
conductivity reductions. This CAREER project has a strong focus on integration
of research and education at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, for
carrying out cutting-edge research in advanced ceramics for energy harvesting,
and nanoscale science and technology.