* 1254739
* CAREER:Variational Inequalities: A New Paradigm for Cognitive Network Layering
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Gesualdo Scutari, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 10/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Objective. The goal of this project is to progress towards a systematic and
better understanding of distributed cognitive layering and consequent network
architecture decompositions, based on the advanced theory of Variational
Inequalities. The ultimate objective is developing a new methodology to
formulate, study, and solve in a distributed way generic cross-layer designs of
cognitive ad-hoc networks (including the optimization of the sensing process),
building on a novel framework that collectively is termed hierarchical
Variational Inequalities.

Intellectual Merit. The theory of Variational Inequalities provides a broad
mathematical framework for a host of formulations of practical interest, such as
classical nonlinear optimization, equilibrium, and game-theoretic problems. The
proposed hierarchical Variational Inequality problem offers thus a constructive
and powerful platform to investigate several novel cross-layer designs, and
provides an alternative and promising direction to deal with the fundamental
issues of traditional NUM designs.

Broader Impact. Success in the proposed research effort has the potential to
change how to teach and design cognitive wireless networks. This research will
enable efficient, rigorous, and cost-effective new approaches for the design of
complex networks, which will represent a shift from current heuristic based
approaches. Moreover, bringing for the first time Variational Inequalities in
engineering disciplines, the project will promote cross-fertilization among
different research fields, such as signal processing, optimization, game and
decision theory, and networking, offering to researchers in these communities a
constructive and powerful platform for fruitful developments. The research
project is well rounded by a complementary educational program that targets both
undergraduate and graduate students.