* 1254839
* CAREER:  Understanding the Physiocochemical and Systems-Level Processes that Would Enable Sustainable CO2 Sequestration in Shales
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Andres Clarens, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 441,352.00

1254839 (Clarens)

This project seeks to understand the processes that would enable geologic
storage of CO2 in fractured shale formations. Two objectives will be pursued to
achieve this overarching goal. The first is to study the physicochemical
processes, e.g., interfacial properties like wettability and bubble rheology and
physical and chemical characteristics like residual trapping and sorption, in
multicomponent and multiphase systems containing CO2, brine, minerals, and
hydrocarbons. Experimental methods at several spatial scales will be used to
test the hypothesis that CO2 can enhance CH4 extraction from low permeability
shales and that these formations can be managed as repositories for geological
carbon sequestration (GCS). The second objective is to model the systems-level
processes driving the industrial ecology of carbon cycling by the oil and gas
industry. Life cycle analysis will be used to understand how and when the
technology proposed here might be implemented to achieve large-scale climate
benefits. Geospatial analysis, scenario development, and multicriteria decision
analysis will be used to evaluate the long-term viability of coupled shale gas
and GCS deployment. In support of this research effort, the PI will carry out an
integrated education project studying novel pedagogical techniques based on the
boundary object literature for teaching climate change. The boundary object
approach focuses students on common ideas, tools, or frameworks (e.g.,
schematics or models) that can be used by groups to start dialog, build
consensus, and successfully collaborate. This work will make the following
contributions to the academic literature: (1) measure the interfacial properties
that will govern the reactive transport of CO2 through shales; (2) identify the
chemical formulations that would enable the use of CO2-based "green" fracturing
fluids as substitutes for water-based fluids; and (3) test approaches for
"healing" shales post extraction using CO2 to minimize the risks of induced
seismicity and leakage. These outcomes could help improve well production over
time and lead to long term stable repositories for CO2. GCS is attractive
because it is proven and could scale large enough to meaningfully reduce
worldwide carbon emissions. Systems models of known shale reservoirs will
estimate the total sequestration capacity of these formations. This project will
build much-needed understanding of how ongoing fuel development will impact
climate dynamics and will directly inform the economic and legal consequences of
GCS. This understanding will reduce the uncertainties currently associated with
unconventional fuel deployment and with GCS in saline aquifers. Both could have
unforeseen environmental, economic, legal, and social impacts if developed
improperly. Shale gas and GCS are now poised for broad deployment. Consequently,
this work is timely for meeting national greenhouse gas and energy independence
objectives.

In support of this research effort, the PI will carry out an integrated
education project studying novel pedagogical techniques based on the boundary
object literature for teaching climate change. The boundary object approach
focuses students on common ideas, tools, or frameworks (e.g., schematics or
models) that can be used by groups to start dialog, build consensus, and
successfully collaborate. The PI will identify and test these boundary objects
in a variety of settings, including a new Introduction to Green Engineering
course being developed for second year undergraduates.