* 1254569
* CAREER: Evaluating the Impacts of River Engineering and Stream Restoration Projects on the Ecosystem Service of Floodwave Attenuation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Mark Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 403,847.00

ABSTRACT 1254569 (Stone).

The research goal of this CAREER award is to discover the degree to which river
engineering, watershed management, and stream restoration efforts impact the
ecosystem service of floodwave attenuation. To accomplish this goal, the
following three research objectives will be pursued: (1) improve conceptual and
numerical models of the process of floodwave attenuation with an emphasis on the
influence of channel-floodplain interactions on flood hydrodynamics; (2)
evaluate the impacts of historical river engineering and watershed management
activities on the ecosystem service of floodwave attenuation within the Middle
Rio Grande (MRG); and (3) assess the potential to enhance floodwave attenuation
within the MRG through restoration. Flume experiments and field observations
will be used to test and refine a conceptual model of the physical processes
controlling channel-floodplain interactions. The improved understanding of flood
hydrodynamics will be incorporated into hydraulic models to more accurately
represent floodwave propagation. Using historical reconstructions of river
conditions, models will be used to investigate changes in floodwave attenuation
in the MRG as a result of human activities. Finally, using alternative future
restoration scenarios, the potential for enhancing floodwave attenuation through
MRG restoration activities will be evaluated. The long-term education goal is to
advance water resources engineering training in the U.S. towards more holistic
and sustainable practices while increasing participation by underrepresented
students. In pursuit of this goal, the educational objectives of this CAREER
award are to: (1) create an integrated research and educational program focused
on sustainable management of rivers and their floodplains; and (2) increase
participation of underrepresented students in engineering and science programs
at the University of New Mexico. These goals will be pursued through an
education plan that includes: (1) outreach to underserved K-12 students through
hands-on learning activities to teach them about watersheds and human
interactions with the Rio Grande; (2) collaboration with faculty and Native
American students at the Southwest Indian Polytechnic Institute on both
educational and research components of this project; and (3) involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students in all aspects of the project.