* 1254340
* CAREER: Molecular Rheology of Architecturally Complex Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Charles Schroeder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

1254340 Schroeder

Polymers underlie an untold number of technologies ranging from consumer
products to electronics. Despite recent progress in the field, a full
understanding of the flow properties of entangled polymer solutions is lacking.
A major challenge in polymer processing arises from the unusually complex flow
dynamics of branched polymers, wherein molecular topology ultimately determines
macroscopic material response. Traditionally, bulk rheological methods have been
used to study polymer flows, but these methods average away individual molecular
motions. To overcome these challenges, a new molecular approach to probe
dynamics is required.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed research aims to provide a molecular-level view
of branched polymer dynamics in flow using single molecule methods. Polymer
stress relaxation and the non-linear flow properties of entangled comb polymers
will be studied, and single polymer data obtained from experiments will be
compared to theoretical models. In this way, direct observation of backbone and
branch relaxation at the molecular level will be pursued, facilitated by using
dual-color fluorescent dyes on the backbone and side-chain branches. The
proposed research relies on three innovative technologies developed in the PI's
lab: (1) custom synthesis of linear and branched single stranded DNA (ssDNA)
polymers with properties similar to synthetic chains, (2) dual-color labeling of
branched ssDNA polymers at architecturally-specific locations such as backbones
and branches, and (3) automated microfluidic-based flow systems that allow for
controlled fluid flows, combined with single molecule imaging of polymer
conformations with nanoscale resolution.

Broader Impacts. This research will provide a detailed molecular-level view of
entangled topological networks, thereby establishing a direct link between the
molecular properties of branched polymers and macroscopic flow properties (e.g.,
viscosity and stress). The proposed combined custom synthesis and molecular
imaging approach will allow for the guided design of polymeric materials with
tailored properties that give rise to a desired processing response. In this
way, the proposed work will provide crucial insight into the improved processing
and manufacturing of branched polymers. The proposed work also integrates
cutting-edge research in molecular rheology with the educational training of
graduate and undergraduate students, which is accomplished by mentoring students
to work in a collaborative workspace. Educational outreach will be incorporated
by working with the Illinois iRise program, which actively engages local K-12
high school science teachers in the Urbana-Champaign area to develop
experimental labs for the classroom, and mentors middle and high school students
from underrepresented groups, with a particular focus on sparking an interest in
science through hands-on experiments. The proposed research also includes
participation in the Multicultural Engineering Recruitment for Graduate
Education (MERGE) program at the University of Illinois, which aims to recruit
students from underrepresented groups in engineering.