* 1254415
* CAREER: Nanostructured Thin Films for Substrate-Mediated Gene Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Angela Pannier, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 419,051.00

1254415-Pannier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal is an integrated
research and education program that focuses on development of novel
nanostructured surfaces that result in high levels of gene delivery to mammalian
cells. Gene delivery is the transfer of DNA into a cell, which allows for the
introduction of a gene to confer new properties to a cell or to correct mutated
genes. Specifically, gene delivery approaches have tremendous potential in
therapeutics to correct genetic deficiencies or abnormalities, to guide tissue
regeneration, and in the development of new assays for diagnostics. The
scientific goal of this proposal is to design nanostructured, slanted columnar
thin films (SCTFs) as new surfaces for gene delivery, and to understand how SCTF
topography can further improve DNA transfer. These novel nanostructured SCTF
surfaces will be designed to load and deliver DNA to cells, as well as prime
adhered cells for optimal uptake of DNA as a result of nanotopographical
influence. These surfaces will result in increased gene transfer efficiency and
cellular function, with applications that would impact the medical and
biotechnological communities, ranging from the development of nanostructured
substrates for culture studies, bioreactors, and biotechnological assays, to the
development of biomaterials for implants or tissue engineering scaffolds that
promote gene transfer. The proposed research will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of relationships between nanotopography and cellular phenotypes
and DNA transfer, allowing for rational design of biomaterial interfaces for
gene delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will integrate
interdisciplinary research, education, and diversity by extending the research
objectives into teaching, training, and learning exercises at multiple
educational levels. The education goal is to attain excellence in research and
educational integration through innovative and interdisciplinary learning
experiences that prepare a new, diverse, and outstanding future biomedical
engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program of the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division, by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cell Biology and
by the Office of the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).