* 1254902
* CAREER: Semiconductor Detectors for Direct Probing of the Absolute Phase of Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Lingze Duan, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 407,898.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to develop a technology that allows
direct measurement of the carrier-envelope phase of ultrafast pulses using
semiconductor devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: First, the
carrier-envelope phase (CEP) of ultrafast pulses is considered an absolute phase
of light as its definition is independent of a second light wave. Finding a low-
cost approach to measure CEP would allow this fundamental parameter become
widely accessible, hence opening up a new dimension in optical information
processing, optical sensing and precision metrology. Second, CEP control is an
enabling technology for the emerging atto-science and zepto-science. Accessing
such short time scales requires the use of intense few-cycle infrared pulses
with precisely tailored field patterns. Such a feat cannot be accomplished
without a reliable method to probe the CEP. Current CEP-detection techniques,
however, are prohibitively complex and expensive. The proposed research exploits
the excellent coherence features offered by semiconductor nanoparticles and aims
to develop a semiconductor-based CEP-probing scheme with possible electronic
readout, which may eventually open up the access to the atto-second world for
most of the researchers around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The broader impacts are: (1) creating a new research thrust of ultrafast
dynamics in semiconductors at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, (2)
strengthening the integration of research and education by supporting
extracurricular student optics club activities, and (3) building an optics
education hub in the northern Alabama region through close collaboration with
local optics/photonics professional societies and through a wide range of
outreach activities.