* 1254273
* CAREER: Low Temperature Microplasmas For Thermal Energy Conversion, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* David Go, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Low Temperature Microplasmas For Thermal Energy
Conversion, Education, and Outreach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermionic energy
conversion (TEC) is the direct conversion of heat to electricity by the
thermal&lt;br/&gt;(thermionic) emission of electrons from a very hot surface.
Though historically pursued primarily&lt;br/&gt;for electricity production from
nuclear sources in space applications, it has the potential to be
used&lt;br/&gt;terrestrially for waste heat, solar, or nuclear energy
conversion. To meet this objective, however,&lt;br/&gt;TEC must be enhanced to
operate more efficiently at lower temperatures than historically
possible.&lt;br/&gt;Microplasma thermionic energy conversion occurs when a
microplasma (ionized gas) is ignited&lt;br/&gt;between a thermionic diode with
an electrode spacing ~1-20 micrometers. This mode of operation&lt;br/&gt;could
enable operation in inert gases, at near atmospheric pressures, and at lower
temperatures - all&lt;br/&gt;necessary features for practical terrestrial
application. Understanding of the fundamental interaction&lt;br/&gt;between
thermionic emission and microplasmas will be advanced by this research in order
to pave&lt;br/&gt;the way for microplasma-TEC devices. First principles theory
and simulations will be used to reveal&lt;br/&gt;the inter-dependence between a
microplasma and thermionic emission, and experiments will be&lt;br/&gt;conducted
to confirm the enhancement of thermionic emission by a microplasma necessary to
realize&lt;br/&gt;improved energy conversion efficiency. Carbon-based
electrodes, including diamond and carbon&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes, will be
synthesized using a microplasma jet processing technique and used as
electrodes&lt;br/&gt;in microplasma-TEC experiments. In addition to the efficacy
of microplasma-TEC being established&lt;br/&gt;by this research, fundamental
studies will also advance the basic understanding of
plasma/electrode&lt;br/&gt;coupling, where there are persistent questions that
affect a wide variety of technologies from highintensity&lt;br/&gt;discharge
lamps to arc-based materials deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct thermal-to-
electrical energy conversion can be used to convert solar, nuclear, and waste
heat&lt;br/&gt;to electricity, and energy conversion technologies will play an
important role in creating a more&lt;br/&gt;energy efficient and independent
nation. The discoveries made by this research will lay the&lt;br/&gt;foundation
for practical, terrestrial TEC devices that could become an essential part of
the energy&lt;br/&gt;economy, greatly impacting energy security in the United
States. Further, undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;from underrepresented
minorities will be engaged in this research early in their careers, creating
a&lt;br/&gt;more effective undergraduate research experience and increasing the
number that achieve graduate&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering degrees. Using a
service-learning approach, outreach to the local K-8 youth&lt;br/&gt;in the
community will be led by these undergraduates including the creation of a plasma
exhibit for a&lt;br/&gt;community-wide science festival and a targeted,
interactive outreach program on environmental&lt;br/&gt;science for middle
school students. These undergraduate students will be exposed to the
fulfilling&lt;br/&gt;nature of outreach and also inspire a large number of K-8
youth toward science and engineering,&lt;br/&gt;creating a perpetuating
educational cycle in which each generation fosters the
inspiration,&lt;br/&gt;excitement, and development of the next generation.