* 1254399
* CAREER: Plasmonic Nanoclusters with Built-in Artificial Antibodies for Label-free Biosensing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Srikanth Singamaneni, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1254399 - Singamaneni

Plasmonic sensors hold enormous potential for the development of low-cost,
label-free, point-of-care biodiagnostics, rapid chemical detection and
environmental monitoring. However, two major challenges need to be overcome to
reap the benefits of this class of biosensors: (i) state-of-theart plasmonic
biosensors either offer limited sensitivity or are impractical for real-world
applications due to their poor stability and excessive cost; (ii) these
biosensors rely on natural antibodies, which are high-cost and impose severe
limitations in handling, storage and device integration. We propose to realize
highly sensitive and inexpensive plasmonic sensors. The focus of the proposed
effort will be hierarchically ordered, self-assembled arrays of chemically
synthesized plasmonic nanostructures. We will incorporate artificial monoclonal
antibodies and demonstrate these to be a highly sensitive, specific, stable and
low-cost biodiagnostic platform. This will be achieved through orientation-
controlled molecular imprinting.

This proposal will lead to development of simpler and more robust biosensors for
detection of multiple important compounds. This will be achieved by replacing
antibodies - complicated, expensive and unstable molecules - with artificial
equivalents based on less expensive and more stable materials. In addition,
novel nanotechnology approaches will be used for detection.