* 1254760
* CAREER: Transition, Turbulence and Mixing in Shock-Accelerated Variable Density Flows at Extreme Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Devesh Ranjan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 10/31/2014
* USD 406,352.00

1254760&lt;br/&gt;Ranjan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies of mixing focus on
the role played by instabilities and turbulence in an incompressible medium.
However, compressibility and shocks play a critical role in many practical
applications. Some examples are understanding the behavior of plumes in volcanic
eruptions, design of more efficient fuel pellets for inertial confinement
fusion, fragmentation of gallstones or kidney stones by shock waves, and
development of energy-efficient scramjet engines. Understanding the mixing
process in such complex flows presents a set of truly fundamental and open
problems of in fluid mechanics that still remain to be solved. This CAREER
project advances our knowledge precisely in this context, which can then be
applied to these practical applications. The scientific goal of the CAREER
project is to produce, diagnose, and simulate shock-driven turbulent flows in a
compressible system. The system decouples hydrodynamic instabilities from the
effects of radiation and plasma. The approach is to use a newly built variable-
inclination shock tube with 11.5cm Ã— 11.5cm square inner cross-section, equipped
with the state-of-the-art laser diagnostics (3D Particle Image Velocimetry,
Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence, as well as Rayleigh-Scattering), to answer
critical scientific questions associated with shock-driven variable-density
flows in configurations and regimes which have not yet been
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will quantify
the effects of initial conditions (single and multimode), incident shock wave
Mach numbers (M), and density contrast on the perturbation growth and mixing
rate, as well as to determine the existence of self-similar scaling laws and the
critical value of Reynolds number and length scales necessary for transition to
occur in these extreme mixing environments. Experiments conducted as part of
this project will provide the first detailed turbulence statistics measurements
(i.e., Reynolds stresses, density-velocity correlations and their spectra) for
shock-accelerated variable density flows at M &gt; 2.0 and will inform physics-
based models used in simulations by testing them under more realistic
conditions. This research will help develop the capability to accurately predict
and model extreme mixing, potentially leading to advances in a number of fields:
energy, environment (atmospheric and oceanographic), aerospace engineering,
chemical processing, homeland security and, most pertinently, inertial
confinement fusion (ICF) devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
integrated Education Plan will engage first-generation college students in
experimental design and operation, support a woman graduate student to work on
the proposed research, and use visualization and team-based approaches to
improve students' understanding of concepts and promote communication and
teamwork skills that are vital to success. The involvement of first generation
students in research will lead to enhanced retention and success rates for these
students in the department. An applet-based visual learning environment will
enhance learning and retention of the material presented in class by allowing
students to observe the dynamic phenomena and explore the effects of varying a
parameter on the resulting solution. To increase awareness among the general
public about shock-driven flows and their potential applications, we plan to
work with a local high school teacher to create informational videos about our
research and experimental facilities, post them on YouTube, and make them
available to teachers for use in the classroom.