* 1254215
* CAREER: Molecular Sieve Inclusion Nanocomposite (MoSIN) Membranes for Liquid Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2021
* Mary Laura Lind, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 521,714.00

Proposal: 1254215 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Lind&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the
PI plans to develop and characterize a new class of chemically resistant
Molecular Sieve Inclusion Nanocomposite (MoSIN) membranes for liquid
separations. These MoSIN membranes will incorporate selective molecular sieve
nanoparticles into barrier-polymeric thin films for osmotic and pervaporation
applications. This is a new research direction that leverages the PI's extensive
experience with synthesis and characterization of zeolite-polyamide
nanocomposite reverse osmosis membranes and the extensive research facilities
available at Arizona State University. The PI will perform experiments to
isolate the intrinsic transport properties of the components of model mixed-
matrix membrane systems. The PI will couple fabrication experiments with
rigorous characterization to elucidate the impact of fabrication conditions on
MoSIN membranes, material structure, and liquid separation properties. Unlike
traditional polymeric liquid filtration membranes, the design does not require
the polymer matrix to have liquid permeability; this enables the use of a
broader spectrum of polymers. A unique aspect of the membrane design concept is
that the molecular sieve nanoparticles will penetrate the thickness of the
barrier polymeric film, avoiding problems with polymeric blocking of the
molecular sieve pores. This new paradigm in membrane design will enable the
MoSIN membranes to be processed as polymers. Broader Impacts: The MoSIN membrane
concept represents a new paradigm in liquid separation technology to develop a
robust membrane for liquid separations. This concept is applicable to reverse
osmosis, forward osmosis, micro and nanofiltration, pervaporation for biofuel
recovery, and should be extendable to gas separations. The overall goal of the
educational activities of the project is to integrate the research, focused on
sustainable engineering solutions for water and energy production, with
education of students at multiple stages in the scientific pipeline from K-12
students to graduate students. To do this, the PI will develop a new six-week
summer teacher-internship program for K-12 teachers. In this program the PI and
her students will work with one teacher per year from a local school. Together
they will develop new teaching modules relating concepts from the research to
the grade-appropriate skills taught in the classroom. They will visit the
teacher's science classroom during the academic year to facilitate
implementation of the newly developed module. The PI will also collaborate with
the Science is Fun program at Arizona State University to disseminate the water-
filtration experiment she has developed to a large, diverse group of middle and
high school students throughout the greater Phoenix metropolitan area.