* 1254636
* SusChEM: CAREER: Catalytic Methods for Hydrofunctionalization of Unsaturated Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Gojko Lalic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2018
* USD 650,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Gojko Lalic of the University of Washington to
investigate new general strategies for the hydrofunctionalization of unsaturated
compounds using transition metal catalysis. The research group is first studying
the highly selective copper-catalyzed reduction of alkynes to alkenes. This
practical method avoids common side reactions such as over-reduction and alkene
isomerization. Copper-catalyzed anti-Markovnikov hydrobromination reactions of
terminal alkynes are also under investigation. These new catalytic reactions for
the preparation of alkenyl bromides provide valuable alternatives to
stoichiometric methods currently used for the synthesis of this class of
compounds. A third aim of Professor Lalic's copper-catalyzed chemistry is the
synthesis of Z- and E-alkenes via the hydroalkylation of alkynes. Finally, the
research group is investigating a new general approach to the asymmetric
synthesis of quaternary stereocenters based on gold-catalyzed
hydrofunctionalization of chiral allenes. Using this approach, new methods for
the synthesis of enantioenriched tetrahydrofurans, tetrahydropyrans, chromans,
pyrroles, piperidines, and a variety of carbocyles containing quaternary
stereocenters are under investigation. In addition to providing valuable tools
for organic synthesis, Prof. Lalic is active in promoting STEM education at two
local high schools by contributing to guest lectures and participating in school
science fairs and in Seattle-area science exhibits.

The selective reduction of triple bonds to double bonds is a common and
important transformation in organic chemistry. These reactions are currently
achieved using a 5% by weight palladium catalyst (Lindlar catalysts) which makes
it very expensive. Furthermore, the current transformations can be unpredictable
- leading to the formation of unwanted single bonds (alkane compounds) and so
the reaction must be closely monitored to achieve high levels product formation
or a significant amount of waste will form and need to be separated and disposed
of, again, increasing the cost of materials and energy associated with the
commercial processes. Professor Lalic and his group at the University of
Washington are preparing new, relatively inexpensive, copper catalysts that will
take the place of palladium in the selective conversion of triple bonds (alkyne
compounds) to double bonds (alkene compounds). These reactions are especially
important because they use earth abundant metals which provide reliable and
sustainable access to organic compounds which are important in medicines and
pharmaceuticals as well as in other fine chemicals. In additional to providing
his students with excellent laboratory training in organic synthesis, Dr. Lalic
has established and maintained a database of problems in organic and
organometallic chemistry that is available to the academic community. Professor
Lalic seeks to address non-representative participation of minorities and women
in science by contributing to science enrichment programs. These efforts - guest
lectures at West Seattle High School and Ingraham High School, participation in
the Hamilton International Middle School Science Fair, and participation in the
Seattle-area science exhibit called Paws on Science at the Pacific Science
Center and the University of Washington - promote chemistry as a career choice
among elementary and middle school students.