* 1254159
* CAREER:   Automated extraction of vessel data from images to construct new models for vascular networks in plants and animals
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Van Savage, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 796,325.00

Blood is pumped from the heart to the capillaries through a highly branched and
interconnected network known as the cardiovascular system, with vessel sizes
that range from microns to centimeters and blood flow speeds that differ by a
factor of 1000. Similar types of vascular networks are essential for the flow of
resources in nearly all multicellular organisms, including plants (xylem
networks), insects (tracheal networks), and mammals. Understanding which
evolutionary principles and environmental factors drive the structure of
vascular networks, and what constrains the flow through them, could help lead to
a better understanding of organismic structure and function with implications
for systems as diverse as forests, food webs, and even tumors. This research
project will supply the data needed to directly test existing models and to
develop new, more realistic models. Outputs will be new software for extracting
vascular data from images (e.g., Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed
Tomography (CT)), a large database for vascular measurements in plants and
animals, identification of branching patterns common to specific taxa or
tissues, and new theory. Measurements will include vessel radii, lengths,
branching ratios, and branching angles. Existing models are contradicted by some
preliminary results, including asymmetric branching (two daughter vessels of
different sizes and different flow) and deviations from self-similarity (similar
branching patterns recurring across scales). New models will be constructed to
incorporate these findings and used to predict connections between the geometry
of and flow through vascular networks. A key prediction of models will be
scaling exponents that describe how the number of capillaries changes with
network volume. In an attempt to enable quick translation of branching geometry
into predictions for flow rate, techniques will be adapted to classify vascular
networks according to a suite of these characteristic scaling exponents.

Closely integrated with these research objectives are three educational goals:
1) teach students how to use image recognition software to extract data from
images across biological fields, including museum collections and labs, 2) teach
students how to translate empirical results into equations and test specific,
mechanistic hypotheses, and 3) motivate data sharing with the public and
scientific community via websites for large, comprehensive databases that will
accelerate scientific research and community outreach. High school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers will
all be trained during this research. Notably, summer research experiences for
three high school students will be provided for each year of the project. A
critical aspect of this training is in teaching students how to combine theory
and empirical data and how to disseminate research findings through
publications, websites, curricular materials, and talks at professional meetings
as well as outreach. The PI has experience educating and training students at
all levels and will actively recruit students from under-represented groups to
engage in informatics research. Publications, databases, code, and curricular
materials will all be made available through websites. Together, this work will
provide an example of how computer vision techniques can be used to extract data
from biological images around the world.