* 1254298
* CAREER: Methodology for Optimization via Simulation: Bayesian Methods, Frequentist Guarantees, and Applications to Cardiovascular Medicine
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Peter Frazier, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
to develop improved methods for optimization via simulation, and to apply them
to decision-making problems in cardiovascular medicine. Optimization via
simulation is required whenever we wish to find the best among several options,
and evaluating the quality of an option requires running a stochastic
simulation. Two types of improved methods will be developed. First, methods for
ranking and selection will be developed using a link between Bayesian average-
case and frequentist worst-case performance. These methods promise to produce
solutions more quickly than do existing methods, with frequentist statistical
guarantees on solution quality that are tighter and whose form is more natural
for engineering applications. Second, multistart gradient-based methods will be
developed using Bayesian value of information analysis to efficiently allocate
simulation effort across starts, allowing those starts more likely to have high-
quality local optima to converge first. These methods promise to produce high-
quality solutions more quickly than do existing approaches for allocating
simulation effort across starts. The new methods will be demonstrated via
application to two problems in cardiovascular medicine: the design of post-
operative surveillance strategies for patients undergoing endovascular aneurysm
repair; and the design and placement of grafts in patients undergoing bypass
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will both serve as an
enabling technology within operations research, and will have specific benefits
within cardiovascular medicine. Better post-operative surveillance will allow
problems occurring after surgery to be detected more quickly, reducing the risk
of aneurysm rupture. Better graft design will improve the reliability and
longevity of surgical repairs, improving patient health. More broadly, as an
enabling technology, the improved simulation optimization methods developed with
this award will allow practitioners and researchers to solve a wider variety of
optimization via simulation problems with greater speed and accuracy.