* 1254679
* CAREER: Axiological Modeling and Simulation for Value-Sensitive Infrastructure Project Planning and Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Nora El-Gohary, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is to
understand, predict, and analyze the impact of civil engineering decisions on
the environmental, social, and economic value of civil infrastructure systems
for its stakeholders (residents, firms, etc.). This aims at advancing our
knowledge of how to plan, design, construct, and operate our civil
infrastructure systems in a way that maximizes its collective life cycle value.
In order to achieve this goal, the research objective of this CAREER award is to
account for stakeholder values (safety, economic growth, etc.) in infrastructure
project planning and design decision-making through the discovery and
formalization of "axiology (a theory of value) of civil infrastructure systems",
its application in value modeling and simulation, and its validation in the
context of value-sensitive decision-making. The research methodology involves
empirical investigations, mathematical modeling, semantic (computer-
understandable and meaning-rich) modeling, and semantic simulation.

If successful, this research will provide models for assessing the value of
infrastructure projects in a stakeholder-conscious way. These models will offer
the structure for soliciting and aligning public values and expectations about
infrastructure systems and can guide the planning and design of solutions that
are socially-equitable, economically-effective, and environmentally-viable. This
research will advance the "science of value" (the science that attempts to
formalize value theory using mathematical and logic formalisms). It will also
advance the fundamental research in decision theory by offering a value theory
that may guide infrastructure system decision-making. This project will involve
educational and outreach activities to integrate research findings into
coursework and outreach material, engage undergraduate and graduate students,
and reach out to K-3 children and female high-school students. These efforts
will help foster the "engineer of the future" who has a blend of knowledge,
skill, and humanistic understanding of the role and impact of civil engineering
in society.