* 1254807
* CAREER: Free Probability and Connections to Random Matrices, Stochastic Analysis, and PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Todd Kemp, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 550,000.00

This mathematics research project will focus on the stochastic analysis of two
kinds of Brownian motions: on high-dimensional flat spaces, and on unitary
groups, the latter giving a model for random continuous rotations of space. Such
processes will be studied in conjunction with another class of stochastic
objects: the spectral theory of large random matrices. Random matrix theory is a
recently developed research area that has garnered much attention in the last
two decades. It beautifully combines many fields of mathematics and has
important outside applications, for example to multivariate statistics and
cellular communication networks. Using contemporary techniques from stochastic
analysis, the principal investigator Todd Kemp will explore the behavior of
large random matrices, realized as concrete infinite-dimensional objects. The
research uses the tools of free probability: a robust, growing field which
incorporates ideas from probability theory, complex analysis, operator algebras,
and combinatorics. The problems to be addressed will give new insight into the
fluctuations and deformations of random matrix models in free probability and
are designed to yield more complete solutions to important open problems
relating to entropy and information in such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematics research project is in
the general area of free probability theory and Brownian motions. The notion of
Brownian motion is central to analysis, and is important in geometry, applied
mathematics, and beyond. Brownian motion is used to model many processes
throughout science and engineering: from the fluctuations of stock prices to the
large-scale behavior of queueing systems in computer or biological networks, to
the core behavior of quantum systems. Stochastic analysis is the systematic
theory of the behavior of Brownian motion. Besides its research value, another,
equally central impact of this mathematics research project is through its
educational goals, focusing on the creation of a new summer research program,
CURE: Collaborative Undergraduate Research Experience. It is designed to give
research experience to groups of primarily local undergraduate students. The
CURE program seeks to introduce novice mathematicians to the community of
practice, through situated learning and cooperative engagement in front-line
research, based on the more accessible and computational aspects of the research
component of this proposal. It will also provide mentoring experience to
graduate students who will assist in coordinating the research effort; thus the
CURE program is vertically integrated across the full spectrum of academic
research. Mathematics has become an increasingly collaborative field; the CURE
program will instill the value of research collaboration in its dozens of
participants. By promoting diversity and developing the talent of young
mathematicians, this project will increase the profile of free probability,
random matrices, and stochastic analysis for the next generation of researchers