* 1254071
* CAREER: Estimation and Decisions in Graphical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Alexander Ihler, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 06/30/2019
* USD 442,040.00

Probabilistic graphical models are central to automated reasoning. The past
decade has seen significant progress on two basic reasoning tasks: combinatorial
optimization (maximization or minimization) and marginalization (summation)
tasks. Maximization queries are often used to generate predictions from a given
model, such as image denoising or finding stereo correspondence. Summation
queries are common in model learning, for computing and optimizing the data
likelihood during fitting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key point is that for these
tasks the model is treated homogeneously; all variables are either maximized (or
minimized) or summed over. However, many important reasoning and inference tasks
require a mixture of these where some variables are maximized (or minimized),
while others are summed over. Such mixed problems occur in optimal estimation,
decision making in single- and multi-agent systems, and worst-case or
antagonistic problems that arise in robust estimation and games. Far less
progress has been made on these more difficult query
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award are to develop a new framework for exact and approximate methods
for such advanced computational reasoning problems. The project includes both
theoretical and practical algorithm pieces, and studies their use in estimation
and learning from data. The project extends the abilities of intelligent systems
to reasoning and decision-making under uncertainty. It applies and tests these
methods on a variety of application domains, including sensor networks and
computer vision. The project supports graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
student research, and it contributes to open and online course development. The
project increases impact and algorithm adoption by deploying open-source tools,
developing open standards and benchmark problems in these domains, and it
encourages additional progress through open comparisons and competitions.