* 1254656
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Patterned Epithelial Chiral Morphogenesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Qun Wan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 409,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to use a combination of micro-fabrication, live cell imaging, molecular
assay, traction force measurement, and mathematical modeling to elucidate the
biomechanical and biochemical mechanisms for epithelial chiral morphogenesis on
micopatterned surfaces. Chirality, also known as handedness or left-right (LR)
asymmetry, is well conserved in the development of living organisms. In
vertebrate development, the formation of epithelial chiral structures (i.e.,
chiral morphogenesis) is biomechanically important in establishing the LR
asymmetric body plan. Recently, we have recapitulated such chiral morphogenesis
on micropatterned surfaces. Studies conducted under this award will evaluate the
role of cell biomechanics in micropatterned cell chirality with experiments and
numerical simulation, with the emphasis on single cell chirality and the effects
of cell-cell interactions. In addition, important signaling pathways and
cytoskeletal proteins will be identified and analyzed for their effects on
epithelial chirality and cell mechanics. This project presents a comprehensive
effort to understand the biomechanical and biomolecular mechanisms of patterned
epithelial chiral morphogenesis, which reflects a fundamental yet poorly
understood cellular property and may directly relate to asymmetry in development
and disease. If successful, the proposed research will (1) develop a new
conceptual framework to study the chirality of cellular collective behaviors;
(2) address the role of intracellular and intercellular mechanisms in
determining multi-cellular LR asymmetry; and (3) initiate a new paradigm in
research of LR asymmetry in development and diseases with an in vitro
multicellular system. The educational plan focuses on course development in Cell
Biomechanics at the undergraduate and graduate level as well as the outreach
involving high school and undergraduate students. In addition, new initiatives
will involve the development of artistic works to inform students and the
general public of the importance of LR asymmetry in development and disease.