* 1254530
* CAREER:   Quantum Information Science with Single Defects in ZnO
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Gregory Fuchs, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Technical Description: The research aim of this CAREER project is to understand
the photo-physics and spin-physics of single point defects in ZnO as a platform
for quantum information science and quantum-enhanced metrology. While quantum
information science promises fundamentally new technological capabilities,
implementation of these theoretical ideas in a physical system is very
challenging. Single point defects in semiconductor crystals are promising
quantum systems with potential for scalability through integration with
conventional computing technology and other quantum systems. This research
project studies point defects in ZnO using a "single-molecule" approach,
combining confocal fluorescence microscopy, time-resolved single-photon
counting, and magnetic resonance to understand the structure and dynamics of
this individually addressable quantum system. Emphasis is on understanding spin
and photo dynamics with an eye toward controlling the quantum states of
electronic and nuclear spins, and on the generation of high-quality single
photon sources. In addition, ZnO growth is studied, both in the principle
investigator's laboratory and through collaboration, to understand and control
the formation of defects and how they interact with the electronic and photonic
properties of ZnO.

Non-technical Description: This project examines the optical and magnetic
behavior of single atom-scale defects. An example is a single missing atom
within the array of atoms that form a crystal. Such defects can behave like
single atoms, even at room temperature, within a solid-state environment.
Understanding and controlling these point defects could lead to new technology
for computing and communication because their behavior is governed by quantum
mechanics. The research team studies a single defect through its optical
signature by detecting the individual photons it emits under different
experimental conditions and in samples grown using different methods. Graduate
and undergraduate students working on this project benefit from research
experience in a stimulating and interdisciplinary environment. The principal
investigator (PI) also develops hands-on science lessons, including equipment
and supplies that may be borrowed by teachers through the Cornell Center for
Materials Research lending library. The PI works with teachers on the
development of these kits, and brings teachers into the laboratory so they can
experience scientific research and share it with their students.