* 1254397
* CAREER: New Catalysts and Methods for Amine Synthesis via Stereoselective Allene Aziridination
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Schomaker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry Division's Synthesis and Catalysis
programs are supporting the research of Professor Jennifer M. Schomaker of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Professor Schomaker will develop new allene
oxidation methodologies to permit the rapid and flexible syntheses of complex,
enantioenriched and densely functionalized amine motifs that are important
components of natural products, ligands for catalysis and probes of biological
processes. The first goal of this project is to develop reliable methods for
regio- and stereocontrolled allene aziridination to reactive bicyclic methylene
aziridine scaffolds. Second, methods to transform these key intermediates into
aminated stereotriads (compounds containing three consecutive heteroatom-bearing
chiral carbons) will be developed, providing access to a diverse array of
nitrogen-containing building blocks for synthesis. Finally, the third goal of
this project is to apply allene aziridination to the synthesis of jogyamycin, a
complex aminocyclopentitol exhibiting potent antibiotic, antitumor,
antiprotozoal and antimalarial activities.

The need for increasingly chemo- and stereoselective catalysis presents exciting
challenges for the development of new synthetic organic methodologies.
Schomaker's work will identify new paradigms in catalysis for the chemoselective
construction of carbon-nitrogen bonds. These new modes of catalysis will enable
powerful approaches to the synthesis of biologically relevant molecules. The
broader impacts of her work will be realized through collaboration with the
PEOPLE program (Pre-College Enrichment Opportunity Program for Learning
Excellence) at UW-Madison. She will identify economically disadvantaged local
students early in their high school careers and provide mentored opportunities
for research experiences focusing on the development of new synthetic
methodologies. Students will have ample time to develop valuable laboratory
skills, learn to communicate scientifically in both oral and written forms and
participate in seminars to broaden their understanding of the role research
plays in addressing important societal concerns. Students will also employ
social media to track their progress and share their experiences with family,
friends and classmates.