* 1254459
* CAREER: Combining Nuclear Magnetic Resonance with Integrated Circuit Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Nan Sun, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Combining Nuclear Magnetic Resonance with Integrated Circuit
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Nan Sun (The University of Texas at
Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) is a resonance interaction between atomic nuclei and a radio-frequency
magnetic field. It finds a broad array of applications in chemistry, biology,
physics, medicine, and material science. Despite its versatility and enormous
contributions, existing NMR systems have the constraints of limited sensitivity,
low throughput, and long experiment time. In addition, they are bulky, heavy,
and expensive. These drawbacks have limited their capability and accessibility.
The PI proposes to address the aforementioned limitations and create novel NMR
systems with significant performance enhancement and substantial size and cost
reduction. To this end, the PI plans to systematically introduce integrated
circuit (IC) technology to the field of NMR. IC technology can potentially bring
transformational change to the design of NMR coil and transceiver, which are two
main components of an NMR system. More specifically, the PI will investigate the
following 4 areas: 1) the PI plans to increase the throughput of NMR
spectroscopy by developing an integrated probehead that contains a large array
of transceivers and planar microcoils, so that many samples can be analyzed
simultaneously; 2) the PI aims to create a miniature NMR spectroscopy system by
developing a highly-sensitive transceiver IC chip and a small but homogeneous
magnet, made possible by a novel hybrid shimming technique; 3) the PI will study
wideband integrated transceivers and coils to develop a miniature high-accuracy
high-spatial-resolution NMR-based magnetic field sensor; 4) the PI proposes to
create a mobile single-sided NMR system by designing a novel multichannel
transceiver IC with a multilayer microcoil array. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The proposed research topics, if successful, will bring major impacts to
the NMR field and its broad application fields. For example, an increased
throughput for NMR spectroscopy will allow fast screening of combinatorial
libraries and accelerate the drug discovery process; a miniature spectroscopy
system will enable NMR spectra to be measured on small lab benches and in the
field; a low-cost NMR magnetometer will make the usefulness of high-resolution
magnetic-field sensing widely accessible; and an integrated sensitive single-
sided NMR system will make possible mobile screening of any arbitrary object
with reduced experiment time. In addition to the research, the PI plans to
actively involve local industry in both teaching and research, develop effective
teaching styles, and use state-of-the-art information technology for innovative
education. The PI will also continue promoting female and minority students in
engineering and reach o