* 1254344
* CAREER: Engineering principles within cell-cell communication networks in animal development
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Gregory Reeves, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

1254344 Reeves

Regulation of signaling between cells is crucial in many areas of biology,
including development, stem cell biology, and proper maintenance of adult
tissues. In development, tissues are patterned by long range, yet highly
variable signals that direct differences in gene expression at different
locations. In the Principal Investigator's lab, the overarching goal is to
connect engineering principles to the regulatory mechanisms that ensure reliable
gene expression patterns in the face of highly variable intercellular signals.
The proposed work aims to study two specific instances of engineering principles
in biological regulatory mechanisms: feedback control and noise-filtering. The
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is used as a model organism, as it strikes a
balance between the complexity needed (as a multicellular organism) and ease of
manipulation, with advanced genetic and transgenesis toolkits. In the early (1-3
hours old) Drosophila embryo, the dorsal-ventral axis is patterned by the
transcription factor Dorsal. In previous work, it was found that Dorsal
establishes robust gene expression patterns even in the face of high intrinsic
noise and extrinsic variability. Negative feedback interactions with a secondary
signaling pathway, the Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) pathway, are
hypothesized to increase the robustness of gene expression patterns with respect
to variations in Dorsal signaling. Furthermore, dorsal target genes are
expressed in a location far beyond the point in which a spatial gradient of a
signaling molecule is expected to reliably act. Thus, the noise-filtering
capabilities of gene expression in the tail of Dorsal signaling, where noise is
the highest, will be investigated. Both negative feedback interactions and
noise-filtering will be studied using genetic and transgenic manipulations,
quantitative (live) imaging/models of gene expression outputs, quantitative
real-time PCR and quantitative Western Blot. Related to the proposed
experimental studies, the outreach goal is to facilitate the synergy between
engineering and biology through educational materials that highlight the
engineering principles found in biological systems. An enrichment module for
high school students will be developed and disseminated in partnership with the
Science House, an NCSU organization that oversees K-12 outreach. The goal is to
train future biology majors, at the high school junior and senior level, to be
comfortable with the language and viewpoint of engineering and physics.
Undergraduate students in courses taught by the PI will participate as teaching
assistants. At the graduate level, a special topics course that focuses on the
engineering principles in tissue patterning will be broadly disseminated with
the help of the NCSU Distance Education Program. These educational materials,
together with the research work, will provide the perspective and research to
understand and then utilize the ?natural engineering? present in biological
systems.