* 1254670
* CAREER: Integrated Materials-Mechanics-Manufacturing Approach to Hot Blank - Cold Die (HB-CD) Forming of Lightweight Alloy Sheets
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Fadi Abu-Farha, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for
advancing a new sheet metal forming process, referred to as "hot blank-cold
die," which is particularly suited for manufacturing components out of
lightweight materials, such as magnesium and aluminium alloys. A coupled thermo-
mechanical numerical tool will be developed to simulate the process and capture
the non-isothermal material deformation. The numerical tool will incorporate
analytical material models that take both anisotropy and changes in the
microstructure into account. Uniaxial and biaxial tensile tests will be carried
out over a wide range of conditions (temperatures and strain rates), in order to
fully characterize material behaviour and calibrate the material models. Overall
validation of the numerical tool will be performed by comparing predictions to
experimental hot blank-cold die forming runs under various process conditions.
The latter will be performed progressively, starting from small-scale lab
experiments, to full-scale forming runs of automotive components. Material
properties in the formed parts will be evaluated and post-process maps will be
constructed, paving the way for future process optimization
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed process has the potential
to enable the manufacture of these hard-to-form alloys at lower cost and higher
throughput than is currently achieved with hot forming operations. The research
outcomes could enable product design for these limited-use materials, especially
for light weighting of automobiles. The project has educational and outreach
components that will foster undergraduate research activities in a graduate-only
institution, integrate education and research within a recently-established
automotive engineering program, and will enrich educational and outreach
activities at the only Children's Museum in the upstate region of South
Carolina. The project will also contribute to developing an Educational
Television Program that aims at promoting awareness of grand long-term issues
(energy conservation, sustainability, etc.), and inspiring the younger
generations on how engineering and innovation help tackle such issues.