* 1254423
* Integration of Ethylene and Light in the Control of Phototaxis in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

A major challenge in biology is to understand how events at the biochemical
level lead to changes at the organismal level. In cyanobacteria, light
stimulates movement towards (positive phototaxis) and away from (negative
phototaxis) light. This is an important survival mechanism in cyanobacteria. The
cyanobacterium Synechocystis contains a protein (SynETR) that has
characteristics of both photoreceptors (important for phototaxis) and ethylene
receptors. In plants, ethylene receptors mediate many responses that impact
plant survival, but it is unknown what these receptors do in cyanobacteria.
Prior results have shown that ethylene regulates phototaxis in Synechocystis via
the SynETR protein. However, no detectable biosynthesis of ethylene was found.
It is known that sunlight can interact with dissolved organics to abiotically
produce ethylene in the concentration range where physiological effects on
phototaxis are seen. Thus, this project tests the hypothesis that Synechocystis
uses ethylene as an external chemical cue to influence phototaxis behavior. The
overall goal is to elucidate the mechanism by which ethylene affects SynETR
function in Synechocystis to modulate phototaxis. A combination of biochemistry,
chemistry, physiology, and molecular biology will be used to address this goal.
This combination of approaches has yielded a great deal of information about the
ethylene receptors in plants and provides a paradigm for determining the
function of SynETR in Synechocystis. The multifaceted research will increase our
understanding about links between ethylene binding events at the biochemical
level with physiological changes that occur at the organismal level. This, in
turn, will provide a broader understanding about how cyanobacteria respond to
their environment and integrate environmental cues to modulate phototaxis.

The research will enhance research and educational infrastructure by broadening
opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students to engage in
research. Since cyanobacteria contribute significantly to atmospheric oxygen
levels and fix a large portion of carbon in the atmosphere, it is important to
understand the effects of ethylene on these organisms because levels of ethylene
in the atmosphere continue to rise as an air pollutant from industrial
activities. Additionally, a better understanding about ethylene and its impact
on cyanobacteria will help us determine how to maximize their use for bioenergy
needs.