* 1254351
* CAREER:Bi-Functional Redox Materials with Facilitated Oxygen Transport for Catalytic Conditioning of Biomass-Derived Syngas
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Fanxing Li, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2018
* USD 417,272.00

PI: Li, Fanxing Proposal Number: 1254351 Institution: North Carolina State
University Title: CAREER:Bi-Functional Redox Materials with Facilitated Oxygen
Transport for Catalytic Conditioning of Biomass-Derived Syngas

Biomass can be converted into electricity, hydrogen, and liquid fuels through
gasification. However, the removal of tars represents a critical challenge to
biomass gasification. The existing tar removal catalysts are only active for tar
reforming and/or partial oxidation in the presence of an external oxidant, the
redox catalyst. This project will develop a catalyst that also functions as a
oxidant. The redox catalyst is composed of a primary metal oxide for oxygen
storage, a mixed ionic-electronic conductor (MIEC) support for O2- transport,
and a catalytically active surface for tar reforming/oxidation. The embedded
oxygen can make the catalyst more active by participating in tar oxidation
reactions. The catalyst will be operated under a cyclic redox mode for lattice
oxygen replenishment. This project will investigate (i) lattice O2- migration in
the redox catalyst and the effect of MIEC support on catalyst activity; (ii) the
effect of catalyst surface on its activity and the surface reaction scheme for
tar oxidation; (iii) redox catalyst optimization strategy and performance
evaluations.

Intellectual Merit: The project will devote a concerted effort towards
understanding the surface reaction and O2- conduction schemes of the unique
redox catalyst, which can be highly effective for tar removal. Besides acting as
an active catalyst, the embedded lattice oxygen can be shuttled to the catalyst
surface, by the MIEC support, for tar oxidation. The MIEC support will also
increase the catalyst's sintering resistance by creating a solid-state O2-
pathway even at low porosity. The lattice oxygen can also increase the catalyst
lifetime by retarding coke formation and sulfur poisoning. The research will
provide essential guidance on redox catalyst design and optimization.

Broader Impact: Development of an effective and robust tar removal catalyst can
be a key enabling step for the deployment of gasification based biomass-to-
liquid fuel processes. This project will provide fundamental insights for
designing an optimized catalyst. The unique concept coupled with the carefully
designed research plan will likely to result in a viable catalyst for
sustainable biomass conversion through gasification. The PI will also integrate
his research with education. To inspire K12 students' interest in STEM and
sustainable energy, the PI will develop and present an interactive module named
"Engineering Our Way out of Global Warming" to both national and international
audiences. A parallel Apple/Android App, "Engineer's Toolbox for Global Warming"
will also be launched in collaboration with NC State Computer Science Department
and Argonne National Lab.