* 1254350
* CAREER: Reengineering physicochemical properties of carbon nanotubes for enhanced adsorption of disinfection byproduct precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Julian Fairey, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 04/30/2019
* USD 410,969.00

CBET-1254350 Julian Fairey University of Arkansas

There is perhaps no greater challenge faced by drinking water utilities in the
United States than meeting disinfection byproduct regulations for
trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids. Formation of these regulated chemicals and
other potentially toxic disinfection byproducts, such as n-nitrosodimethylamine,
is expected to increase as water utilities continue to exploit source waters
impacted by algal blooms and wastewater discharges. Fortunately, the burgeoning
field of nanotechnology offers promise. Specifically, properties of carbon
nanotubes suggest they may have substantial adsorption capacities for
disinfection byproducts precursors, which could be further enhanced by
manipulating carbon nanotube surface chemistry. The objective of this research
project is to reengineer the tunable physicochemical properties of carbon
nanotubes for enhanced adsorption of disinfection byproduct precursors. A
systematic reductionist approach will be employed to modify physical (e.g.,
surface area, pore size distribution) and chemical (e.g., surface functional
groups, surface charge) properties of carbon nanotubes for enhanced adsorption
of trihalomethane, haloacetic acid, and n-nitrosodimethylamine precursors.
Equilibrium adsorption capacities of the reengineered carbon nanotubes will be
measured in batch isotherm experiments. Kinetic limitations will be assessed
using rapid small-scale column tests to determine suitable processes within
drinking water treatment plants for carbon nanotube integration. The extent to
which direct gasification can regenerate spent carbon nanotubes will be assessed
to address cost considerations. Fundamental characterizations of the
reengineered carbon nanotubes and disinfection byproduct precursors (e.g.,
elemental composition by Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectroscopy) will facilitate development of structure-property relationships,
thus permitting broad applicability of the research findings. The expected
outcome of this research is a systematic procedure to fundamentally reengineer
carbon nanotubes for enhanced adsorption of disinfection byproduct precursors.

A major challenge for many drinking water utilities in the United States is
achieving adequate disinfection while limiting formation of disinfection
byproducts. As waters become more impaired due to the trickle down impacts of
population growth, significant advancements in the removal of disinfection
byproduct precursors are critically needed. In this research project, principles
of nanotechnology, surface chemistry, and analytical chemistry are leveraged to
reengineer carbon nanotubes for effective uptake of disinfection byproduct
precursors. This discovery could spur vast improvements in the treatment of the
nations drinking water supply and reduce concentrations of disinfection
byproducts at the tap.