* 1254786
* CAREER: Wireless network simplification: using the necessary and no more
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Ayfer Ozgur, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a fundamental
framework for simplifying wireless networks by extracting small sub-networks
that provably preserve a large fraction of the entire capacity. Recent results
in information theory show that optimal cooperation of a large number of
wireless devices can achieve large gains in capacity. In practice, however,
optimally operating many distributed devices is notoriously difficult and
current cooperative techniques are limited to the use of few relays and
suboptimal strategies. This project aims to bridge this divide by building on
the observation that most networks can be greatly simplified through a better
understanding of the inherent correlations between signals carried by different
relays. It builds an information-theoretic understanding of why, how and by how
much to simplify wireless networks and develops efficient simplification
algorithms and low-complexity codes that approximately achieve capacity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project lies in its transformative approach to the way wireless networks are
studied today. Instead of focusing on a single number, the network capacity, it
clarifies how information propagates through a wireless network, revealing the
significance of individual relays. The study explores the rich set of
connections to combinatorial optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of the project is to bridge the large disconnect
between the current theory and practice of wireless relay networks by removing
the complexity barrier via network simplification. The project aims to transform
the way relaying is currently done in practice, allowing for significantly
higher rates and smaller energy consumption.