* 1254117
* CAREER: Human Behavior Assessment from Internet Usage: Foundations, Applications and Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Sriram Chellappan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2015
* USD 280,665.00

Human interaction with computers, and especially with the Internet, is ever
increasing. As a consequence the field of cyber-psychology, which studies the
thinking, behavior and attitudes of the person using the computer, is of growing
importance. To date, studies in cyber-psychology have collected Internet usage
data by means of self-reported surveys only, an approach which suffers from a
number of drawbacks including human error, bias due to user concerns relating to
social desirability, and limits on the volume and dimensionality of the data
obtained. The PI's vision in this project is to advance human behavior
assessment based on real Internet usage data, that is to say Internet usage data
collected continuously, passively and unobtrusively without manual intervention
while carefully maintaining user privacy expectations. To these ends, the PI
will develop practical foundations, create two Internet enabled applications
(one relating to online mental healthcare and the other to online socializing),
and leverage results in behavioral psychology to design classification
algorithms that demonstrate the ability to achieve significant insights and to
detect behavioral similarities (relating to symptoms of depression and
preferences in social contacts) based on Internet usage. The project builds on
the PI's preliminary work that exploited real Internet usage data collected from
Cisco NetFlow records to identify fine-grained Internet usage features
associated with symptoms of depression, and will be executed with college
students as primary subjects. The PI will collaborate in the current project
with experts from the psychological and social sciences, clinical psychiatry,
and the FBI's cyber crimes division. Outcomes will include an accurate
characterization of Internet usage minimally affected by error and bias, and a
large number of Internet usage features of high granularity for assessing human
behavior, which together will yield insights and conclusions readily adaptable
for practical utility.

Broader Impacts: This research will advance our ability to assess human behavior
based on Internet usage data. The online mental healthcare application will
yield Internet enabled proactive, early and cost -effective mental health care
to complement care in existing clinical settings, while the online socializing
application will lead to improved online social experiences by leveraging mutual
social preferences. Applications of the research to mitigating Internet fraud
and detecting cyber bullying are immediate. The PI will collaborate with HBCU
and RUI institutions as well as K-12 schools to further enhance project
outreach.