* 1254262
* CAREER: Electroelastic Dynamics of Flexible Piezoelectric Composites for Enhanced Biomimetic Locomotion and Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Alper Erturk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 427,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to understand and leverage the electroelastic dynamics of flexible
piezoelectric composites for next-generation biomimetic locomotion and energy
harvesting. Due to their robustness, structural flexibility, high energy
density, and well-balanced force-deflection capabilities, fiber-based
piezoelectric composites with interdigitated electrodes can be employed in
various applications ranging from structural sensors/actuators and energy
harvesters to bio-inspired aquatic and aerial vehicles. This research will
establish a unified mathematical framework with experimental validations for
complex dynamics of fiber-based piezoelectric composites for low-to-high
mechanical and electrical excitation levels in the presence of two-way coupling.
The technical approach is based on the synthesis of materially and geometrically
nonlinear non-conservative electroelastic structural dynamic models with
controlled experiments to explore and understand the effects of various
parameters on the coupled system dynamics. Specifically, this research will lead
to an unprecedented multifunctional nonlinear dynamical system platform that
combines biomimetic locomotion and energy harvesting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will result in electroelastic models and structural
concepts that can be exploited in various applications, ranging from structural
shape control and adaptive stiffness change to bio-inspired aquatic/aerial
robotics as well as energy harvesting from deterministic and stochastic
dynamical systems. Potential high-impact applications of enhanced aquatic
locomotion and vibrational energy harvesting span from sustainability in marine
environments and effective drug delivery to battery-less medical implants and
energy-autonomous wireless sensor networks in structural health monitoring. This
project will also reach and inspire a large number of underrepresented and
minority K-12 students and their teachers through a complementary and engaging
educational plan, prepared in collaboration with the Center for Education
Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing (CEISMC) at Georgia Tech. The
educational and outreach activities include the hosting of Georgia Intern-
Fellowship Teachers (GIFT) and high school students for research on dynamical
systems involving smart structures, aquatic locomotion, and energy harvesting.