* 1254791
* CAREER: Statistical mechanics of superconductors and other macroscopic phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2020
* Kay Kirkpatrick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2020
* USD 453,502.00

The PI will work on problems related to the statistical mechanics of quantum
systems and spin models for ferromagnets and superconductors. A fundamental
problem in mathematical physics is to explain macroscopic phenomena from the
first principles of interacting microscopic particles. This project will build
on previous results of the PI and collaborators on the statistical mechanics of
Bose-Einstein condensation and the Gross-Pitaevskii equation, Gibbs measures for
quantum systems, spin models of ferromagnetism, and probabilistic algorithms for
family pedigree relationships. The proposed problems include developing a new
Stein's method for quantum many-body systems; extending recent methods to other
questions such as large deviations for quantum systems; studying metastability
in XY and related models; formulating new spin models of superconductivity and
analyzing their properties; and finding connections to the phenomenological
theories of Ginzburg-Landau and Gross-Pitaevskii. The PI will integrate her
research expertise into probability courses and train students in analytical and
computational techniques valuable for a variety of careers. The PI will also
continue her interest in encouraging women and other underrepresented groups in
math.

There are fundamental challenges in the mathematical physics of condensed
matter, the cool and unusual phases of matter near absolute zero that have
important applications in physics and engineering. One is to understand how the
unique properties of condensed matter emerge from the large-scale interaction of
many microscopic particles. Superconductors, for instance, allow current to flow
freely with no loss and can expel magnetic fields; superconducting magnets are
used in particle accelerators and MRI machines. Mathematical physicists would
like to explain these phenomena (and the associated equations) starting from
microscopic quantum many-body systems, but to do so, will need innovative
mathematical tools developed at the interface between mathematics and physics.
The main goals of this project are to develop such tools, to formulate new
models with interesting phase transitions, and to find connections to
phenomenological theories. Other goals are to strengthen ties with physics and
engineering for mutual benefit, integrating research expertise into probability
courses, and training students in analytical and computational techniques
valuable for a variety of careers. The PI will also continue her interest in
encouraging women and other underrepresented groups in math.