* 1254077
* CAREER:Investigating Mechanisms of Regulatory and Functional Diversity in an Enzyme Superfamily
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2019
* Patrick Frantom, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,049,683.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Allosteric regulation is a central tenet of modern
biochemistry, however, it is a mechanism that is still not well understood. The
long-term goal of this project is to understand how allosteric and catalytic
mechanisms work together in multi-domain enzymes. This research examines the
mechanistic and evolutionary interactions between two conserved domains in the
context of the DRE-TIM metallolyase superfamily. An integrated experimental
approach, including biochemical, structural, and bioinformatics techniques is
used to (a) determine the identity of kinetic steps perturbed in allosteric
inhibition, (b) predict and verify functional and structural diversity and (c)
investigate the role of conserved residues in the allosteric mechanism. This
type of approach overcomes several difficulties commonly encountered in the
study of allosteric enzymes, moves away from the phenomenological description of
different allosteric mechanisms and considers the impact of evolutionary
pressures on the diversity of mechanisms within a conserved protein scaffold.
Rapid-reaction kinetics and kinetic isotope effects will be used to investigate
the changes to enzyme mechanisms caused by allosteric inhibitors. The creation
of a protein similarity network for the model allosteric domain will provide
rapid organization for a large number of diverse sequences predicted to contain
the domain. High-throughput structural techniques will provide essential
structural coverage for clusters of sequences currently lacking structural
description. Mechanistic and structural data will be mapped onto the protein
similarity network to define the functional and structural boundaries of the
model allosteric domain. The integrated results will provide a description of
structure/function relationships contributing to functional and allosteric
diversity and also give insight into how a single protein scaffold evolves
multiple allosteric mechanisms. The outcomes of this research will impact the
growing areas of allosteric biosensors and metabolic engineering of bacterial
strains for industrial uses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote interdisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students at The University of Alabama. Graduate student training
will be enhanced by an on-site visit to the laboratory of Dr. Patricia Babbitt
at the University of California, San Francisco for hands-on training in cutting
edge bioinformatics techniques. Undergraduate training will be accomplished
through two mechanisms designed to increase exposure to original hypothesis-
based research. The first mechanism will provide multiple positions in the
Frantom laboratory for undergraduate researchers from the University of Alabama
Emerging Scholars to continue performing mentored research. The second mechanism
is the creation of a formal undergraduate laboratory course to mimic key
experiences encountered in undergraduate research. Students unable to
participate in direct scientific research will benefit from a laboratory course
built around performing original hypothesis-driven experiments that contribute
directly to the intellectual merit of this project.