* 1254291
* CAREER:   Incentives, Diversity, and Scientific Problem Choice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Kevin Zollman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 405,527.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research to develop
a more unified theory of scientific incentives using a broadly economic
methodology. The educational and training aspects of the project includes a
number of activities such as course development, a summer school for
undergraduates, and mentoring of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing economic
modeling and computer simulation, this project aims to understand how incentives
typically faced by scientists (to secure funding, get promoted, publish papers,
etc.) facilitate or harm the advancement of science. Policymakers, science
commentators, and scientists themselves have begun to worry that such incentives
encourage scientists to engage in behaviors that would be counterproductive to
science as a whole such as choosing projects that will not significantly advance
knowledge, or misrepresenting or even fabricating their findings. Rather than
focusing on single case studies, which can sometimes be misleading, this project
aims to uncover the underlying relationships between the incentives faced by
scientists and their ultimate behavior. The results from the project will help
to uncover whether there is reason to worried about the state of contemporary
science. Where the incentives are misaligned, the investigators will attempt to
suggest alternative methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project could eventually help
to guide science policymakers in understanding how to create a reward system for
science that will make the enterprise of science most efficient. They may serve
to suggest recommendations that would make more efficient use of public money by
enhancing the rate and reliability of scientific discoveries. The project also
includes a number of pedagogical activities such as a freshman seminar, a
philosophy of economics course, materials for a summer school course in
mathematical modeling for philosophers, and improved dissemination of materials
for an undergraduate summer school course in logic and formal epistemology. This
sort of work is well suited to getting students involved at a fairly high level
in fairly short order.