* 1254406
* CAREER: Scale Dependent Property-Performance Relationships in Individual Heterojunction Nanowire Photocatalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Shen Dillon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 597,371.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Efficiently converting sunlight and water
into hydrogen is an attractive approach to producing 'green' fuels that could
help support the future US economy. Commercially realizing this goal requires
improved scientific understanding of the associated processes and the
development of human capital capable of addressing the engineering challenges. A
variety of catalysts have been known to perform photolysis (converting water to
hydrogen) for several decades, but many remain too inefficient or expensive for
commercial application. The properties of photocatalysts may be improved most
effectively by controlling their electronic structure, which depends on
variables such as particle size, shape, chemistry, defect structure, or their
interactions with adjoining materials. The resultant photocatalytic performance
is typically characterized over an ensemble of millions of particles, whose
individual properties could vary significantly. Averaging over the entire system
obscures the fundamental relationships between the electronic properties and the
photocatalytic performance at the nanoparticle level. This project develops and
utilizes new approaches to measuring the electronic properties and
photocatalytic performance of individual nanoparticles in order to develop
improved scientific understanding of the effects of size, defects, and
interfaces on both the electronic structure and the associated photocatalytic
performance. The activity integrates research and education through a research
experience for education majors program while promoting diversity. It will
enable Illinois teachers to bring authentic scientific research experience into
the K-12 classroom, research experience for undergraduate students, and research
support for a graduate student. As well, inquiry-based and active-learning
approaches to education will be fostered by working closely with the Illinois
Foundry for Innovation in Engineering Education (IFoundry). This multifaceted
approach will have impact at all levels of the STEM pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;The project is seeking to
develop improved scientific underpinnings for nanostructural design of optimized
high-efficiency low-cost heterojunction photocatalysts. The electronic
properties and photocatalytic performance of individual heterojunction nanowires
are being characterized as a function of size. The experiments utilize a
geometry that enables electrical measurements, ex situ structural and chemical
characterization, and subsequent in situ photocatalysis by environmental
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In situ TEM provides appropriate spatial
resolution, temporal resolution, and geometric flexibility necessary to quantify
the rate of photocatalytic gas evolution at individual nanostructures. Special
emphasis is being placed on elucidating the role of characterized defects and
defect states in affecting the variation in performance of individual nanoscale
photocatalysts. The experiments target ZnO-Pt and ZnO-Fe2O3, which will serve as
model oxide-metal and model low-cost oxide-oxide systems that exhibit the
desired physics and fulfill experimental requirements.