* 1254360
* CAREER: METAL CATALYZED METHODS FOR THE PREPARATION OF ORGANOSILANES
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Donald Watson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2019
* USD 570,000.00

This CAREER award from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports the work of Professor Donald A. Watson of the University of
Delaware. Professor Watson will develop catalytic methods for the introduction
of silicon groups into unsaturated hydrocarbon frameworks using silyl-Heck-type
reactions. These new reactions will allow for the conversion of a variety of
simple and widely available alkenes and dienes into high value organosilanes,
which have broad applications in chemical synthesis of both materials and
biologically active molecules. In addition, Professor Watson will conduct
experiments directed at understanding the mechanisms of silyl-Heck reactions,
both to increase fundamental understanding of these processes and to aid in
developing improved reaction conditions for these and related transformations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful development of this research program is
expected to have positive impact on a wide range of endeavors requiring the
preparation of synthetic organic compounds, including pharmaceutical,
agrochemical, and materials industries, as well as biological and chemical
research. Professor Watson will also develop an integrated undergraduate
research program directed at involving underrepresented minority students in
cutting-edge chemical research. The goal of this educational component of his
research is to provide encouragement and opportunities to students who have
traditionally not participated in undergraduate research. This is expected to
benefit participating students through increased connection to their field of
study, development of mentoring relationships, and building of critical thinking
and research skills, all of which are expected to increase retention of these
students in sciences and provide critical training for future employment or
graduate studies.