* 1254741
* CAREER: Bulk and boundary properties of topological matter
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Michael Levin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2018
* USD 465,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research aimed at improving our understanding of topological phases of matter.
Topological phases, such as fractional quantum Hall states and topological
insulators, pose a fundamental conceptual challenge because they cannot be
characterized using order parameters or symmetry breaking. Consequently, new
concepts and tools need to be developed to understand these systems. The
research supported by this award will focus on two aspects of these novel
phases. First, the PI will investigate the general relationship between bulk and
boundary properties of topological phases of matter. This 'bulk-boundary
correspondence' is important both for theory and experiment since one of the
easiest ways to probe these systems is via transport measurements at the
boundary. Second, the PI will investigate concrete microscopic models for these
phases, with the dual aims of (a) identifying experimental realizations and (b)
understanding the deeper structure of these states and the limitations of
numerical approaches. Some of the main topics that will be explored
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Conditions for protected edge modes for 2D
topological phases,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Exactly soluble lattice models for
2D topological phases and their limitations,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Quasi-
realistic models for bosonic integer quantum Hall
states,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Bulk and surface properties of 3D bosonic
symmetry-protected topological phases. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
research, this award supports education in two ways. First, the PI will create a
new graduate class on 'Topology and Physics.' Importantly, this class will cover
topological phenomena in both condensed matter and high energy physics with the
goal of attracting a mixture of students from both groups and thereby
facilitating interactions between the two subfields. Second, the PI will
supervise summer research projects for undergraduates. Other benefits of this
award will come from outreach activities, including several talks on quantum
computing and superconductivity that will be given to the undergraduate students
participating in the summer REU program at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research aimed at improving our understanding
of exotic phases of matter known as 'topological phases.' Just as a collection
of water molecules can behave like a solid, a liquid, or a gas depending on the
temperature and pressure, the electrons in a material can organize into metals,
insulators, superconductors and other phases depending on various parameters.
One of the basic goals of condensed matter physics is to characterize and
analyze the different phases that can form in these many-electron or many-
particle systems. More than 70 years ago, Lev Landau developed a powerful
framework for answering these types of questions. His theory, based on the
concept of symmetry, was able to explain a vast array of phases -- everything
from superconductors to magnets. Despite these successes it is now clear that,
in some materials, quantum effects can lead to new phases of matter that are
fundamentally beyond the Landau paradigm. The most dramatic examples are known
as 'topological phases.' These phases have a rich internal structure, but unlike
conventional phases like magnets or superconductors, this structure has nothing
to do with symmetry. Instead, the defining features of these phases have a
topological character. As a result, entirely new concepts and tools need to be
developed to understand these systems. The research supported by this award aims
to develop this machinery with the ultimate goal of building a general
theoretical framework, analogous to Landau theory, for analyzing these novel
phases of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, this award
supports education in two ways. First, the PI will create a new graduate class
on 'Topology and Physics.' Importantly, this class will cover topological
phenomena in both condensed matter and high energy physics with the goal of
attracting a mixture of students from both groups and thereby facilitating
interactions between the two subfields. Second, the PI will supervise summer
research projects for undergraduates. Other benefits of this proposal will come
from outreach activities, including several talks on quantum computing and
superconductivity that will be given to the undergraduate students participating
in the summer REU program at the University of Chicago.