* 1254931
* CAREER: Nonlinear, Dissipative Mechanics of Phononic Materials: An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Mahmoud Hussein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to establish exact and approximate analytical continuum formulations for the
treatment of the effects of (1) viscous and nonviscous damping and (2) geometric
and material nonlinearities on the free dispersive wave motion characteristics
of phononic materials, and to do so in the complete space of complex frequencies
and wavevectors. These tools will then be applied to the analysis of reduced-
dimension, low-weight/high-stiffness lattice structures as well as plate-like
and bulk phononic crystal and metamaterial configurations. On a parallel track,
a series of experiments ranging in complexity from simple vibration testing to
laser ultrasonic probing will be conducted in order to provide reference data
for validation of the developed theoretical formulations.

This research will deliver a generalized theoretical treatment of wave motion in
periodic materials incorporating the effects of nonlinearity and dissipation,
and will provide a thorough and verified understanding of the underlying
physical mechanisms. The research will promote the reach of mechanics to an area
that traditionally falls within the realm of condensed matter physics by
providing needed formulations and analytical tools to investigate the
application of phononics in many areas of technology, for example,
acoustic/vibration control, blast protection, radio frequency sensing, acoustic
imaging, digital signal processing, energy conversion, among others. The
complimentary education component proposes a philosophy described as "Vertical
Integration of Students In Order to Nurture Scholarship in Phononics (VISIONS in
Phononics)". In this program, students at the undergraduate level will help
develop education tools related to vibrations, wave propagation and phononics
that will enable educational activities at the graduate level, and vice versa.
Furthermore, the research activities will feed into the development of the
modules, and the modules in turn will help advanced students gain better
appreciation of the physical phenomena they are researching especially
concerning the effects of nonlinearities and dissipation.