* 1254424
* CAREER: Performance through Instability -- An Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Study of the Mechanics of Multiscale Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Dennis Kochmann, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to understand how microscale instabilities in multiscale material
systems affect their macroscopic mechanical response, and how they can be
exploited to result in tunable low-frequency acoustic band gaps and order-of-
magnitude increases in the overall (visco)elastic properties, which will be
demonstrated explicitly for metal-polymer structural materials. The integrated
theoretical, computational and experimental strategy promises to result in what
is urgently needed to advance opportunities in metamaterials: i) experimentally-
confirmed physical understanding of effective properties and stability of
multiscale systems, ii) computational models for advanced structural materials,
and iii) proof-of-concept experiments leading to a novel class of light-weight
functional high stiffness-high damping materials for applications ranging from
seismic protection and scientific vibration isolation to acoustic wave guides
and filters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their superb physical properties,
the new materials expected to emerge from the proposed research stand to improve
a variety of commercial products in aerospace, automotive, and civil
engineering, in the defense, transportation, energy and telecommunication
industries, and to result in new technologies. The multidisciplinary approach
and the potential for technology transfer will promote scientific collaborations
beyond Caltech and with industry. The educational component will make a
significant impact both locally ? through sustainably improving K-12 STEM
education by a long-term classroom partnership program and by promoting hands-on
research experience ? and globally ? through international collaborations and
research opportunities, and by providing new research-integrated educational
resources to students and educators world-wide. Research and teaching will
prepare future scientists and engineers for the key challenges in the emerging
interdisciplinary field of engineered material systems and provide opportunities
for students of all levels to become involved.