* 1254812
* CAREER: Advances in Hodge Theory and Moduli
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Radu Laza, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2019
* USD 414,004.00

This proposal is concerned with the study of the geometry of moduli spaces and
the development of tools for studying them. In particular, the PI plans to apply
and adapt some newly developed techniques in abstract Hodge theory to the
geometric context of moduli spaces. The PI will focus on the investigation of
special classes of varieties, such as Calabi-Yau threefolds and higher
dimensional Hyperkahler manifolds. In a different, but related direction, the PI
aims to construct geometric compactifications for certain classes of surfaces
via the KSBA approach inspired by the minimal model program. The PI is actively
involved with the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and in recent
years he has organized several activities with a strong educational component.
He will expand these activities. In particular, he will run a summer research
activity for undergraduates. Also, as part of the thematic program on Calabi-Yau
varieties to be held at the Fields institute (Fall 2013), the PI will organize
an introductory school for graduate students and other training activities.
Additional planed activities include developing new courses for undergraduates
and students in the teacher education program, organizing a workshop on Hodge
theory and moduli spaces, and writing a monograph. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
general area of the proposal is algebraic geometry with connections to complex
geometry and arithmetic geometry. Algebraic Geometry studies the geometric
properties of objects defined by algebraic (or equivalently polynomial)
equations. Within Algebraic Geometry, the PI is interested in the study of
moduli spaces. A moduli space is a geometric object that parameterizes the
shapes of objects within a given topological class. By studying a moduli space,
one obtains important information about geometric objects of a given kind, in
particular about the existence or non-existence of objects with prescribed
special properties. This study has numerous applications to algebraic geometry
and other related fields including mathematical physics.