* 1254768
* CAREER: Novel Designs for Kidney Exchange and Other Markets, in the Intersection of Operations Research, Economics and Computer Science
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Itai Ashlagi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is
the design, study and implementation of algorithms and matching mechanisms for
kidney exchange and other matching markets. In the last decade the field of
market design has been growing rapidly, attracting economists, operations
researchers and computer scientists. The emergence of kidney exchange
clearinghouses is one of the successes of this field. The need for kidney
exchange arises when someone who wishes to donate a kidney to a particular
recipient is incompatible with that recipient. Two or more incompatible pairs
can participate in an exchange allowing the patients to receive transplants. The
growth of kidney exchange clearinghouses has driven novel theory based on
empirical evidence, leading to impact on existing mechanisms. However, the
growth is still slow leaving many more questions than answers. Long term
efficiency in kidney exchange will be studied with emphasis on developing and
analyzing dynamic mechanisms driven by data. As many exchanges fail to take
place in practice (due to hospitals? preferences and medical issues), to reduce
failures as well as developing mechanisms that will increase efficiency in the
presence of such failures will be investigated. The potential growth of kidney
exchange will be studied, from merging exchange networks (domestically and
internationally) to relaxing current constraints such as conducting exchanges
simultaneously. Finally, unresolved issues in driven by actual challenges in
other matching markets will be investigated.

There are over 92,000 patients on the waiting list for cadaver kidneys in the
U.S and there is a severe shortage of kidneys for transplant; In 2011, 33,581
patients were added to the waiting list, 11,026 transplants from cadaver and
5,154 transplants from living donors were performed, 4,700 patients died and
2,466 were "Too Sick to Transplant". Kidney exchange is therefore a growing
source for living donation. Expanding kidney exchange will help many people.