* 1254536
* SusChEM: CAREER: Synthesis of Macrocyclic Carbene Complexes for Catalytic Aziridination
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* David Jenkins, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2019
* USD 650,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor David M. Jenkins of the University of Tennessee at
Knoxville (UTK) to explore new aziridination reactions using organic azides
(both aryl and alkyl variants) as the nitrene source and alkenes as the carbon
source. This innovative reaction involves novel transition metal complexes
supported by strong sigma-donor macrocyclic tetra-N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs)
as auxiliary ligands which act as homogeneous azirdination catalysts. The
research is accomplished in four steps: ligation of tetracarbenes to first and
second row transition metals (especially iron), catalytic studies of
aziridination reactions between organic azides and alkenes, mechanistic studies
of the reaction through probes of intermediates (i.e., metal imide complexes),
and expansion of substrate scope to make the reactions relevant to industrial,
pharmaceutical, and biological applications. The broader impacts of this work
include providing opportunities for pre-college scholars from Central High
School (CHS), an economically-disadvantaged high school in Knoxville, TN, to
perform research at the UTK. With the assistance of high school teachers at CHS
and collaborators in the Knox County School District, new Advanced Placement
(AP) laboratories that match Professor Jenkins's research interests are being
developed within the guidelines of the AP Chemistry curriculum. The laboratory
capabilities at CHS are being upgraded in order to support the new experiments.
Finally, in addition to the typical technical presentations and publications,
these research results are being disseminated though the Pre-Game Showcase at
UTK football games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aziridine compounds are found in
natural products, such as mitomycins and azinomycins, that have antitumor and
antibiotic properties crucial to the development of new pharmaceutical products.
Despite the myriad of uses, the synthesis of aziridine compounds has been
wasteful and expensive due to the need for additional reagents that are not
fully used in the final products. This CAREER project utilizes less expensive
metal-based catalytic processes to avoid the need for expensive reagents. The
improved reactions are expected to have impact in biology and synthetic organic
chemistry, particularly in the preparation of new medicines. In his work with
teachers and administrators at Central High School in Knoxville, Tennessee,
Professor Jenkins stresses the use of sustainable processes in the development
of new laboratories for the Advanced Placement (AP) Chemistry courses. Professor
Jenkins publishes his work in technical journals but also disseminates his
group's results in non-traditional forums, such as the Pre-Game Showcase at the
University of Tennessee Knoxville football games.