* 1254352
* CAREER:  Uncertainty Quantification in the Rational Design of Bifunctional Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Andreas Heyden, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit For complex reactions with more than one key surface
intermediate, bifunctional multiphase catalysts have a significant advantage
over conventional monophase catalysts since each phase can potentially be
adjusted independently to activate a key reaction step. Unfortunately, our
understanding of multiphase catalysts whose activity and selectivity is
primarily determined by the interfaces and adjacent surroundings remains
relatively poor. Andreas Heyden of the University of South Carolina in this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program Award proposes utilizing
computational studies to establish the underlying science of such bifunctional
heterogeneous catalysts whose activity is largely determined by the three-phase
boundary (TPB) of a gas-phase, a reducible oxide support, and a noble metal
cluster or nanoparticle. The work will focus on identifying the origin or
descriptors of the unique activity of Au and Pt catalysts supported on ceria and
titania for the water-gas shift (WGS) reaction. The desire to better understand
chemical reactions at the TPB is motivated by the fact that most heterogeneous
catalysts consist of several solid phases and that although the overall catalyst
activity and selectivity is often known to be a result of multiphase effects,
the understanding of the chemical function of multiphase systems is relatively
poor.

Given the complexity of catalyst systems, connecting theoretical calculations to
experimental observations becomes extremely challenging for multiphase systems.
Heyden proposes to use modern density functionals and to quantify uncertainty in
the computational predictions based on a network of reactions. As a result,
realistic and meaningful probabilistic predictions can be made which
significantly facilitates connecting theoretical calculations with experimental
observations. Heyden plans to use modern Bayesian statistical tools to validate
reaction site models and to identify a required level of accuracy for a given
prediction. Experimental information for comparison is secured through
collaborations with scientists at Purdue University and the University of
Southern California.

Broader Impact Understanding the origin and identifying descriptors for the
unique activity of oxide supported noble metal catalysts for the WGS has the
potential to lead to the development of improved WGS catalysts for mobile and
stationary applications. Furthermore, insights obtained from this study can
likely be applied to various chemical reactions since the combination of
reducible oxide supports and noble metals catalyze many reactions. In addition,
the application of a computational strategy that quantifies uncertainty in
computational catalysis predictions is important not only for reactions
occurring at TPBs but for most complex reactions occurring at lower temperatures
where even small errors in reaction energies lead to large uncertainties in
predicted turnover frequencies, apparent activation barriers, and reaction
orders.

The research results of the proposed project will be integrated into a joint
graduate and undergraduate elective ?Multiscale Modeling: From Electrons to
Chemical Reactors? as part of the core chemical engineering curriculum to
promote active, inquiry based learning. A continuous outreach program will be
established with the Engineering Academy of a local urban high school (92%
African American students) to increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities in the study of engineering. Key components of this program include
guest lectures, hands-on learning experiences of Academy students on the USC
campus, and a mentoring program for Engineering Academy students.