* 1254107
* EAGER: The Verge of Percolation in Nanoparticle Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Micah Green, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 60,122.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding
to evaluate the feasibility of producing graded nanocomposites with controlled
linear nanofiller concentration profiles. Experimental research aims focus on a
custom processing technique where dual ramped-flowrate pumps, a static mixer,
and rapid curing are used to create nanofiller-loaded polymer composites with a
constant gradient in reinforcement. The concentration profile will be measured
by light absorbance in samples taken from the composite precursor prior to
curing. The conductivity profile will be tested pointwise using a four-point
probe after curing. The desired nanofiller is pristine graphene, a nanomaterial
prized for its outstanding combination of transport properties. Polymer matrices
to be explored include Polydimethylsiloxane and epoxy. Because the graphene
sheets are conductive, it is hypothesized that the axial conductivity profile
mimics percolation scaling laws such that gradient composites may be used to
investigate how percolation threshold and critical scaling exponent are affected
by varying dispersion quality, nanofiller geometry, and nanofiller size as a
function of sonication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will
provide nanoscale insight (into percolating network architecture) and contribute
to advanced material functionality (in sensing applications in the aerospace and
energy industry). The composites produced by this technique will allow for high-
accuracy, high-repeatability comparative studies of nanofiller percolation
within polymer matrices. Such composites have immediate application to a range
of engineering needs, particularly in next-generation piezoresistive smart
materials. Broad scientific communities affected by this exploratory work
include those interested in nanomaterial exfoliation and dispersion, composite
manufacture, percolation theory, and nanomaterial electrical contacts and
networks.