* 1254108
* EAGER: Investigating linguistic dimensions in cross-domain authorship analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Thamar Solorio, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 45,084.00

The ability to analyze a text and determine with certainty the author of that
document, a task known as Authorship Attribution (AA), can help build a case
against an online abuser, determine the trustworthiness of a document, and can
also support this country's fight against terrorism by analyzing online
communities of interest. This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research investigates
new approaches for AA in two specific cross-domain settings: where both the
topic and genre of the test documents differ from those of the training data.
The research study departs from the standard single feature vector
representation in text classification settings and follows a framework where the
writeprint of authors is represented as a set of linguistic dimensions. The goal
is to understand how each dimension will change in the new domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this exploratory research will show the
feasibility of building new text representations and approaches for text
classification problems where there are larger domain shifts between the
training and testing data and the breakout representation into linguistic
dimensions is suitable. The results and findings from this work will contribute
to building longer-term research projects which will be able to tackle more
challenging cross-domain settings.