* 1254990
* CAREER: Formal Tools For Analysis and Design of Collaborative Hybrid Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2020
* Meeko Oishi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2020
* USD 422,715.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award is to apply observability methods and reachability analysis and controller
synthesis from hybrid control theory to the analysis and design of human-
automation systems. Methods and tools will be created to validate and design
collaborative hybrid systems. A formal framework will be developed that
incorporates both qualitative human factors guidelines for user-centered design,
and mathematical models of human input and user interfaces, into a
mathematically rigorous framework for collaborative hybrid systems. This
research specifically addresses: 1) prioritized, dynamics-driven user-interface
design, 2) collaborative control synthesis, 3) verification of safety with a
human in the loop, and 4) customizable displays. These techniques will be used
to 1) assess information content in multi-modal user interfaces (modeled as
output maps of hybrid systems), 2) identify regions in the state-space with
potential for ?fighting? between the human and the automation, 3) associate
state configurations with multiple levels of safety, and 4) assess efficacy of
user-interfaces under imperfect information that represent inaccurate mental
models or various levels of user training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research could help identify problems (such as automation
surprises, fighting between the human operator and the automation, inadequate or
excessive information contained in the user interface, and false or frequent
alarms) in safety-critical, high-risk, or expensive collaborative systems before
they are built, tested, and deployed. The proposed research and education plan
will contribute to the formal methods in human computer interaction community,
and to the control theory communities focused on the design of decision support
aids. Developed theory, code, and data will be disseminated in a timely manner.
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit through new and resigned
courses that incorporate active learning techniques, as well as through
mentoring and participation in the proposed research.