* 1254637
* CAREER: Biomimetic Nanostructured Semiconductors for Controlled Electrical Interfacing with Single Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Bozhi Tian, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to the University of Chicago is to investigate the fundamental limits
of signal transduction at the interface between biological cells and inorganic
materials. The objectives of this proposal are to investigate the effect of
surface morphology and chemistry of nanoscale semiconductors on their structural
and electrical interfaces with mammalian cells. The proposed study will
potentially yield a new biomaterials platform for conducting electrical
recording of single cell activities, which will have much higher spatiotemporal
resolutions and better signal to noise ratio than conventional fluorescence or
microelectrode based techniques. This work will adopt an integrative approach
involving experiments in materials chemistry, biophysics and cell biology. The
materials and devices proposed in this work can potentially yield highly
sensitive devices for biomedical applications. As part of this Career award, an
integrated educational goal is proposed to create a research-intensive learning
environment to educate students on subjects of nanostructured semiconductors,
biomaterials and biophysics. Based on research results, educational materials,
demonstrations, and web tutorials will be developed. Existing model programs at
the University of Chicago will be used to increase diversity in science and
engineering by offering summer research opportunities to high school and
undergraduate students. Finally, two international summer exchange programs are
being launched that will allow the undergraduate and graduate students to work
with collaborators in China or Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrical signals
from single cells can regulate their functioning. Earlier studies by this
investigator have shown that these signals can be measured using nanoscale
materials and devices. The proposed research is to gain a fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms by which nanoscale materials and devices record
these electrical activities. This work plans to adopt an integrative approach
involving experiments in materials chemistry, biophysics and cell biology. The
materials and devices proposed in this work can potentially yield highly
sensitive devices for biomedical applications. The research activities will
provide learning opportunities for students in a highly interdisciplinary
research environment. The study will also provide a unique knowledge and skill
set that can open new areas of endeavor in the semiconductor or detector
industry. In addition to existing outreach programs at the University of
Chicago, overseas studies in China or Israel will be planned to provide the US
students with an awareness and lifelong appreciation of scientists and engineers
in other countries.