* 1254328
* SBIR Phase II:  No Heat Spray Drying Technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Charles Beetz, ZoomEssence, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project of ?No Heat Spray
Drying? fundamentally changes the process of spray drying liquids to powders by
eliminating the use of heat. Typically, a liquid emulsion consists of a high
value liquid ingredient that is emulsified with a carrier system that when dried
captures the liquid ingredient in a powdered form. High temperature spray drying
remains the preferred method of drying many thermally sensitive materials such
as foods, chemicals, probiotics, pharmaceuticals, and in many other applications
where the production of a free-flowing powder is required. The current spray
drying process employs air heated up to 400Â° Fahrenheit to dry the liquid into a
powder. Exposing sensitive, volatile liquid ingredients to high temperatures
causes molecular degradation that negatively impacts performance. By eliminating
the use of heat the end result is a significantly improved powder in terms of
product quality, solubility, stability and overall performance. Our research
will be focused on improving our proprietary technology through dryer
optimization and atomization development. This research should yield an
innovative, commercially viable ?no heat? spray drying technology with the
ability to manufacture significant amounts of powdered
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project spans markets including food &amp; beverage, chemicals, pharmaceuticals,
infant formula, coffee, vitamins and numerous other segments where the
production of a free flowing powder ingredient is desired. The challenge: how to
eliminate the use of heat in converting liquids to powders. By eliminating the
use of heat in the manufacturing process, we create significantly improved
powder products. Our process is more economical, delivers products with longer
shelf life, better encapsulation and improves solubility. Our technology has
several societal benefits including decreasing energy consumption and preventing
the evaporation of volatile ingredients into the atmosphere. Our technology may
be able impact the bioavailability of drugs, decrease tablet sizes, deliver
stable Omega 3 ingredients and improve dried milk powder. We are only beginning
to explore the potential applications of our revolutionary process technology