* 1254549
* CAREER: Harnessing Smart Grid Data to Enable Resilient and Efficient Electricity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Paul Hines, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 408,000.00

The objective of this research is to harness Smart Grid data (Big Data) to
enable more resilient and efficient electricity. Three research sub-projects
contribute to this goal. Project 1 combines a new ?Random Chemistry?
computational algorithm with complex networks methods to find patterns of
vulnerability in power systems, and uses the results to reduce cascading failure
blackout risk. Project 2 transforms smart grid data into actionable information
about the health of a power grid by looking at statistical properties
(structured noise) in data from grid sensors. Projects 1 and 2 seeks to make
power grids more resilient to fluctuations from renewable generation or weather
events. Project 3 uses crowdsourcing to identify trends affecting residential
energy consumption through a web-based energy efficiency social network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
research ideas from diverse scientific disciplines, including complex systems,
graph theory, data science, computational intelligence and crowdsourcing.
Projects 1 and 2 use abstract complex systems approaches, while retaining
critical information about the physics of power systems. By using data from real
power systems the project will contribute to the emerging field of data science.
The third project combines computational intelligence with crowdsourcing in a
way that could open new ways to improve energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project tests
new educational approaches, including a unique LEGO-based grid simulator, and
integrates smart grid data into new courses. New curriculum and a hands on
?smart grid road show? will be leveraged to attract students from diverse
educational and demographic backgrounds to study electric energy.