* 1254921
* CAREER: Integrated Multiresolution Transportation Network Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Stephen Boyles, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program award is
to investigate the relationships between transportation networks of different
scales/sizes, learn how to quantify these relationships, and discover the
implications for transportation planning. The research focuses on three examples
where scale and size are important issues: freight models where a multistate or
national scale is considered in addition to a local scale, allocation of
transportation funds within a region, and transportation networks that change
rapidly with time (e.g., due to accidents or other disruptions). Current multi-
scale models are often constructed in an ad hoc manner, without understanding
the fundamental connections between the models. The research investigation in
this grant will be guided by the conjecture that "mixing" models incorporating
simplified versions of one model into another, rather than separating them
completely is the key to efficiently finding consistent
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will allow network
models to represent much larger regions, specifically supporting improved
transportation planning, but also contributing to multi-scale network models in
other domains. A complementary education and outreach plan to the research plan
has four major components. First, active-learning curricula will be developed
for transportation engineering and network analysis courses, building on recent
pedagogical research. Second, a library of state-of-the-art transportation
algorithm codes will be made public, allowing students to work with large-scale
practical data in course projects and allowing practitioners to experiment with
state-of-the-art models, facilitating technology transfer. Both the code and
curriculum materials will be released in open-access form, free of charge.
Third, the PI will actively recruit and mentor undergraduate and graduate
researchers, interfacing with university programs to identify talented students
from underrepresented groups. Finally, a new course in multi-scale modeling will
be developed, based on the research results.