* 1254129
* CAREER: Probabilistic Tools for High Reliability Monitoring and Control of Wind Farms
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Peter Seiler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 02/28/2019
* USD 410,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to create probabilistic tools for the design of high reliability systems with
application to wind energy. The research focuses specifically on two innovative
methods to reduce the costs of wind energy. First, probabilistic techniques will
be developed to detect faulty turbine components in a fast and accurate manner.
This will enable preventative maintenance or continued operation after selected
component faults. Second, tools from stochastic optimal control theory will be
applied to design damage-aware control strategies for the wind farm. Currently
each turbine within a wind farm is operated to maximize its own captured power
while ensuring that structural loads remain within design limits. Stochastic
optimal control will be used to perform this trade-off by coordinating all
turbines in the wind farm. This will enable a better trade-off between the
revenue from power production and the true financial costs that arise due to
structural loads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lead to a significant
reduction in operating costs for wind turbines thus improving the economic
viability of wind energy. In addition, the research will be applicable to high
reliability systems in other domains including aerospace, automotive, and
medical devices. The research also addresses the need to develop a highly
skilled workforce to design and maintain reliable wind turbines. The plan
centers on a unique collaboration with a local community college, Mesabi Range,
which offers a two-year technical program in wind energy maintenance. The
technicians trained at Mesabi Range will benefit from a deeper understanding of
the control and monitoring systems they encounter in the field. Students and
researchers at the University of Minnesota will benefit from understanding the
issues faced by wind turbine technicians. Finally, the research findings will be
integrated into the university undergraduate and graduate curriculum.