* 1254608
* CAREER: Microfluidic Cell Encapsulation for High Throughput Screening and Rationally Designed Biomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* John Oakey, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 471,724.00

1254608 &lt;br/&gt;Oakey, John S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ forming hydrogel
tissue scaffolds hold tremendous potential for regenerating damaged or diseased
tissues by delivering reparative cells within a three-dimensional matrix to the
site of injury. Many natural and synthetic hydrogel-based tissue scaffolds have
been developed for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications but
most suffer from a common bottleneck: the inevitable compromise between a
material?s diffusive conductivity and mechanical strength. This project
introduces microfluidic cell encapsulation as a route to develop vehicles for
the high-throughput screening of cell-matrix interactions and the selfassembly
of composite hydrogel scaffolds. These techniques will help develop superior
modalities to repair and regenerate damaged tissues by understanding and
designing tissue scaffolds to account for the response of cells to their
chemical, physical and mechanical environment. This work addresses both the slow
pace of innovation in the field of regenerative medicine as well as intractable,
intrinsic conflicts in current approaches to biomaterial development for tissue
engineering. Over the course of this project, new high-throughput optical
screening instrumentation will be developed and self-assembly techniques will be
demonstrated and characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
potentially transformative technology at the intersection of engineering,
biology and the physical sciences. Miniaturization techniques and devices will
be developed to rapidly assess the response to cell encapsulation within tissue-
like biomaterials. This information will be employed to strategically build
implantable tissue scaffolds. This project focuses upon biomaterials and cell
types that are appropriate for the regeneration of structural tissues such as
cartilage and bone, but will ultimately be applicable to a variety of
therapeutic scenarios. This project also includes a significant commitment to
develop an educational outreach program built upon synergistic curriculum
development efforts. The educational goals of this proposal are to develop and
introduce microfluidic devices as demonstrations and laboratory modules at the
university, high school and elementary school levels. These devices will be
designed to present fundamental concepts in a visual format while connecting
intuitive demonstrations with more complex data collection and analysis via
emerging mobile technology. The microfluidic tools provide a direct link between
the research and educational components of this proposal. Initially, the focus
will be upon curriculum development by developing a capstone&lt;br/&gt;Chemical
Engineering Unit Operations Laboratory around microfluidic experiments.
Subsequently, these devices will be modified for use as demonstrations with
existing outreach programs in Wyoming K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award is jointly funded by the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass
Engineering Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division, and by the Office of the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).