* 1254245
* CAREER: Quantum Dot Degradation in Aquatic Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Philip Larese-Casanova, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 403,847.00

CBET-1254245&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;With the projected market
for nanomaterial-based products approaching in the trillions of dollars
annually, management of these products and their waste will inevitably pose
challenges to environmental health, particularly when nanomaterials are released
through product disposal or industrial waste streams. This study is a plan to
describe quantum dot fate in representative aquatic settings subjected to broad
chemical conditions while exploring specific degradation mechanisms and
environmental factors that influence these processes. Quantum dots (QDs) are
semiconducting nanocrystals with core/shell structures often less than 20 nm and
employed in fluorescent measurements and energy applications, and, like other
metallic nanoparticles studied over the past decade, may undergo physical
(aggregation) and chemical (dissolution) transformations that influence their
overall bioavailability upon release to receiving water bodies. While the
toxicity of CdSe/ZnS QD and their leached metals have been examined closely for
a variety of microorganisms, more mechanistic details of their degradation
processes is needed for the various classes of QDs subjected to diverse aquatic
chemistries in order to better predict their overall fate.&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this proposal is to determine how different types of QDs, both
conventional and next-generation, degrade in aquatic environments and waste
streams. Specific objectives are (1) to develop a robust, rapid analytical
procedure for identifying and quantifying QD elements in their particulate,
complexed, and dissolved forms with almost no sample pre-treatment using single-
particle inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (SP-ICPMS) and size
exclusion chromatography (SEC-ICPMS), (2) to identify the ligand groups of
various types of organic matter that promote QD degradation and element release,
(3) to determine influence of UV and visible light in promoting QD degradation,
(4) to evaluate other inorganic geochemistry factors such as dissolved hydrogen,
oxygen, and sulfide that may influence QD degradation, and (5) to determine
whether physicochemical properties of QD coatings can be altered to prevent QD
degradation. Reaction rates and product distributions will be determined within
batch reactors containing various combinations of QDs and geochemical
constituents. The results will provide fundamental information on the roles of
geochemical solution conditions, dissolved organic compounds, and UV and visible
light exert on the dissolution of a variety of QDs. The SP-ICPMS developed here
will have application to other metallic nanoparticle measurements in
waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The laboratory
investigations into QD degradation processes will lead to a deeper understanding
of QD longevity to be expected upon release into aquatic environments, and this
information will lead to improved designs of QD coatings. This work will provide
education for one graduate student per year and several undergraduate students
in environmental engineering. The research opportunity provides diverse
experimental and analytical instrumentation training in water quality, inorganic
synthesis chemistry, and mineralogical techniques. Broadened participation of
underrepresented groups will be addressed by providing experiential learning
opportunities through hands-on laboratory engagement to undergraduate students,
Massachusetts state teachers, and local high school students. Their research
experiences will be integrated into the PI's Research Program by supporting QD
synthesis, reaction, and characterization methods as well as the Educational
Program by assisting development of educational materials for the instruction of
broad audiences about the principles of environmental science and engineering.
These materials are intended to foster systems thinking education using WWW-
based multimedia modules comprised of graphical, video, and systems modeling
tools. The results of this Educational Program will reach local middle school,
high school, and undergraduate students through field trip demonstrations and
curriculum modules.