* 1254309
* IDBR: Developing a Behavioral Acoustic Biome Measurement System
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Cory Miller, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2017
* USD 995,110.00

An award has been made to Ross Snider of Montana State University and Cory
Miller of the University of California, San Diego to develop a novel acoustic
and behavioral recording system for investigating the ongoing dynamics of
communication networks in wild small mammals. Communication is a biological
necessity. Without the ability to communication, interactions between
individuals would be impossible. To this end, species evolved complex
communication systems that provide them with a range of signals that function to
convey meaningful information to other individuals. Much of what is currently
known about the mechanisms underlying communication is derived from relatively
simple interactions involving a signal producer and signal receiver. While this
undoubtedly remains a core component of communication, a range of studies in
human and nonhuman animals show that communication is often far more complex.
Rather than being restricted to a dyadic pair, communication frequently involves
multiple individuals in a dynamic network. A significant constraint on
investigating these communication networks is methodological. Traditional
methods may be inadequate for recording the ongoing vocal interactions of
multiple individuals in the wild. This project seeks to address this limitation
by developing a novel collar-based recording system that allows the simultaneous
acoustic and behavioral data collection on multiple individuals in a social
group. Using a species of nonhuman primates, the common marmoset, as a model,
this recording system will provide significant insight into the complexities of
species-typical communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary nature of this project provides several unique opportunities
for training and education. By combining methods from electrical engineering and
organismal biology, the graduate students working on the project are afforded
the unique opportunity to not only be trained in applying the respective
techniques but to be involved in integrating across the disciplines. Engineering
students will gain valuable experience with developing applicable technologies,
while the biology students will gain experience in the significance of
developing and implementing novel tools. Minority students will participate in
this project at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Furthermore, as this
project deals specifically with communication - a topic of significance when
related to human language - it provides a unique opportunity for outreach
education as an example of instrumentation development and implementation in a
biological system. A demonstration for students of multiple ages will be created
to use in classrooms and other educational settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made through the Instrument Development for Biological research in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and through the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).