* 1254167
* CAREER: Empirical Studies of Technology Adoption
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Pascaline Dupas, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 458,665.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CAREER: Empirical Studies of
Technology Adoption&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES - 1254167
&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Pascaline Dupas
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher adoption of available technology could
significantly improve various aspects of wellbeing in developing countries. Two
thirds of child mortality could be eliminated through adoption of available
technologies, such as vaccines, antimalarial bednets, and oral rehydration
salts. Average maize yields in sub-Saharan Africa are three to five times lower
than yields attained by agricultural extension workers in the same region using
technologies now universal in rich countries, such as improved seed varieties
and fertilizer. How can adoption of these and other technologies be increased in
developing countries? What barriers do households and providers face? How can
these barriers be overcome? &lt;br/&gt;The research under this CAREER award aims
to advance our understanding of technology adoption in developing countries
through: (a) enabling and performing empirical tests of economic theory on three
determinants of technology adoption- subsidies, financial access, and education
- through a series of field experiments embedded in longitudinal data collection
efforts; (b) enhancing educational opportunities for students and educators
interested in development; and (c) filling gaps in the knowledge base available
to the practitioners who develop policies and programs to foster technological
transition. &lt;br/&gt;The research component has three strands. The first
research strand exploits randomized subsidy experiments in Ghana and Malawi,
combined with innovation in measurements, to examine when and how subsidies for
a new technology can foster learning about its effectiveness and trigger
diffusion. Both demand-side and supply-side factors are being considered, in
particular: how to target subsidies to those most likely to actually experiment
with the new technology, and once a targeting scheme has been established, how
to limit corruption and guarantee the subsidy reaches those it targets.
&lt;br/&gt;The second research strand exploits randomized variation in access to
financial products in Kenya, Malawi and Uganda to estimate how financial
exclusion impedes technology adoption. Namely, does the fact that the great
majority of the poor in rural Africa have limited ability to borrow and no
formal means to save limit technology adoption? What financial products can
boost their investments in technology and why does the market not provide them?
&lt;br/&gt;The third research strand exploits the randomized assignment of
education subsidies to youths in Ghana, combined with a 10-year panel dataset,
to estimate the causal impact of secondary education on technology adoption and
shed light on the pathways: does secondary education equip individuals with
cognitive skills that are complementary with technology, does it enable them to
hear about technology more easily, or does the effect of education on technology
adoption operate primarily through an income effect? &lt;br/&gt;This research
agenda embeds a comprehensive education plan aimed at disseminating the research
findings and methods to policymakers from the developing world, enabling better
understanding of and greater interest in development issues among high school
and undergraduate students, and offering international research opportunities
for college students and college graduates, as well as for graduate students
wanting to study development issues.&lt;br/&gt;This work will generate and
disseminate new evidence on questions debated by policymakers and practitioners,
not only those in government but also those in institutions that shape global
development agendas and resource allocation, from private foundations to
bilateral agencies such as USAID and multilateral agencies such as the UN and
the World Bank. One such debate is on whether and how new technologies should be
subsidized when they are first introduced. The proposed work will inform this
debate, potentially impacting the design of subsidies to encourage immediate and
long-term diffusion. Another debate is on the relative costs and benefits of
expanding banking services to the rural poor. The proposed work will inform this
debate, potentially impacting the regulation and incentives of both providers
and households in poor countries. Yet another debate is on the importance of
secondary education. There is much evidence on the importance of primary
education but little on that of post-primary education. The proposed work will
contribute evidence on both the private and social returns to secondary
education, potentially impacting expansion of secondary education. Finally, the
proposed work will generate innovative survey instruments and rich panel
datasets and make them public, and in doing so will stimulate further relevant
research.