* 1254999
* CAREER: Titanium Microelectromechanical Systems: Strength and Strengthenability
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Masaru Rao, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objectives of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program award are: 1) to advance fundamental understanding of size-dependent
plasticity in titanium-based microelectromechanical systems (Ti MEMS); and 2) to
develop means for strengthening Ti MEMS in situ, after they have been
fabricated. The former is motivated by the importance of such understanding in
establishing guidelines for reliable design, while the latter is motivated by
the limited material selection capability and poor fabrication process
versatility in MEMS. To achieve the first objective, mechanical testing will be
used to characterize deformation response of micromechanical structures produced
using recently-developed techniques for deep reactive ion etching of Ti. To
achieve the second, diffusional alloying will be used to strengthen Ti MEMS with
interstitial nitrogen solute. Understanding gained in these studies will help
elucidate mechanisms underlying size-dependent strength in Ti, as well as foster
development of new technological capabilities with direct relevance to both
conventional MEMS and emerging biomedical microdevice
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research, teaching, and outreach efforts will
be integrated to help inspire and prepare the next generation of scientists and
engineers, as well as engage a local community that is rich in ethnic and
socioeconomic diversity, but not well-represented in higher education. These
efforts will also help support continued growth and diversification of the U.S.
science and engineering (S&amp;E) enterprise, and will leverage a new
partnership with the California Science Project, a statewide network focused on
enhancing science instruction. Specific activities to be undertaken will include
those focused on: 1) supporting diversity in S&amp;E higher education; 2)
inspiring interest in advanced S&amp;E studies; and 3) promoting K-12 S&amp;E
interest and awareness.