* 1254041
* CAREER: An Information-Theoretic Approach to Communication-Constrained Statistical Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2022
* Maxim Raginsky, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2022
* USD 518,435.00

This project aims to develop an information-theoretic approach to communication-
constrained statistical learning problems involving multiple learning agents
located at the nodes of a large network. This approach will build on the
recently introduced coordination paradigm within network information theory,
which looks at multiterminal problems in terms of optimal use of communication
resources in order to establish some desired statistical correlations between
the nodes of a network. The main theoretical goal is to explicitly identify the
effect of bandwidth limitations, losses, delays, and lack of central
coordination on the performance of statistical learning algorithms over
networks. The project will systematically explore the fundamental limits of
learning in multiterminal settings and design efficiently implementable and
robust coding/decoding schemes. The theory developed under this project will be
a novel synthesis of probabilistic techniques from machine learning (such as
empirical process theory) and of multiterminal information theory (such as
distributed lossy source coding).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a broader impact, this
project will provide key enabling technologies for large-scale, distributed
applications of machine learning in such domains as smart grids, health-care
informatics, transportation networks, and cybersecurity. Statistical machine
learning is emerging as a dominant paradigm for making accurate predictions on
the basis of empirical observations in the presence of significant model
uncertainty. Most of the research activity in this field, however, has taken
place in isolation from the realities of complex networks and all the attendant
limitations on information transmission and processing: it is frequently assumed
that the data needed for learning are available instantly, with arbitrary
precision, and at a single location. However, given the fact that most data fed
to machine learning algorithms are increasingly generated, exchanged, stored and
processed over large-scale networks, there is a pressing need to dispense with
this assumption and thus take network effects into consideration. The theory and
the algorithms developed as part of this project will ensure that the relevant
data are delivered over the network to the right decision-makers, while securing
accurate decisions made on the basis of the received information. The research
component of the project is tightly integrated with an education and outreach
plan, including development and teaching of new courses on machine learning
aimed specifically at engineering students.