* 1254148
* CAREER: Controlled Enzyme Biocatalyst Immobilization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Bradley Bundy, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 419,717.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic biocatalysis should be a major
contributing technology as a foundation of renewable, sustainable and highly
specific catalytic processes for the growing $600+ billion US chemical industry.
The major challenges preventing widespread use of enzymatic biocatalysis are
cost of production, limited stability and separation difficulties. While
immobilization of enzymes to surfaces can address certain aspects of these
challenges, traditional immobilization technologies do not allow the researcher
to control and optimize the orientation of the attached enzyme on the surface.
Enzyme orientation is less of concern for free enzymes in solution, but is of
importance when they are fixed to a surface and restricted in motion. Dr.
Bradley Bundy at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah in this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) Program Award proposes to utilize site-specifically
incorporated unnatural amino acids to directly control the orientation of the
immobilized enzyme on a surface, thereby controlling the aspects exposed to
reactants in solution. In order to accomplish the determination of the most
suitable orientations, Dr. Bundy proposes to develop a high-throughput screen to
rapidly test multiple orientations of the immobilized enzyme to optimize both
enzyme activity and stability. With data on orientation being generated, a
further objective of this work is to gather orientation-specific immobilized
enzyme stability and activity data in bulk for processing and analysis. This
data will enable the validation of molecular interaction simulations and also
assist in the development of design guidelines to predict in advance
orientations of immobilized enzymes which both improve enzyme stability and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROAD IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
includes an integrated research and education plan with multiple levels of
impact. The successful development of the proposed technology has the potential
to significantly impact biocatalysis, medical diagnosis, biohazard sensing,
proteomics and any application that uses proteins immobilized on surfaces. The
award work promotes sustainability as it develops less expensive, more efficient
green biocatalysis to economically replace existing unsustainable and energy and
waste intensive chemocatalytic processes. The education component of Dr. Bundy?s
proposal addresses the U.S. President?s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness goal
of producing 1 million additional college graduates from Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Towards this aim, the proposal seeks to
light the fire of discovery in students early and maintain it through graduate
school. Elementary students will be introduced to enzymes and biocatalysis
through fun, grade-individualized, hands-on teaching modules that are feedback-
optimized by the PI and leveraged for impact through university engineering club
participation and community science events. A STEM-promoting learning
environment for grades 7-12 students will be created to meet the strong need for
biotechnology education materials and teacher-training. To maximize impact and
distribution, the PI will collaborate with the NSF-sponsored National Center for
Engineering and Technology Education at Brigham Young University which directly
works with teachers state-wide. The award is being jointly made between the CBET
Division's Catalysis &amp; Biocatalysis Program and the NSF EPSCoR Program.