* 1254838
* CAREER: Smart Radar Sensor for Pervasive Motion-Adaptive Health Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 04/30/2019
* USD 413,683.00

Intellectual Merit:The objective of this CAREER proposal is to resolve some of
the significant problems currently limiting microwave biomedical radar in an
innovative approach equipped with adaptive circuits and sensor fusion. A ?smart?
portable biomedical radar sensor will be devised for pervasive motion-adaptive
health care by monitoring the important physiological motion of human beings.
The proposed approach is founded on a hybrid of radar and camera solutions,
enabled by novel agile RF/analog circuits and demodulation algorithms. The hand-
in-hand revolution of hardware and algorithms enables an adaptive radar
architecture that can dynamically tune multiple operation points to combat
clutter generated DC drift and the associated signal distortion. Fusion with a
portable camera will ensure effective noise and interference removal, which
would be otherwise impossible to do using multiple radars only. Furthermore, a
CMOS smart-radar-on-chip solution will be conceived to demonstrate the
feasibility of truly portable biomedical radar devices that could be as popular
as an iPhone. The impact will be embodied as a revolution in human life style
and quality. Software configurability will be a driving force in this effort to
revolutionize the capability of radar systems to achieve being ?smart?. The
proposed research bridges the fields of biomedical engineering, microwave
engineering, embedded systems, and radar signal processing. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:The proposed smart radar sensor system will have broad impacts on health
care solutions to benefit the long-term U.S. healthcare program. If successful,
this research can be directly used for the monitoring and treatment of sleep
apnea and sudden infant death syndrome. It can outperform other technologies in
motion-adaptive tumor tracking during cancer radiotherapy in many anatomic
sites. When configured as a nonlinear vibrometer, the radar will also advance
approaches to monitoring rotating and reciprocating machinery in the
transportation and manufacturing industries. This program will provide a
thorough understanding of the capability and limitations of continuous wave
radar sensors for short-range applications, which is not only valuable to the
scientific community, but also beneficial to education in general. The studies
involved in this research are at the crossroads of engineering and health care
disciplines, and will enable unique educational opportunities that are often
missing in traditional engineering curriculums. The program will provide the
opportunity to strengthen electrical and computer skills of health care
professionals.