* 1254893
* CAREER: An Integrated Approach to Neuron Mechanics: Deciphering the Functional, Mechanical, and Structural Interactions between Microtubules and Actin
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Megan Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2019
* USD 410,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to use a suite of custom imaging and microscale manipulation tools to
investigate the interdependence of motility, adhesion and transport in neurons.
Neurons are specialized cells, with highly elongated geometries, that form
mechanically connected networks to enable transmission of signals in the nervous
system. The development of healthy neural networks depends on the action of
filamentous cytoskeletal structures: actin guides neuron growth and adhesion,
while microtubules serve as the tracks for the long-distance intracellular
transport of proteins and organelles that is required to maintain the extended
cell protrusions. Studies conducted under this award will determine the extent
and nature of the coordination between the actin and microtubule structures by
measuring how errors in long-distance transport affect cell adhesion and
motility, and how chemically- and mechanically-engineered scaffolds that
modulate adhesion affect transport. The effects of sudden impact injury on
single neuron mechanics, adhesion and transport will also be determined.
&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide a new paradigm for the
experimental investigation of neurons (-). One that integrates distinct features
such as adhesion or transport into one comprehensive model of neuron function.
Ultimately, the results will lead to the design of improved neural devices and
implantation materials, and novel treatment strategies for a wide range of
neurological disorders and traumatic brain injuries (TBI). The educational goals
are to include undergraduate students in all aspects of research, and to develop
new teaching material on the emerging field of neuron mechanics. A new
internship program, Veteran-student Internships in Biomechanics Research and
NeuroTechnology (VIBRANT) will be developed to bring veteran students from local
community colleges to campus to pursue independent research. One-on-one
mentoring and professional development opportunities will be provided to
encourage and empower veteran students to pursue science and engineering
degrees.