* 1254733
* CAREER: Chemistry of Iron-Sulfur Clusters in Nitric Oxide Signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Eunsuk Kim, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

Through this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
Eunsuk Kim from Brown University to elucidate chemical patterns and principles
related to the interaction of NO with [Fe-S] proteins, and the subsequent
formation and reactivity of dinitrosyl iron complexes (DNICs)resulting from this
interaction. Although NO signaling mechanisms are largely unknown, it has been
found that iron-sulfur proteins are one of the main reaction targets for NO,
wherein [Fe-S] clusters become modified and convert to DNICs. In this study, the
following specific questions will be probed: What are the intrinsic properties
and reactivity of DNICs? What are the physiological and/or deleterious roles of
DNICs? What happens to the bridging sulfides when [Fe-S] clusters are degraded
by NO? How do cells cope with unwanted [Fe-S] modifications by NO? These
questions will be addressed by employing synthetic chemistry expertise in
combination with a number of spectroscopic, biochemical, bioanalytical and
mechanistic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitric oxide (NO) is a double-edged
sword in biology. While NO is a ubiquitous signaling molecule, misregulation of
NO is implicated in numerous conditions including vascular diseases, cancer, and
neurodegeneration. The proposed studies will elucidate the interconnections
among the key cellular redox components such as [Fe-S] clusters, NO, O2, H2S,
and thiols, which will provide fresh insights and solutions to current questions
in the field and may lead to new paradigms in the study of biological NO
signaling. This project will also be integrated into educational and outreach
activities, which will initiate (i) a program dedicated to develop inquiry-based
laboratory curricula for high school chemistry and (ii) a student-led problem
solving session at a major research conference to promote a culture of active
participation from students and underrepresented groups in science.