* 1254738
* CAREER: Building bone marrow
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Brendan Harley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,000.00

1254738 &lt;br/&gt;Harley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hematopoiesis is the process
where all the body's blood and immune cells are generated from a small number of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). These events take place in unique parts of the
bone marrow termed 'niches'. The genetic information required to direct HSC
behaviors such as long-term inactivity, self-renewal, or differentiation to
produce blood and immune cells is contained within its DNA, but external signals
from the niche are required to trigger these events. And while HSCs are
responsible for producing nearly one trillion hematopoietic cells per day such
as platelets and immune cells, mutations in this process are responsible for
hematopoietic pathologies such as leukemia. However, it is difficult to study
these events inside the bone marrow. The long-term goal of this project is to
build an artificial bone marrow that provides the correct sequence of niche
signals to grow HSCs in the laboratory. Such a tool would be transformative
because it would allow one both untangle the web of cues that define HSC niches
as well as engineer variants to assist a range of hematopoietic and cancer
biology studies. To that end, the group has created a bone marrow biochip
platform that reduces the complexity of HSC niches to a manageable series of
discrete signals that we can selectively define within a threedimensional
biomaterial. This biochip allows to isolate small numbers of HSCs from the bone
marrow, manipulate the niche signals surrounding these cells in defined
increments, and track their response. This project we will chart how
combinations of three important classes of niche signals -- the structural make-
up of the bone marrow, supportive niche cells, and biomolecule cues -- impact
two critical behaviors, self-renew versus the initiation of differentiation.
Such knowledge will be critical for defining how niche signals can be engineered
into a biomaterial to control all phases of HSC activity. &lt;br/&gt;Through a
coordinated research and educational plan, this project will directly support a
number of critical outreach programs. Outreach efforts targeting early
elementary, secondary, and undergraduate students will be used to broaden
participation in science and engineering. Tools developed during this project
will serve as the foundation for ongoing and future research projects at the
confluence of immunology-biology-engineering disciplines.