* 1254095
* CAREER: Bridging Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Stiffness into Arterial Mechanics to Advance the Mechanisms of Restenosis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Linxia Gu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2019
* USD 457,308.00

1254095 Gu

Stenosis-induced heart disease and stroke result in 4.1 million long-term
physical disabilities in the US, especially among aging populations. Stent
implantation has been widely used to alleviate the stenosis by mechanically
enlarging the blocked artery and restoring blood flow. A major complication of
the stenting procedure is in-stent restenosis (ISR), the negative cell growth
toward the lumen. Acute ISR often aggravates the stenosis-induced permanent
disability. It was known that stent-induced abnormal loading leads to
maladaptive biological responses of vascular cells, specifically smooth muscle
cells (VSMC), which, in turn, regulates extracellular matrix (ECM) composition,
density, and structure resulting in the ISR. However, very little is known about
the changes of VSMC stiffness in response to stent-induced loadings and its role
on the mechanical responses of the artery. This knowledge will be essential to
advancing understanding of the detailed progression mechanism of restenosis. The
PI's long-term career goal is to fundamentally understand how cellular changes
are related to tissue remodeling by altering the geometry and material
properties (e.g., stiffness, porosity, etc.) to improve the prevention and
treatment of vascular diseases. As a step toward this goal, the research
objective of this proposal is to investigate the mechanical responses of VSMC at
various loading conditions and determine its impact on local arterial stiffening
following the stent implantation through hierarchical computational simulations
combined with in vitro cell culture and tensile tissue tests. The validated
model will capture the role of VSMC on the stentinduced arterial adaptation and
enable better understanding and control of restenosis. The educational goal of
the proposed work is to identify and frame an effective interdisciplinary
instructional strategy to train students in solving medical problems via
engineering approaches. The PI will build on her successful education activities
via the following: recruiting and mentoring graduate/undergraduate students and
high school teachers; developing an interdisciplinary curriculum; and finally,
leading innovative outreach programs for stroke rehabilitation patients, K-12
students, and the general public. Intellectual merit: Fundamental understanding
the role of VSMC stiffness is the key to developing effective preventive and
therapeutic strategies to reduce the restenosis rate. This project will bridge
the knowledge gap related to the mechanisms of restenosis. It will inform how
cellular dynamics are coupled with tissue behavior to result in arterial
adaptation. In vitro tissue tensile testing and cell culture experiments will be
utilized to provide inputs to computational models and benchmarks for validation
of these models. This study will: provide new datasets on the cellular responses
to various loads; provide new avenues to exploit the coupling between cell
population and tissue response; and will provide a new way of thinking about
mechanisms of restenosis. The proposed methodology could be extended to other
interventions, including vascular grafting and heart valve repair. The proposed
research is transformative in that it provides an innovative multi-scale
strategy to predict the arterial adaptation; it is expected to enable a new
methodology for further development of minimally-invasive medical devices.
Broader impacts: The knowledge obtained by completing the proposed work will
provide a new design/evaluation platform for stents and will prompt changes in
the prevention and treatment of the stenosis-induced disability. Graduate and
undergraduate students, especially women, will be recruited for this project.
The integration of this research into a stroke rehabilitation project will lead
to advanced rehabilitation strategies for persons with strokeinduced
disabilities. An enriched undergraduate curriculum will improve student learning
and prepare well-trained students regarding the tissue properties. Multiscale
computational results obtained using 64 processors in the University's Holland
Computing Center will be made available to the public. Presentations will be
given at the University of Nebraska State Museum to inform K-12 students and the
general public about the relevance of engineering programs in solving medical
problems. High school science teachers will be recruited to work in the PI's lab
in an effort to infuse their curricula with examples from the latest engineering
research. The impact of integrated education and research activities will be
evaluated and shared with the community.