* 1254380
* CAREER:   Social Networks, Labor Markets and Agricultural Technology Adoption in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Lori Beaman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 401,482.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CAREER: Social Networks, Labor Markets and
Agricultural Technology Adoption in Developing Countries&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: SES - 1254380&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Beaman, Lori
A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER seeks to provide insights into how social
networks affect economic behavior in developing countries in two key domains:
labor markets and agricultural technology adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
starting point for the first topic -social networks and labor markets- is that a
large body of evidence shows that the quantity and quality of an individual's
social network influences his or her labor market outcomes. Theory suggests
social networks may exist in order to address market failures such as asymmetric
information. Previous work by the Principal Investigator (PI) supports that
individuals have useful information about fellow network members. However, the
use of social networks in hiring decisions may reinforce existing inequalities,
as those with few or poor-quality network connections could be further isolated
from job opportunities. Women in particular report using social networks less
often and also have worse labor market outcomes on average. Using a recruitment
experiment in Malawi, the project looks at whether women are disadvantaged by
referrals, and if so, why? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second area is agricultural
technology adoption: An important puzzle in development economics is why farmers
do not use simple and seemingly profit-enhancing technologies. While there may
be numerous constraints to technology adoption, imperfect information about the
technologies could be an important factor. This project asks how social networks
can be harnessed to improve the dissemination of information. The research also
relates to recent work in economic theory on how network structure affects the
diffusion process. Several interrelated projects in this area seek to answer
empirical questions, including: 1) Do individuals with more agricultural
experience generate positive spillovers to their neighbors? 2) Can agricultural
extension agents partner with well-connected farmers to increase technology
adoption? 3) Which social network characteristics (betweenness, degree,
eigenvector centrality) of seed farmers most influence diffusion of information
on new agricultural technologies? 4) Does targeting well-connected farmers come
at the cost of increased inequality of knowledge within rural villages? These
projects all employ novel data collected to precisely answer these questions,
including social network censuses of many villages in Mali and Malawi. New
methodologies are also used, such as integrating theory into a field experiment
by using simulation of diffusion models and baseline social network data to
determine which farmers in Malawi should receive training on new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One limitation of much of
the previous research on social networks is that there are few policy
implications. Policymakers can rarely alter people?s social networks. An
objective of this CAREER project is to find ways in which policymakers can use
the deep social networks which exist in developing country contexts to improve
the effectiveness of policy --in particular to increase the adoption of simple
agricultural technologies which can raise incomes and reduce poverty.