* 1254653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Nuclear Arms Control in American Science, Politics, and Culture
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 8,376.00

Introduction

This doctoral dissertation improvement grant supports research in history of
technology. Specifically, the project will examine efforts to prevent nuclear
war, to control it, defend against it, and even to disarm and disable its
possibility, efforts loosely collected under the broad canvas of Nuclear Arms
Control, from the beginning of the missile age in the late 1950s through the end
of the Cold War. It focuses on the scientific, political and institutional work
of nuclear experts who were involved in various nuclear arms control efforts in
this period. It follows their activities in a variety of venues: university-
based research, defense consulting, public political engagement in the national
media and the U.S. Congress, and in new non-state arms control organizations.
The grant is predominantly for covering travel expenses for conducting archival
research in Washington D.C., Ithaca, San Francisco, and San Diego.

Intellectual Merit

The project will demonstrate how the structure of arms control work and the very
meaning of Nuclear Arms Control shifted and multiplied in this period. In the
1960s, arms control was itself a Cold War pursuit, the nuclear security state's
own prerogative. By the 1970s and 80s, arms control had taken on some of the
connotations more familiar to a twenty-first-century observer, as an enterprise
the state itself seemed reluctant or simply unable to properly execute. The
project seeks to chart and explain this broad shift in practice and meaning by
showing how it emerged from a changing interaction between experts, the federal
government, and the public. Numerous scholars have documented American efforts
to design and construct nuclear weapons, by contrast with documenting what was
done to prevent nuclear war.

Broader Impacts

The results of this project will be of interest to historians of modern U.S.
politics and historians of science, alongside the full range of scholars of the
nuclear age and the Cold War. Besides publishing a scholarly book and scholarly
articles based on the dissertation research, the researcher intends to write
articles for audiences beyond that of professional historians. Two general areas
of broader impact are envisioned. One is the community of professional
physicists, which has had a long and complex relationship with nuclear weapons
and the challenges of nuclear arms control. Another is the security policy and
international affairs community, which has an enduring interest in arms control
policy, missile defense, and the legacy of the Cold War. In sum, the project has
the potential to contribute broadly to thinking about nuclear weapons and the
relationship between foreign policy, domestic politics, and science and
technology.