* 1254323
* CAREER: Becoming Boundary Spanners: Investigating, Enhancing, and Assessing the Experiences of Early Career Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Brent Jesiek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This engineering education research project supported by the CAREER program will
enable an early career researcher to investigate how engineering degree programs
can develop students to act as boundary spanners who can communicate,
collaborate, and coordinate across organizational, disciplinary, geographic,
demographic, stakeholder, and other boundaries. Such skills are increasing
necessary for engineers to function effectively in a globalized workforce. The
project will investigate the nature of boundary-spanning competencies both in
degree programs and the workforce, as well as explore how degree programs can
enhance these competencies. The study uses a sequential mixed-methods design and
will develop a measure to assess key dimensions of boundary spanning competence
in engineering practice.

The broader significance and importance of this project arises from the
project's attempt to integrate a range of 21st Century skills into one
measurable competency, then develop ways to assess and teach this competency.
Such attempts can have systemic impact by informing degree programs about ways
to reduce time to degree while maintaining the ability to graduate engineers
with skills needed by today's workforce. This project overlaps with NSF's
strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an
engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by supporting the development of
innovative learning systems.