* 1254648
* CAREER:Understanding Sponteneous Combustion of Hydrogen and Oxygen in Nanobubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Li Qiao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1254648&lt;br/&gt;Qiao,
Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is focused on ignition and combustion
of hydrogen and oxygen in nano-sized confinements formed by water nano-bubbles,
which are generated by electrolysis. It is hypothesized that ignition and
combustion results from either (1) the confinement shortening the effective mean
free path resulting in higher rates of molecular collision, reaction, and heat
release to overcome the significant heat loss commonly encountered in small
combustion devices, or (2) the pressure increase during the collapse of the
water bubble resembling that in a rapid compression machine that leads to
ignition and combustion of the reactant mixture. Experimental efforts
concentrate on measurements of bubble size, growth dynamics, and temperature
within the bubble. Scanning laser-Doppler vibrometry is used for determining
bubble size and evolution, while micro fabrication techniques are used to
produce nano-scale thermometer suitable for the associated small time and
spatial length scales. The study is aimed at bridging the gap between nano-
science and traditional combustion science that are usually associated with
systems of much larger scales such as engines. Potential benefits include
understanding ignition and combustion at truly nano-scales, with applications in
small energy systems and machinery and fire safety. A Molecular Dynamics
approach is adopted for determining the pressure and chemical reactions of the
H2/O2 mixture within the nano-bubble To help alleviate the difficulties in the
proposed small-scale experiments. The educational program calls for education of
the public, dissemination of research through a popular nano-science website,
research opportunities for undergraduate students, and recruitment and mentoring
of woman engineering graduate students.