* 1254906
* CAREER: Modeling the Dynamic Interplay of Control, Planning and Perceptual Functions in Agile Human Guidance
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Berenice Mettler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
grant is to study and model the interplay of spatial control, perception and
planning functions in human guidance skills. Ample empirical evidence exists
supporting the observation that experienced pilots or operators display patterns
in their behavior. These patterns are significant because they are
manifestations of the mechanisms used by humans to organize and implement agile
guidance behaviors. Guidance tasks conducted with small-scale helicopters will
be used to generate experimental data that combine vehicle motion, pilot control
and visual gaze information. The research is organized in three threads: 1)
Determine the principles of patterns' emergence using a data-driven approach
combining dynamics, control, identification and data-clustering methods; 2)
Analyze the transition across patterns and their dynamic makeup to determine the
underlying model structures; and finally 3) Integrate the gained knowledge to
form an interaction model that describes the interplay between control,
perceptual and planning functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful this
research will enable tele-operation systems that take advantage of the
operator's innate guidance functions to reduce workload and increase safety.
Example applications include search and rescue helicopters or tele-surgery
systems. These systems will work by directing the operator's visual attention to
cues that are significant to performance and conversely, decode visual attention
to predict future control actions. The proposed research activities will promote
interactions between the fields of control engineering and cognitive sciences.
Cross-disciplinary opportunities will be leveraged to: 1) Create stimulating
undergraduate and graduate courses; 2) Encourage the involvement of
underrepresented students in the research environment; 3) Design outreach
activities for high-schools and elementary schools. The results will be
disseminated through a website accessible to the broader public and through
conference workshops designed to reach across the control and human factor
communities.