* 1254519
* CAREER: Stochastic Models for Designing the Patient Centered Medical Home in Primary Care
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Hari Jagannatha Balasubramanian, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 520,971.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
create capacity planning and allocation models to improve timely access,
patient-clinician continuity, and care coordination in primary care delivery.
Two-stage and multi-stage stochastic optimization methods will be used for this
purpose. Specifically, the models will optimize the allocation of care needs
arising from patients with different comorbidities and chronic conditions (case-
mix classes) to physician-nurse teams. A key part of the proposed framework is
modeling the impact of time spent in non-visit care (care provided outside of
the face-to-face office visit, through email, phone and/or other means). Non-
visit care is important since it provides both providers and patients an
alternate method to enhance access, continuity, and coordination, and can also
substitute for regular office visits. All project tasks will be carried out in
close collaboration with two academic medical centers (Mayo Clinic and
Massachusetts General Hospital) and a small family medicine clinic. The project
includes plans for dissemination (annual workshops at medical centers), and
implementation of results in practice (residency clinics at Massachusetts
General Hospital). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the stochastic models
and empirical estimations will provide rigorous quantitative support to inform
the operational and financial design of the patient centered medical home that
is being adopted nationwide. Ultimately access, continuity and care coordination
for patient populations will be positively impacted. The methodologies developed
to solve the computationally challenging allocation problems and the resulting
insights will have relevance for other service environments. Through this
project, graduate and undergraduate students will conduct interdisciplinary
research in clinical settings. Additionally, pedagogy in graduate and
undergraduate operations research courses will be enhanced through the use of
real world healthcare data sets.