* 1254127
* CAREER: Developing Quantum Nanogeochemistry for Molecular Studies and Inclusive Education
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Sara Mason, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 525,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Sara E. Mason at
the University of Iowa who will direct a project whose ultimate goal is to
develop quantum nanogeochemistry as a platform, (1) to provide fundamental
understanding of environmental nanoparticle (ENP) structure-reactivity, (2) to
merge distinct theories of ENP reactivity, and, (3) to recruit community college
(CC) students for training opportunities at the university level. The research
strategy is to carry out Density Functional Theory (DFT)-based simulations on
two classes of ENPs: Aqueous aluminum hydroxides modeled as Giant Aluminum
Polycations (GAPs) and mineral-water interfaces modeled as Periodic Slab Models
(PSMs). Reactivity questions that are suited to each model category are
identified, and systematic simulation experiments are designed using comparisons
to isolate what controls reactivity. The projects are designed to develop
atomistic simulations results of both GAPs and PSMs into new conceptual models
for ENP reactivity, a goal that will support or dispel existing theories. For
this purpose, the distinctions between the models will be exploited, for
example, GAPs are ideal models for tracking reactivity with orbital interactions
because they are truly nanoparticulate, and fewer electronic states are expected
to participate in interfacial bonding. Also, these aluminum hydroxides do not
have d electrons, so they have a less complicated electronic structure than
similarly structured iron hydroxides. Meanwhile, the PSM geometry is ideal for
probing how adsorption-induced long range bond relaxation and relative
energetics can be captured in a Bond Valence (BV) framework. Several of the
proposed simulations will involve first time calculations, such as the later
described DFT + COSMO (conduction-like screening model)+ (delta)H2O (partial
explicit hydration) method for simulating the aqueous Al30 (GAP) and deriving
surface-specific Hubbard U corrections to accurately model PSMs comprised of
strongly correlated mineral oxides.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
enable improved predictions about the sequestration of aqueous contaminants that
could ultimately lead to new water remediation strategies. Each research project
will support the training of graduate and undergraduate students, and a major
emphasis will be placed on the "Never Too Late to Learn" (NTLL) program and its
mission to engage community college students in education and research
activities that will extend opportunities to train them as the next generation
scientists. Efforts to organize research outcomes into DFT databases that will
be reported in the associated Data Management Plan, ensure that the fundamental
information obtained from the atomistic simulations will be disseminated to the
research community, regardless of any failure to pioneer the proposed conceptual
models. The unified research and education plans are suited to principal
investigator's strengths, background, and commitment to develop quantum
nanogeochemistry as a vital field in environmental chemical science.