* 1254333
* CAREER: Reaction Mechanisms, Performance Assessment, and Novel Mitigation Tools for Alkali-Silica Reaction in Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Farshad Rajabipour, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2020
* USD 435,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will advance the state of
knowledge on deterioration mechanisms, damage mitigation, and prediction of
service-life performance for concrete structures susceptible to alkali-silica
reaction (ASR). The research approach decouples the three fundamental ASR
reactions (silica dissolution, gelation, and swelling) and characterizes the
thermodynamic equilibrium and kinetics of each reaction as a function of the
chemistry (i.e., species concentrations and interactions) and physics (e.g.,
temperature, pressure, humidity) of the system. This will significantly clarify
the reaction mechanisms and the role of aggregate mineralogy and binder
compositions, and can lead to developing more efficient ASR inhibiting
admixtures, and admixture delivery methods, applicable to new and existing
structures. In addition, new testing and modeling tools are developed for rapid
and reliable assessment of the ASR risk and for quantitative prediction of the
durability performance of concrete containing potentially reactive aggregates.
Finally, ASR in emerging alkali-activated concretes is studied which allows
improved reliability and market acceptance of these green materials. The project
integrates multi-scale experimentation with multi-scale (geochemical, reactive-
transport, and performance prediction) modeling to efficiently achieve these
research goals. In addition to advancing the ASR science, the findings could be
of substantial value in accelerating the synthesis and utilization of new
pozzolans, geopolymers, and other high performance silica-based materials.

Alkali-silica reaction continues to be a major durability problem of concrete.
The resulting expansion, cracking, and loss of serviceability impose enormous
maintenance and reconstruction costs for bridges, pavements, dams, and other
civil infrastructure. This project performs hypothesis-driven basic research to
support transformative advancements in durability, service-life extension, and
as such, sustainability and resiliency of concrete infrastructure susceptible to
ASR. Through fostering collaborations with national and international
institutes, the project provides state-of-the-art research training for graduate
and undergraduate students to become the next generation scientists and
engineers. The project's technical components are well integrated with teaching
and outreach activities, including (a) implementing cooperative problem-based
learning to improve creative thinking and teamwork skills of undergraduate
students; (b) development and dissemination of free interactive e-learning
modules to familiarize students, faculty, and practicing engineers with advanced
materials characterization techniques; and (c) promoting engineering at high
school level to attract and engage under-represented students.