* 1254314
* CAREER: First-principles calculations of quantum processes in bulk and nanostructured semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Emmanouil Kioupakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is made on funds from
the Division of Advanced Computing Infrastructure and the Division of Materials
Research. It supports an integrated research and educational program on the
theoretical study of quantum processes in materials using first-principles
computational methods. Quantum processes play a crucial role in the operation
and efficiency of modern electronic, optoelectronic, photovoltaic, and
thermoelectric devices. Theoretical studies can provide insight into the
microscopic mechanisms that govern quantum processes in materials but are
inaccessible to experiment. First-principles methods based on density functional
theory enable the predictive calculation of the electronic properties of
materials entirely from theory, without empirical or adjustable
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will focus on quantum
processes in technologically important bulk and nanostructured semiconducting
materials. The role of scattering mechanisms such as carrier-phonon and carrier-
carrier coupling will be explicitly evaluated with density-functional and many-
body perturbation theory, respectively. In combination with the Boltzmann
equation formalism, these studies will provide valuable insight on the nature
and significance of microscopic quantum processes during carrier transport in
devices. Studies of optical absorption by free carriers and nonradiative Auger
recombination will elucidate the microscopic nature of these parasitic quantum
processes and their role in the operation and efficiency of optoelectronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will be integrated with
educational activities through the incorporation of numerical calculations and
computer simulations in the undergraduate and graduate curriculum and the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. Proposed outreach activities
aim to assist students from community colleges in making the transition to
Engineering at the University of Michigan. The effectiveness of the educational
program will be evaluated by education professionals at the Center of Research
on Learning and Teaching at the University of Michigan. Computer codes for the
predictive theoretical calculation of quantum processes will be created and
shared with the educational and research communities with the intent to
contribute to software reuse and the software cyberinfrastructure of the
materials research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is made on funds from the
Division of Advanced Computing Infrastructure and the Division of Materials
Research. It supports an integrated research and educational program on the
theoretical study of quantum phenomena in materials with predictive
computational methods. Semiconductor devices have significant impact on modern
society and improve our quality of life. For example, transistors are the
fundamental components of computers that are a cornerstone of the Information
Age. Semiconductor lasers enable high-speed fiber-optics communications, while
light-emitting diodes are novel light sources that can replace incandescent and
fluorescent light bulbs. Solar cells are used to produce electricity from
sunlight, while thermoelectric devices can convert heat directly into
electricity and power deep-space probes such as the NASA Curiosity rover on
Mars. The motion of electrons in the underlying semiconducting materials,
described by the laws of quantum mechanics, lies at the foundations of how these
devices operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
develop and apply predictive computational tools in order to understand the
properties in semiconducting materials related to the transport of electrons
through the material. This work will focus on how the motion of electrons is
affected by their interactions with each other and with atomic vibrations. This
study will also focus on how certain quantum processes cause energy loss in
semiconductor devices. The results obtained from this work will assist in the
development of better-performing and energetically more efficient semiconductor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will be integrated with
educational activities through the incorporation of numerical calculations and
computer simulations in the undergraduate and graduate curriculum and the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. Proposed outreach activities
aim to assist students from community colleges in transitioning to Engineering
at the University of Michigan. The effectiveness of the educational program will
be evaluated by education professionals at the Center of Research on Learning
and Teaching at the University of Michigan. Computer codes for the predictive
theoretical calculation of quantum processes will be created and shared with the
educational and research communities with the intent to contribute to software
reuse and the software cyberinfrastructure of the materials research community.