* 1255100
* CAREER: Elucidating the Structural-Functional Relationship of Photoelectrochemically Active Molecular Multilayers
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Peter Dinolfo, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2019
* USD 563,000.00

Professor Peter H. Dinolfo from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is supported by
a CAREER award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B program
in the NSF Chemistry Division to study the photo- and electro-chemical
properties of molecular donor-acceptor systems at electrode interfaces. The
design of multilayer materials for specific electronic, photonic, or electro-
optical applications requires an accurate knowledge of the structural-functional
relationships of the films and their respective building blocks. Using a new
layer-by-layer assembly technique developed in the PI's laboratory, multilayer
films comprised of spectrally-tuned organic and inorganic chromophores will be
assembled in donor-acceptor configurations on electrode surfaces. Spectroscopic
and electrochemical methods will be applied to the modified substrates to
elucidate the mechanisms and efficiency of energy and electron transfer
processes between chromophore layers. This information will then be correlated
with structural data on the multilayer thin films to determine the optimal
conditions for creating efficient molecular-based light harvesting arrays for
use in p-type dye-sensitized semiconductor solar cells.

Developing adaptable methods to chemically modify electrode and semiconductor
surfaces with hierarchical molecular structures and understanding the
photophysical processes occurring amongst the molecular constituents is of
central importance to the field of artificial photosynthesis. This research will
help formulate the design principles necessary to improve the efficiency of next
generation molecular based solar cells and artificial photosynthetic devices.
The project will also provide training for a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in the interdisciplinary field of materials chemistry.
Additionally, in an effort to stimulate and encourage young students to consider
a career in one of the STEM fields, the PI will organize and run a week-long
workshop for local high school students. These students will participate in
several hands-on activities in the PI's laboratory at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute that are designed to highlight some of the basic chemical aspects of
solar energy conversion and artificial photosynthesis.