* 1255274
* EAGER: Personalization in the Information Age
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Alex Snoeren, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This work seeks to understand the extent and impact of personalization
algorithms in popular on-line forums. In particular, the PI is studying web
search engines, social networking sites, and recommendation services like
Pintrest, Yelp and Reddit. While it is well known that each of these classes of
information sources perform extensive personalization, there has not been a
careful analysis on the impact of their efforts on what users see. This effort
is working to answer a number of fundamental questions: How different are the
experiences of distinct users? What features do the services use as input to
their personalization algorithms? How are they gathered, and where are they
stored? To the extent that the services display different information to
different users, are users aware, and can they - or third parties - manage and
exploit these changes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
understand the impact of various forms of information manipulation - as opposed
to outright censorship - on the Internet. Personalization algorithms in
particular are known to have the potential to place users inside ?filter
bubbles?, where they see only information that already aligns with their
viewpoints. In the worst case, adversaries can actively manipulate how content
is produced, discovered, and accessed. This work will develop technologies to
give users control over the information that they see to mitigate the effects of
information manipulation. Concrete outcomes of this effort include prototype
mechanisms to help users ?normalize? personalization technologies and
potentially move between alternate on-line ?personalities.?