* 1255379
* CAREER: Geometric Control of Flexoelectricity in Patterned Dielectric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 705,214.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Coupling between electrical and mechanical impulses
underlies the basic behavior of many sensors and actuators. Classical
piezoelectric materials are based on a linear correlation between the developed
charges and applied stress (sensor applications) or strain developed under an
applied electric field (actuator applications). With the drive towards
miniaturization for micro- and nano-electromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS),
piezoelectric materials have received additional interest because piezoelectric
actuation and sensing at the nanoscale can be conducted with much higher
actuation power densities than with electrostatic and magnetoelectric
approaches. This finding is in contrast to classical piezoelectric materials
that offer only a limited strain range, and actuating device structures offer
only limited scalability below the micron level. This work aims to take
advantage of novel physical phenomena, i.e. flexoelectricity (coupling between
strain gradients and developed charge), emergent on the nanoscale, to develop
novel electromechanical materials systems scalable to nanometer sizes, while
allowing for large strains. The electromechanical response scales inversely with
the dimensions of flexoelectric composites (and therefore miniaturized samples),
a trend opposite to what is observed in currently-available bulk single-crystal
or ceramic piezoelectrics. The response of flexoelectric composites cannot be
thermally or electrically degraded, and Pb-free compositions should offer much
larger electromechanical response than current Pb-based piezoelectric materials.
Therefore, flexoelectric nano-composites may enable a wider range of
miniaturized applications and an environmentally-safe alternative to current
bulk sensors and actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
research aims to achieve fundamental understanding of flexoelectricity as a
contributor to the electromechanical response of all dielectrics, and to harness
it as a new transduction approach for micro- and nano-systems. The combination
of precise nano-manufacturing methods with rigorous dielectric and (micro- and
macro-scale) piezoelectric characterization, in addition to exhaustive
microstructural characterization will provide a major insight into the
multiscale science of flexoelectric composites. This research aims to establish
theoretical and experimental limits for high electromechanical response through
flexoelectricity in micro- and nano-meter patterned dielectrics, and correlate
dielectric (microstructural) and flexoelectric (geometric) scaling effects to
understand their co-regulation of the effective piezoelectric response in
flexoelectric patterned dielectrics. A new understanding of flexoelectricity
facilitates the required departure from lead-containing crystals, which remain
the cornerstone of ceramic sensors and actuators. Flexoelectric coupling
provides a potentially transformative companion to the conventional approaches
of solid-solution engineering once the relationships between strain gradients,
nanostructure, and phase transitions are well understood. An integral part of
this project is the recruitment and retention of women in science and
engineering. This objective is achieved through hands-on workshops (focused on
smart materials) targeted to groups of girls in grades 5-12, as well as
mentorship, research and education activities targeted at graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge scientific and technological fields.