* 1255305
* CAREER: Nanocrystalline Grain Boundary Network Engineering Enabled by New Deformation Mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 09/30/2019
* USD 537,053.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a research project to
reveal how nanocrystalline grain boundary networks evolve during plastic
deformation and understand how this evolution affects subsequent mechanical
response. It is hypothesized that the unique deformation physics of
nanocrystalline metals will allow for manipulation of the grain boundary network
through thermomechanical treatments, connecting the heretofore separate fields
of grain boundary engineering and nanostructured materials. Specifically, the
research is driven by three technical objectives: (1) characterize the details
of the grain boundary network in nanocrystalline materials, (2) measure the
evolution of grain boundary character distribution and network topology under
thermomechanical cycling, and (3) leverage the insight gained to develop new
materials theory which connects grain boundary network details to mechanical
behavior. This work will combine advanced characterization techniques, carefully
designed mechanical testing, and atomistic simulations to meet these objectives.
The insights obtained here will be used to connect interfacial network character
to nanocrystalline mechanical behavior and to optimize the design of interfaces
in nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This program is motivated by several technologically relevant
questions: (1) How are the properties of nanostructured materials influenced by
the details of their grain boundary networks? (2) How does mechanical
deformation, both at room and elevated temperatures, alter these interfacial
networks? (3) Can the grain boundary network be optimized, through
thermomechanical treatments, to engineer better nanomaterials? This work will
provide a roadmap for controlling the details of grain boundary structure and
the interconnecting network formed by all boundaries in order to create improved
nanostructured materials and enable next-generation technologies. In addition,
this project supports an outreach program to broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities and women in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) fields. A multi-tiered approach will be implemented to engage
and empower high school students and teachers, as well as undergraduate
university students, through direct laboratory experiences and exposure to
interdisciplinary research.