* 1255409
* CAREER: Physical Properties of New Materials via Mathematics -- Methods and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Erika Kaufmann, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2020
* USD 419,985.00

The goal of this research project is to advance the understanding of physical
properties of new nano-materials by applying modern mathematical techniques. The
PI has new research projects, which will be attacked by using a) analytical and
b) noncommutative geometric methods. This will lead to the development of new
general techniques that can be applied to other fields as well. The materials
stem from triply periodic constant mean curvature (CMC) surfaces and their
complements which form wire networks. This gives an effective theory for the
Dirac equation on the CMC surface, the computation of the eigenvalue spectrum of
the Laplace operator on the graph of the wire network, the probing of a
previously found noncommutative/commutative duality and the study of
noncommutative topological invariants and the analogue of the quantum Hall
effect for the wire networks. The methods and tools that the PI will employ
range from methods in noncommutative geometry, algebra and representation
theory, singularity theory and differential geometry to condensed matter
physics. The above projects will provide important insights from different
perspectives into the mathematical and physical properties of new nanomaterials.
This interdisciplinary effort brings together tools from mathematics and physics
and fosters the dialogue between the two disciplines. The outcome may be useful
in photovoltaics, leading to increased effectiveness of solar cells. The broader
impact aspects of this project are inherent in its educational aspects and the
subject matter of the proposed research which involves several fields of
physics, as well as the interdisciplinary nature between the physical and
mathematical sciences. Kaufmann, holding a joint appointment in mathematics and
physics, is fostering the dialogue between these two departments by discussing
research projects with colleagues in both departments. She is undertaking the
development of a combined math-physics course for undergraduates, a joint
seminar series in math and physics, undergraduate research projects with an
interdisciplinary subject and a new website as an interactive blog about
questions from math and physics. This evolves from her experience in developing
an interdisciplinary course as a distance learning class. The proposal has a
strong outreach component. The PI plans a field day for elementary school
children, a symposium for Indiana teachers as well as a semiannual lecture
series for the general public. Kaufmann plans to join the Science K-12 Outreach
Program at Purdue University. Kaufmann actively serves as a role model for women
in mathematics and physics, and by her involvement in Women in Science and Women
in Physics initiatives and outreach for women in physics. She is also
supervising a minority graduate student working on a joint research project with
the chemistry department at Purdue.