* 1255156
* CAREER: BROADBAND INFRARED NANO-SPECTROSCOPY
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Mumtaz Qazilbash, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 625,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Competing interactions in correlated
electron materials lead to emergent phenomena, for example, phase transitions
under external perturbations like temperature, chemical doping, and electric
field. We will investigate metal-insulator phase transitions in oxides with
strong interactions, for example, vanadium dioxide, and manganites with
perovskite structure. We will primarily use infrared photons to document the
evolution of the phase transformations at nanometer length scales and
macroscopic length scales using broadband far-field and near-field infrared
spectroscopy. The goal is to discover new paradigms that govern emergence in
materials with strong interactions. Specifically, we hope to ascertain the role
of size of the system on the evolution of metal-insulator phase transformations
and accompanying structural instabilities. We plan to develop near-field nano-
spectroscopy with broadband far-infrared photons in order to simultaneously
document electronic and structural changes with about 10 nm spatial resolution.
This experimental method will have wide applicability in physics, chemistry,
biology, optical engineering and materials science that goes beyond the
applications to correlated electron materials. This project will provide
advanced scientific training for graduate and undergraduate students, and hence
an excellent foundation for their future careers in academic institutions, and
national and private research laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Strong interactions between a large number of
electrons in solids lead to novel macroscopic behavior that is not seen in
materials with weak interactions. Examples of such exotic macroscopic phenomena
include metal-insulator phase transitions, superconductivity at high
temperatures, and coupled magnetic, electronic and structural ordering. The
principles of macroscopic organization do not follow in any simple manner from
the known laws of physics that govern individual quantum entities (i.e. single
electrons). The rules that regulate collective behavior and ordering phenomena
in complex, interacting systems are yet to be discovered, and this is what
motivates my research on such systems. We will primarily use infrared photons to
investigate metal-insulator phase transitions and ordering phenomena in complex
metal oxides. The photons interact with charged quantum particles and carry
information about their behavior which we measure and record. Since
organizational principles can vary with the size of the system, we plan to study
metal-insulator phase transformations from nanometer length scales (hundreds of
atoms) to macroscopic sizes (trillion trillion atoms). We plan to develop the
experimental tool of near-field optical spectroscopy by coupling to a broad
continuum of low energy infrared photons in order to study multi-faceted
nanoscale phenomena. This project will provide advanced scientific training for
graduate and undergraduate students, and hence an excellent foundation for their
future careers in academic institutions, and national and private research
laboratories.