* 1255326
* CAREER: Fundamental Investigation of Supported Materials: ZIFs and Nanoclusters
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2019
* Lauren Benz, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 10/31/2019
* USD 489,381.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The proposed work, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
is a fundamental investigation of supported materials which focuses on oxide-
supported metal/metal oxide nanoclusters, and supported zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks. Such materials are promising candidates for applications in gas
capture and storage, and hold potentially novel, unexplored reactive properties.
The interaction of energy-relevant molecules with these supported materials will
be probed using temperature programmed reaction spectroscopy (TPRS) and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). These techniques will shed light on some key
fundamental questions regarding binding sites, relative binding strengths, and
reactivity. They will also enable critical investigation of the chemical and
thermal stability of the supported films. This work is expected to establish
connections between material composition and gas binding and reactivity,
enabling the prediction of structural and chemical changes in supported
materials which will lead to enhanced reactivity and selectivity in gas binding.
Furthermore, the bulk of this work will take place at the University of San
Diego, a primarily undergraduate institution, affording an integration of
materials chemistry into the undergraduate curriculum. Finally, a portion of the
funds will be used to develop a network of female STEM faculty in the San Diego
region (the "femSTEM" network) which fosters the retention and promotion of STEM
women in academia, and mentors women transitioning to academia from postdoctoral
and graduate positions.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

A number of challenges exist currently in the areas of energy production and gas
storage. For example, carbon dioxide produced from the combustion of hydrocarbon
fuels continues to contribute to global warming. One potential mitigating
solution to this problem is the filtration and storage of carbon dioxide using
high surface area materials, such as porous metal-organic frameworks. The
proposed work, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, is
a fundamental investigation of such supported materials for energy-relevant gas
storage and reactivity. Materials of interest include zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks and supported metal and metal oxide nanoclusters. The goal is to
establish relationships between material structure/composition and gas
adsorption, as well as energy-relevant reactivity using surface science
techniques. This work will heavily involve undergraduate researchers, and will
also lead to the integration of materials chemistry into the undergraduate
curriculum at the University of San Diego. A second important aspect of this
work involves the development a network of female STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and math) faculty in the broader San Diego region ("femSTEM"
network). The purpose of this group will be to foster the transition,
development, and promotion of women faculty in the STEM fields of academia.