* 1255546
* EAGER: Attacking (and Defending) Information
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Giovanni Vigna, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The Internet has evolved into an essential medium that permeates most aspects of
our lives. We consume information and entertainment online, cultivate
relationships, exchange ideas, and handle business transactions. Not
surprisingly, this new medium has also attracted malicious elements who seek to
use the Internet to take advantage of others. Information manipulation is a new,
emerging frontier in cyber security. Information manipulation denotes all
attempts by adversaries to distort information with the goal to influence
opinion, thought, or action. It can take many shapes and forms, from blatant
attacks, such as search-poisoning, to misinformation, such as bogus on-line
reviews, and more subtle distortion, such as personalized search and biased
news. Unlike more traditional attacks, which typically aim to take control of
computational resources or sensitive data, information manipulation targets
human minds and their ideas. Left unchecked, information manipulation can harm
our economy, culture, and democracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
project, the PIs aim to systematically study the ways in which attackers can
manipulate information along its flow from the source where it is created to the
recipient. Of particular interest are systems that help to discover, organize,
and present information to users. These systems, such as search engines and news
portals, reach large audiences and act as filters that often determine what
content users will see or not. Thus, attackers can achieve significant leverage
when successfully manipulating the filter mechanisms to their benefit. As one
example, attackers can carry out search engine poisoning attacks to trick search
engines into ranking their content higher than it should be based on its organic
value. However, attackers do not need to target search engines directly; it is
also possible to manipulate ranking by targeting users of search engines and
their search history. Based on the study and analysis of attacks, the PIs will
develop general detection approaches to identify when systems are under attack.
This information can then be leveraged to design appropriate countermeasures.