* 1255907
* CLASH - Cross-Layer Accelerated Self-Healing:  Circadian Rythms for Resilient Electronic Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Mircea Stan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 222,995.00

A great challenge for future electronic systems is coping with process, voltage,
temperature and aging variations. If left unchecked these variations require
unacceptable design margins, can lead to transient and permanent faults, and
significantly degrade the system reliability and resilience. This project is to
consider the potentially transformative concept of regular periodic deep
rejuvenation for electronic systems akin to the recovery during sleep for
biological systems. Until now sleep for electronics just meant a period of
inactivity; this proposal explores the idea of sleep becoming an active recovery
period as essential for electronics as it is in biology. Such deep rejuvenation
schemes will require cross-layer optimizations in order to balance the various
tradeoffs. Promising preliminary experimental results show the potential
benefits of the proposed activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research, if successful, could have a deep impact on the semiconductor industry,
and society as a whole, by the way electronic systems are designed, used and
operated. Due to the periodic rejuvenation such systems could be optimized to
run faster, consume less power, have less area, cost less, and thus overall
provide more value per dollar. The Principle Investigator plans to develop a
textbook for application-specific integrated circuits or systems-on-chips that
would take advantage of the interactive graphics made possible by the iBook
format, and to "flip" the classroom with the help of the available on-line
lectures.