* 1255757
* A Hardware-Accelerated Transistor-to-Application SEU Simulation Platform
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Derek Chiou, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 183,000.00

As transistors shrink in size, they enable more functionality on the same area
of silicon. However, small transistors are also more susceptible to intermittent
errors due to alpha particles striking the silicon. Engineering systems to
tolerate such errors is a problem that will become increasingly important over
time. Evaluating fault tolerant designs has traditionally been almost impossible
because (i) faults occur very infrequently, (ii) they require highly detailed
(and thus time-consuming) simulations to determine whether they have any real
effect, and (iii) millions or even billions of such simulations need to be
performed to determine whether the design can actually tolerate particle strikes
with different charateristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
problem through a set of interlocking simulators, each at a different level of
accuracy and simulation speed. The initial particle strike is modeled in
extremely high detail for a short time until it can be modeled by a faster
simulator with less detail, and so on. How to intelligently decide when the
particle strikes, what it strikes, and when to transition between simulators are
some of the core intellectual components of this project. Such a simulator could
help develop techniques to build more efficient and effective reliable systems
than are possible today.