* 1255539
* SusChEM: CAREER: The Application of Visible Light Photocatalysis to Amine Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Nan Zheng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Nan Zheng of the University of Arkansas. Nitrogen radical
cations are synthetically useful yet underutilized electrophilic nitrogen
sources. The goal of this project is to develop chemistry utilizing nitrogen
radical cations generated under visible light photoredox conditions. There are
three specific objectives. First, [3+2] annulation of cyclopropylanilines with
alkynes, enynes, and diynes will be developed to provide 1-amino-2-cyclopentene
derivatives. An asymmetric variant of the [3+2] annulation of
cyclopropylanilines with alkynes will be investigated using a chiral Ru complex.
Second, using much less reactive cyclobutylanilines, an analogous [4+2]
annulation with alkynes, enynes, and diynes will be developed to synthesize
1-amino-2-cyclohexene derivatives. The [4+2] annulation method will be employed
to complete a racemic synthesis of (±) hayayne. In the final objective, a
general synthetic strategy based on a photocatalyzed cascade reaction will be
developed for access to the akuammiline family of alkaloids.

Organic reactions driven by visible light are ideal for sustainable chemistry,
as they use abundant sunlight, are operationally simple, and often have high
atom economy. The chemistries in this project embody the principles of
sustainable chemistry. The products of the reactions are highly useful synthetic
intermediates for the pharmaceutical and materials industries. In addition,
Professor Zheng will initiate three educational projects that interweave his
research with teaching. The goals of these projects are to improve the learning
experience of the students in organic chemistry courses and expose them to
researches such as drug design and sustainable chemistry that are more
interesting and relevant to them. The first project is to develop 3-D (three-
dimensional) contents to improve how organic chemistry is taught. Some of the
3-D contents include using the Computation/Visualization Facility in the Center
for Protein Structure in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of Arkansas to teach some basic concepts of drug design as well as
using a 3D visualization system to help the students "see" stereochemistry
better. The second educational project involves designing new experiments for
advanced undergraduate organic labs and organic chemistry II labs based on the
proposed research. The last educational project focuses on introducing
sustainable chemistry to organic chemistry II lectures.