* 1255930
* Collaborative Research/IDBR:   High-Throughput Measurement of Oxygen Consumption Rates of Single Cells Using Wide-Field Optical-Resolution Photoacoustic Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Lihong Wang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2016
* USD 320,736.00

Collaborative Research/IDBR: High-Throughput Measurement of Oxygen Consumption
Rates of Single Cells Using Wide-Field Optical-Resolution Photoacoustic
Microscopy An award is made to the Washington University in St. Louis to develop
a novel wide-field opticalresolution photoacoustic microscope (OR-PAM) and a new
high-density single-cell array substrate to achieve simultaneous and high-
throughput measurements of single-cell oxygen consumption rates (OCRs) for a
large population of cells. OCR is a critical parameter of the functioning of the
cells, which is directly linked to their metabolic state. So far, OCR
measurements have been performed on bulk populations of cells. Recent studies
have shown increasing evidence of cell-to-cell heterogeneity among previously
assumed homogeneous populations. Measuring the average response of a cell
population to a stimulus may not well reflect individual cell responses.
Therefore, conducting OCR measurements on single cells will provide more
accurate information on cellular functioning, not only for individual cells but
also for the entire cell population. OR-PAM is capable of "label-free" detection
of a wide range of biochemicals with high sensitivity and spatial resolution.
Combining wide-field OR-PAM with high-density single-cell array substrates will
enable high-throughput screening of a large population of single cells in a
timely manner for the first time. This project will lay a solid technical
foundation for developing a new class of scientific instruments to study
heterogeneity in cellular metabolism. These instruments will be accurate, high-
resolution, highthroughput, easy-to-use, and low-cost. Therefore, they will
significantly impact many areas of biological research. The multidisciplinary
nature of this research is expected to offer learning and training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students to cross their discipline boundaries by
learning new principles and methods. Grade 7-12 teachers and students from
underrepresented school districts will be involved. Research results will be
incorporated into the PIs' course development at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. They will be also disseminated through paper publications and
outreach activities to the research community and general public. In addition to
the outreach plans, a comprehensive dissemination plan has also been developed.
The developed methods, devices and system will be actively promoted to the
biological research community through conference presentations, invited talks
and seminars. Collaborations and partnerships with bioinstrumentation industries
will be established to explore potential opportunities for further development
and commercialization.