* 1255821
* Cross-Layer Resilience Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Christoforos Kozyrakis, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Electronic systems are an indispensable part of everyday life. Malfunctions in
these systems have consequences ranging from annoying computer crashes, loss of
data and services, to financial and productivity losses, or even loss of human
life. For coming generations of electronic systems manufactured using advanced
silicon technologies, several hardware failure mechanisms, largely benign in the
past, are becoming visible at the system-level. As a result, a vast majority of
future electronic systems, handhelds and servers alike, will require resilience
to hardware failures during their operation. Traditional redundancy techniques
impose significant costs, and are clearly impractical for general usage. This
proposal addresses this outstanding challenge: how to create systematic
approaches to achieve the required level of resilience at minimal power,
performance and area costs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
educating new generations of students and semiconductor industry professionals
on the emerging resilience topics, this project will enable the broader research
community to answer several key questions for which satisfactory answers don't
exist today. Quantitative answers to these questions will enable the industry to
create next generations of electronic systems with highly cost-effective
resilience. As a side benefit, the results obtained from this project can help
overcome challenges associated with post-silicon validation and debug of complex
electronic systems of the future.