* 1255410
* CAREER: The Effect of Physiological Pacing on Cardiac Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2019
* Alena Talkachova, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2019
* USD 552,685.00

In this project the PI will (1) to extend the concept of electrical restitution
to the case of real physiological stimulation by mimicking HRV, and (2) to
determine the effect of feedback modulation on the transition from normal to
abnormal cardiac rhythms in the heart. The main hypothesis is that modulation
and elimination of feedback leads to the stabilization of normal sinus rhythm,
and therefore prevents abnormal rhythm formation in the heart. The revised
concept of electrical restitution will be more accurate in predicting the
transition to arrhythmias in the heart. Specifically, the PI proposes: (1) to
develop a novel restitution concept by including a physiological HRV, and to
test predictions of this new concept in isolated cardiac myocytes; (2) to
validate predictions of the novel restitution concept in cardiac tissue using
both numerical simulations of physiological ionic models and whole heart optical
mapping experiments; and (3) to demonstrate the beneficial effect of feedback
modulation on abnormal rhythm development using an in-vivo rat model. The
proposed program will train graduate and undergraduate students in a
multidisciplinary environment, and will expose students to nonlinear ways of
thinking. The proposed activities will help students gain the ability to use
nonlinear analyses to understand complexities in engineering and biological
systems. The proposed research is designed to allow maximum use of combined
numerical simulations and experimental approaches. Different levels of numerical
simulations and experimental techniques will help train students in various
areas, and encourage them to work as a team to accomplish the general objectives
of the grant. As a part of educational program, the PI will develop a new course
suitable for graduate and undergraduate students from the College of Science and
Engineering to enhance their exposure to nonlinear dynamics. This course will
describe the dynamics of the heart based on a multi-level approach, from single
ionic current to isolated cardiac myocytes to the whole heart. The results of
the research program will be used to promote ?hand-on? learning through
demonstration and laboratory experiments. With the help of graduate and
undergraduate students, the PI will design a Summer Lab course on cardiac
electrophysiology to help students gasp several techniques, including optical
imaging, data acquisition, nonlinear signal analysis, and feedback control.
During next several years, the PI will organize an educational summer camp on
cardiac dynamics adapted for high-school students, in which both lectures and
lab course will be adapted for their needs.