* 1255535
* CAREER:  High Resolution Spectrochemical Imaging Through Tissue
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Anker, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2019
* USD 526,216.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR)
program in Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Office of Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Jeffrey Anker and
his group at Clemson University are developing a novel, powerful, and general
method, known as functional X-ray Luminescence Tomography (fXLT), for high-
resolution chemical imaging in tissues. The proposed technique combines the
advantages of X-ray imaging, including its excellent spatial resolution and
ability to image deep in tissue, with the chemical sensitivity of optical
methods. The proposed approaches are to 1) construct a proof-of-principle high-
resolution fXLT instrument and evaluate signal strength and X-ray doses in model
tissue samples, 2) develop and characterize chemical sensing films and particles
and evaluate chemical sensitivity, and 3) evaluate the spatial resolution and
chemical sensitivity of fXLT films embedded in intralipid/hemoglobin tissue-
mimics and ex vivo porcine tissue.

The proposed imaging technology has the potential to revolutionize biological
and biomedical imaging by providing a powerful, general set of minimally
invasive imaging methods for detecting chemical changes with high spatial
resolution on surfaces deep within tissue. Professor Anker also plans to provide
valuable training for graduate and undergraduate students who will gain
expertise in experimental design, nanoparticle synthesis and characterization,
microscopy, spectroscopy, chemical analysis, particle printing, data analysis,
and dissemination via manuscripts and oral presentations. Research methods and
results will be included in a new graduate class on imaging, sensing, and
therapy with nanoparticles. The PI will also incorporate fXLT spectroscopy
examples into his undergraduate Quantitative and Instrumental Analysis courses.
A high school teacher will collaborate on inkjet printer research and outreach
project through a research experience for teachers (RET) summer research plan.
High school students will participate in the research activities through an
exciting chemical-sensing robot kit competition.