* 1255629
* CAREER: Spin-Dependent Transport at Oxide Interfaces Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Nikoleta Theodoropoulou, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 01/31/2019
* USD 499,998.00

Technical Description: The overarching research goal of this CAREER project is
to explore new physical phenomena that emerge when interfaces between different
oxides are created with atomic-scale precision as afforded by the Molecular Beam
Epitaxy deposition technique, which enables better control of stoichiometry and
termination of the interfaces than other deposition methods. Synthesis, in-situ
and ex-situ characterization of heterostructures consisting of perovskite oxides
with different valence and multiferroic properties are used to (a) tailor the
electronic properties of the interfaces and to investigate the presence of a
predicted 2-dimensional electron gas and the metal-insulator-transition at the
interfaces; (b) study the epitaxial growth and stabilization of novel oxides;
(c) investigate spin injection and the spin transport properties of the
established 2-dimensional electron gas at oxide interfaces in magnetic
nanostructures using integrated, epitaxially grown oxides as tunnel barriers and
spin filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The project
involves materials growth and characterization, and explores new interfacial
phenomena. The successful implementation of the scientific findings could lay
the foundation for a new technology platform based on the interfaces of hybrid
materials. It can lead to a large-scale use of oxide technology and has the
potential to usher in a new era of highly integrated oxide-based charge and spin
electronics. The educational and outreach project activities impact and benefit
the society by engaging high-school science teachers in materials science
research through a "hands-on" summer workshop; attracting the attention of the
local, largely Hispanic community and exposing them in scientific research
through a "Science Open House" initiative; recruiting and engaging high-school
and undergraduate students into research, fostering their understanding of
scientific methodology and reasoning; training and retaining the next generation
of physicists and materials scientists; leveraging the institutional pool of
minority students to increase the level of diversity in scientific disciplines.