* 1255237
* EAGER: Investigation of Techniques for Creating Storytelling Animations During Data Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,908.00

The aim of this exploratory project is to enable scientists to easily create
storytelling animations for effective communication of research results. Today
visualization has become an indispensable tool for many scientists in their
daily work to validate and explore the data obtained from their studies, to
discover new findings, and to communicate them with others. Both commercial and
open-source visualization tools offer a wealth of visualization techniques,
enabling scientists to explore their data and generate individual images which
capture key aspects of the subject under study. However, an important need of
scientists - creating animations for storytelling - is not sufficiently
supported. Scientists make extensive use of animation in the form of videos that
explain complex structures or processes. Surprisingly, most visualization
packages provide very limited support for making animations. The objectives of
this project are to: (1) design an interactive animation interface seamlessly
integrated with the visualization interface, and develop optimal strategies for
controlling camera movement based on key-frames specified by the user; (2)
create a prototype system to assess how well the proposed integrated interface
enhances users' ability to create visualization animations for storytelling; and
(3) through case studies and a user study, investigate whether animations
created using the system effectively illustrate complex processes and spatial
relationships. This proof-of-concept study focuses on volume data visualization;
however, the results are expected to be generalizable to a wide range of
scientific and information visualization. This proposed research is challenging
as it seeks to establish understanding of how animations can effectively
illustrate evolving structures, spatial relationships, and patterns and what
system support is needed to enable users to create expressive animations during
data exploration without seeking help from professional animators.

The lessons learned in this study suggest the design of a new framework for
next-generation visualization systems that can benefit a broad range of
scientists. Educational activities include the integration of research into
teaching, in the form of special topic courses, the establishment of internships
with industry and national laboratories, and the introduction of the proposed
visualization technology to students from other disciplines. Project website
(http://vis.cs.ucdavis.edu/NSF/IIS1255237) is used for results dissemination.