* 1255888
* Acquisition of a Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Earth Science Research and Research Training in Northern New England
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Julia Bryce, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 722,107.00

With this award, the PIs and faculty colleagues at UNH and other Northern New
England institutions will acquire a multicollector inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) to carry out high-precision isotopic measurements
for a variety of elements applicable to studies in the Earth and environmental
sciences. Isotopic characterization of Earth and environmental materials
continues to revolutionize our capability to track and quantify processes as
well as understand elemental fluxes between different reservoirs of the Earth
system. Isotopic data are also critical to deciphering the timing of major
events in Earth history that profoundly impact the evolution of life, Earth?s
climate and the physical development of the continents, ocean basins and the
planet?s interior. Projects capitalizing on this facility will include: (1)
advancement and enhancement of the quantitative model for the isotopic
consequences of partial melting of Earth?s crust; (2) geochemical assessment of
mantle melting dynamics; (3) isotopic characterization of soil minerals, fungal
material, and tree tissues from novel biogeochemical experiments designed to
develop elemental and isotopic proxies for nutrient limitation; (4) early
evolution of Earth?s mantle and lithosphere, as recorded by silicic and
ultramafic rocks in early Archean cratons; (5) geochronologic and tracer studies
to quantify the rates and mechanisms of crustal processes, with emphasis on
modern plate boundaries and past orogenic events; (6) isotopic tracer
applications to elucidate sediment provenance; (7) geochronologic and tracer
applications to constrain environmental change in Earth?s history; (8)
hydrogeological applications of isotopic ratios to identify surface and ground
water interactions and anthropogenic contributions to mixed-use watersheds; and
(9) isotopic tracking of air mass provenance and atmospheric chemical reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this analytical facility will include
student training, innovation of new analytical techniques, and the strengthening
(and development) of research ties between several New England institutions.
Data collected in this facility will foster the growth of quantitative models
for characterizing varied deep Earth, Earth surface, deep time and atmospheric
processes.