* 1255377
* CAREER: Biomimetic Self-assembly of Polymer-inorganic Hybrid Nanocompartments with Biomedical Delivery Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Zhihong Nie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 498,900.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative functional hybrid
nanomaterials may offer a new generation of highly selective and effective
therapeutics and diagnostics for human health. The goal of this award is to
synthesize a new class of polymer-inorganic vesicular hybrids for drug delivery
through polymer-assisted nanoparticle self-assembly. These functional vesicular
hybrids mimic viral capsids from the aspects of size, surface patch, surface
topology, and mechanical properties, thus facilitating their functions in
medical delivery. Each building block of polymer-tethered nanoparticles in the
assemblies serves as a polymeric brick to uniquely define the local physical and
chemical cues on the membrane surface of vesicular hybrids at the nanoscale.
This strategy enables the preparation of vesicular hybrids with critical
features required by biomedical delivery, including (1) tailored permeability,
surface functionality, surface topology, and mechanical properties, (2) tunable
inherent or new synergetic properties of inorganic components due to
significantly enhanced ordering and weight fraction of inorganic nanoparticles
in the assemblies, (3) remote-controlled release of encapsulated cargo in
addition to imaging and manipulation capability while preserving the original
unique functionalities of the polymer ligands. The objectives of this proposal
are: (1) to understand and control the construction of vesicular hybrids with
well-defined tunable surface patches, surface topology, and mechanical
properties at the nanoscale; (2) to design multicompartment vesicular hybrids
and systems that respond to external stimuli including pH, temperature, light,
and potentially electromagnetic field; (3) to explore the encapsulation of drug
compounds in vesicular hybrids and study the kinetics of remote-controlled
release of cargo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer-inorganic hybrid nanocompartments with
highly organized, topologically complex surfaces have important applications
ranging from healthcare and medicine (e.g., imaging contrast agents and drug
delivery vesicles) to optoelectronics. The proposed program will develop new
robust multifunctional hybrid compartments to address current challenges in
biomedical delivery, explore a new class of remote-controlled responsive
materials, and provide new insights into polymer-assisted self-assembly of
inorganic nanoparticles. This award will allow the PI to integrate
interdisciplinary research on biomimetic polymer-inorganic hybrids with
education of students at the graduate, undergraduate, and high-school levels.
The goal is to give students a competitive edge in both academia and industry,
and to help them become leaders in these new and emerging research fields. The
proposed outreach program seeks to: i) incorporate current advances in emerging
research fields into curriculum development such as laboratory design at both
graduate and undergraduate levels, ii) recruit and train students particularly
under-represented groups at both graduate and undergraduate levels, iii) create
a mentoring program aimed at interested high school students, and iv) bring
advanced educational science demonstrations to classrooms.