* 1255158
* CAREER:  Assessing the Reactivity and Diversity of Neutrophilic Iron-Oxidizing Bacteria in Terrestrial Aquatic Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Owen Duckworth, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,181.00

Despite their ubiquity and high visibility, rust colored iron oxide deposits
remain a poorly understood feature of rivers, lakes, and springs. Until
recently, it was assumed that these deposits were formed by abiotic chemical
processes; however, recent studies have shown that these deposits often result
from the action of specific iron oxidizing bacteria. These bacterial iron oxides
may have very different properties than those abiotic oxides that are
traditionally used by geochemists in laboratory experiments designed to probe
environmental and geochemical reactivity. The overall goal of the project is to
characterize the structure, reactivity, and biological diversity of these iron
oxide deposits to better understand the multifaceted roles they may play in the
environment. To achieve these goals, we will conduct a suite of field,
laboratory, microbiological, and spectroscopic analyses aimed at determining key
properties of both the iron oxides and the bacteria associated with their
formation.

Results from this project will advance the fundamental understanding of the
behavior of iron in aquatic environments. Because iron oxides are effective
sorbents of common nutrients and contaminants, results may also provide new
insights into how natural iron oxides affect the mobility and distribution of
dissolved species in the environment. The project also incorporates an
integrated education and outreach component designed to engage students,
teachers, and the general public. In the process of collecting data, we will
engage a group of high school teachers and students by conducting presentations
at their schools and leading field trips to sample local iron oxide deposits.
This activity will be reinforced by summer research visits to the PI's
laboratory by participating high school teachers, who will conduct experiments
that utilize the same field samples they helped to collect. An additional
product of this project will be a map-based web resource that will present field
data to help students, teachers, and other citizens understand the importance of
biogeochemical processes in their local environment. These activities will help
to expand awareness of the importance of geochemistry and geobiology to students
and the public, and help to stimulate their curiosity about the science behind
natural processes that are occurring in the world around them.