* 1255915
* IDBR:   Portable monitoring device for off-gassed volatile plant metabolites
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Cristina Davis, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,039.00

An award is made to the University of California, Davis to develop a small,
mobile chemical detection platform for the plant science research community.
Plant sciences in the 21st century broadly makes use of many instruments to
assess plant health status and stress changes, and these instruments can be very
useful to study important agriculture and horticulture systems. One key plant
science research need has not been addressed by existing portable
instrumentation platforms. All plants and trees produce (off-gas) volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) as a normal byproduct of baseline physiological
processes. These VOCs are chemicals that represent a unique non-invasive route
to assess plant health, infection, nutrient stresses, and many other important
biological questions. However, prior instrumentation to assess and monitor these
plant VOCs has been rudimentary at best, has many manual steps, and relies
heavily on laboratory-based analytical chemistry equipment. This project will
create a miniature portable easy-to-use detection system for these VOCs. It will
be highly sensitive and be capable of quantifying the amount of specific VOCs
that are released from plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture remains a
critical portion of many national economies, and is regionally important to many
communities. New scientific breakthroughs that can enhance food production and
safety will ultimately have large societal and economic benefits. This project
will engage in extensive outreach efforts across all education levels, bringing
together trainees from multiple disciplines. Each year an undergraduate
engineering student team will contribute to a technical task of the instrument
development plan. Mentoring and career development for both graduate students
and post-PhD researchers are a key aim of this proposal as well. Finally, this
project allows for broad dissemination of the research tool to the plant science
community as a new commercial product. The new VOC detection system can be
broadly used by many researchers in the plant science community to investigate
topics ranging from host pathogen responses to fruit quality assessment and even
to assessing the effect of pest eradication efforts in field settings. The
platform can ultimately be tailored for many different plant science research
questions, which are likely to lead to increased agriculture performance across
the world.