* 1255136
* CAREER: Determination of enzyme mechanisms using new kinetic isotope effect approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Andrew Murkin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting
Dr. Andrew Murkin of the University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York, in the development of new methods for studying the mechanisms of enzymatic
reactions. The objective of this research is to determine the transition state
structures of two enzymes that catalyze reactions with unresolved mechanisms. To
reach this goal, Dr. Murkin developed a method for measuring kinetic isotope
effects based on two-dimentional NMR spectroscopy that delivers better
sensitivity and precision than previous methods. Transition state models will be
constructed by matching the theoretical kinetic isotope effects obtained
computationally to those measured experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a
molecule undergoes a reaction and reaches the transition state, the atoms that
react or experience geometric or electrostatic changes exert differences in
rates when substituted with heavier isotopes. Such kinetic isotope effects
provide an experimentally accessible picture of the substrate during the rate-
limiting step in a mechanism. The techniques developed from this award should be
of interest to a wide audience of scientists who depend on kinetic isotope
effects to study a variety of processes, including the design of new therapies.
This program is also designed to encourage youth to pursue training in
biochemistry and related sciences. To stimulate educational interest among
youth, an introduction to enzymes will be provided to K-12 students in greater-
Buffalo schools, including underrepresented youths, through informative hands-
on, inquiry-based experiments conducted in middle schools and in a university
laboratory. At the university level, the design of transition state inhibitors
and measurement of kinetic isotope effects will be integrated into undergraduate
and graduate chemistry courses.