* 1255084
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigations of the Excited-State Dynamics in Thiobase and Pterin UVA Sensitizers and in Their DNA Constructs
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Carlos Crespo-Hernández, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2018
* USD 606,590.00

Through this CAREER award, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms-B Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Carlos E. Crespo-
Hernández of Case Western Reserve University will develop an integrated research
and education program based upon investigations of the excited-state dynamics in
UVA-sensitizers and of the photosensitized reactions that underlay DNA damage.
This information along with the techniques used to obtain it are central to
understanding a host of biological processes, including cell death and skin
cancer, and for developing therapeutics for a range of disorders. The research,
by providing an understanding of these reactions, will scrutinize fundamental
ideas in the fields of organic photochemistry and photobiology. The educational
objectives seek to motivate students at various educational levels to enter and
persist in science and technology studies and careers by: developing modules
that teach fundamental concepts in photochemistry and time-resolved spectroscopy
and that incorporate active learning strategies; providing research
opportunities for high school and undergraduate students; and mentoring and
serving as a role model for underrepresented and disadvantaged students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photochemistry involves the study of the interaction of
light with matter. Such interactions are paramount in vision, photosynthesis,
solar energy conversion and storage, and photonic/optoelectronic devices. In
addition, photochemistry of biologically related molecules is paramount for the
prevention and treatment of skin cancer. In skin cancer, light causes damage to
DNA by various mechanisms that are not fully understood. DNA damage in skin
exposed to ultraviolet light emanating from the sun primarily depends on non-DNA
biomolecules acting as energy transfer units. It is a goal of the Crespo-
Hernández group to investigate the reactions in DNA that are initiated by these
biomolecules when acting as energy/charge transfer units. The educational
aspects of the CAREER plan involves the design of concept-centered modules and
laboratory sessions for undergraduate and graduate courses that systematically
incorporate active learning and teaching strategies to enhance student learning
and retention. These activities will also contribute to a broader understanding
of the variables that affect the performance and continuing interest of students
in science and technology fields. Exposure of pre-college and postsecondary
students, including underrepresented and disadvantaged students, to
multidisciplinary research, modern photochemistry, spectroscopy, and
computational methods will motivate their participation in science, spark their
interest in important areas of science and technology, and contribute to the
nation's scientific workforce and economic competitiveness.