* 1255962
* EAGER:  Computed Tomography of Early Age Structure of Hydrated Portland Cement
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* David Lange, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 08/31/2014
* USD 55,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project advances the
use of X-ray computed tomography (CT) to view cement microstructure like never
before: three-dimensional images of undisturbed wet samples as a function of
time. While CT is emerging as a powerful tool that is available to more and more
researchers, the literature remains sparse. Proof of concept experiments have
demonstrated the power of these new tools to provide profound new insights into
cement hydration and microstructure development. The primary objectives of this
project are the development of experimental methods for time studies of
hydrating Portland cement. Such experiments require high resolution, high
precision sample holders to assure spatial registration over time, special
sealed sample holders that prevent evaporation, and special sample preparation
techniques to assure that samples are representative of bulk cement, and imaging
protocols to assist in segmentation of phases. The proposed study will use
university-based nano-scale X-ray computed tomography (funded by an NSF large
equipment grant) and Argonne National Lab synchrotron x-ray computed tomography.
The synchrotron CT offers high resolution, but is not ideal for long term
studies by students. The university CT offers superior access for students for
long term studies, but suffers from being lower x-ray flux. This EAGER project
aims where little work has been conducted, little precedent has been developed
for experimental methods, but great potential exist to advance the science of
understanding the complex microstructure of porous solids like hydrated portland
cement.

Study of microstructure and material modeling have broad impacts in helping us
understand cement and concrete properties, durability, life cycle performance,
and sustainability. There is no question that improved understanding of
materials has potential to improve building materials and extend the service
life of the built infrastructure. The high resolution 3-dimensional images that
will be acquired in this project provide important insight into the pore network
and distribution of phases that control material properties of concrete. Such
knowledge will lead to new products and processes that will improve concrete
materials in the future.