* 1255972
* Collaborative Research:   Diversity and evolution of fungal endophytes in native Hawaiian plants
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Anthony Amend, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,997.00

Inside nearly all healthy plant leaves reside a diverse community of fungi
invisible to the naked eye. These cryptic symbionts, known as foliar fungal
endophytes, span hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary history, are
linked to plant fitness and are thought to comprise a wealth of undocumented
species and biochemical compounds. Despite their ubiquity and diversity, little
is known about why different fungal endophyte species are found in different
plants. Hawaii's endemic and imperiled flora provides an opportunity to collect
and describe a unique set of these organisms, while determining the extent to
which environment, barriers to dispersal and plant evolutionary history shape
these fungal symbionts' diversity and distribution across islands. PIs Amend and
Perry will inventory fungal foliar endophytes from a broad selection of Hawaii's
endemic plants and diverse habitats using a combination of DNA sequencing and
culturing techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii's fungi are almost entirely
undocumented, yet are undoubtedly disappearing as quickly as Hawaii's critically
endangered plants. This project will enumerate the species involved in one of
the most pervasive cross-kingdom symbioses in natural and agricultural systems,
while also preserving biological material for future experimentation and
potential natural product discovery. Through this project, Perry and Amend will
train local high school, undergraduate and graduate students in fungal taxonomy
and systematics, molecular ecology and evolutionary biology.