* 1255058
* CAREER:   The use of Quantitative Geography to Predict Population Tipping Points for Colonial Seabirds
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Heather Lynch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2019
* USD 782,718.00

Sub-meter resolution satellite imagery is a transformational technology that
radically expands our ability to study the spatial ecology of colonial seabirds.
At the same time, satellite imagery and the geospatial tools being developed to
explore it present novel opportunities for earth and environmental science
education. The research objective of this five-year project is to use
individual-based models of nest site occupancy, parameterized by sub-meter
satellite imagery, to estimate the relative importance of biotic and abiotic
factors in structuring the fine-scale spatial ecology of seabird colonies
(biological process) and to understand how these within-colony dynamics drive
habitat occupancy at regional scales (geographic pattern). This project involves
three interconnected research activities: 1) the synthesis of manual and
automated algorithms for satellite imagery interpretation, and the use of such
methods to create a high-resolution, large extent database of penguin breeding
occupancy from which species-specific habitat suitability models will be
developed; 2) the construction and parameterization of a hierarchical (species-
specific) stochastic spatially-realistic structured metapopulation model to
study the processes of colony formation and collapse. These models,
parameterized by the sub-meter satellite imagery, will elucidate how tipping
points at the local-scale drive emergent dynamics at the metapopulation scale;
and 3) the optimization of spatial and/or temporal metrics for 'critical
slowing' as an indication of impending seabird colony collapse and, at larger
spatial scales, regional extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of
this project center around the development of secondary-school earth and
environmental science learning modules that integrate geography (content),
geospatial technologies (process), and virtual access to Antarctica (context)
into a unified framework for teaching key components of the New York State Core
Curricula for science. In addition to these modules, the project will involve
paid summer internships for high school students to conduct independent research
on Antarctic biogeography as part of New York's 'Science Research' curriculum.
Finally, this project will provide research training for two Postdoctoral
Researchers and two PhD students.