* 1255334
* CAREER: Interactions between knot homology and rep
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Aaron Lauda, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2019
* USD 445,000.00

This proposal details a comprehensive program which uses diagrammatic methods in
categorified representation theory to obtain new results in representation
theory and low-dimensional topology. One research objective seeks to exploit an
analogy between knot homology and categorified representation theory to produce
new representation theoretic objects arising from odd Khovanov homology. Another
research direction seeks to use the powerful tool of categorical skew Howe
duality to solve open problems in link homology theory for the special linear
Lie algebra. This work will have applications to Landau-Ginzburg models in
theoretical physics via the Kapustin-Li formula. The same diagrammatics used to
encode the structure of categorified quantum groups will be used to transform
current research into unique educational opportunities including an
undergraduate research program at USC and innovative curriculum development of
an undergraduate course on 'Diagrammatic Algebra'. The PI will also tap into the
existing infrastructure of USC's community involvement to recruit high school
students for a mathematics based event using diagrammatic algebra as a tool for
engaging high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging mathematical
philosophy known as "categorification" has significantly altered our perception
of mathematics and the way we analyze our surroundings. Imagine if an architect
studied a building by only examining its shadow. In much the same way, the
perspective of categorification uncovers a hidden layer in mathematical objects
allowing mathematicians to see the entire structure rather than its shadow. The
PI's research uncovers these hidden structures in an area of mathematics known
as representation theory which is closely connected to some of the most
sophisticated models in theoretical physics. Following the philosophy that
fundamental structures in mathematics should be simple and intuitive the PI
utilizes a diagrammatic framework to encode a great deal of complexity into an
intuitive diagrammatic language that greatly simplifies computations. The PI
will incorporate this diagrammatic philosophy into transformative educational
programs aimed at high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students
making the tools of modern research accessible to a new generation of
researchers. This award is co-funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program
and the Topology and Geometric Analysis program.