* 1255194
* CAREER:   How will marine ecosystems respond to climate change? Integrating K-12 teaching and paleoceanographic research
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2020
* Tessa Hill, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 06/30/2020
* USD 626,117.00

Fundamental shifts in the Earth's ocean ecosystems and carbon cycle are
currently underway due to anthropogenic processes, and the implications of these
shifts are still poorly understood. Paleoceanographic records provide a unique
opportunity to understand how ecosystems have responded to rapid climate change
in the past. This work, led by a faculty member at the University of California
at Davis, will utilize exquisite sediment records from Santa Barbara Basin (SBB)
to reconstruct how seafloor biodiversity responded to changes in temperature and
oxygenation during past time periods of rapid warming. This project builds upon
the recent discovery that a wide variety of invertebrate taxonomic groups,
including arthropods, molluscs, and echinoderms, are abundantly preserved in SBB
sediments, and thus can be directly compared to more established records of
climate change. The investigations of sedimentary communities will focus on
three areas: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) modern fauna, using recently collected box
cores that span 300-1200m on the California margin, &lt;br/&gt;2) a depth
transect of cores from SBB spanning the deglaciation, the most abrupt climate
change in recent geologic history, and &lt;br/&gt;3) Mid-Pleistocene sediment
records that have provided evidence of pervasive millennial-scale climate change
throughout the past 1 Ma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key to understanding the
complexities of climate change impacts on ocean environments is the synthesis of
biological, geological, chemical and physical information. This research will
directly tackle that integration, and be combined with an effort to educate
future math and science teachers and K-12 students by collaborating with the
successful UC Davis Math and Science Teaching (MAST) program. Each year, MAST
students will develop, test, and modify climate science curriculum during the
fall, which will then be utilized for visiting classrooms the following spring.
Summer Fellowships will provide full financial support for MAST students
(2/year) to take summer intensive field courses at Bodega Marine Laboratory
(BML) and complete independent research projects. At the completion of their
MAST Fellowship, students will utilize their independent research projects and
data as inspiration for the next round of MAST-student led curriculum
development.