* 1255937
* Collaborative Research: Feedback-Driven Resiliency for Near-Threshold Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 96,000.00

Near-threshold voltage (NTV) operation has emerged as a promising strategy to
improve energy-efficiency by reducing the supply voltage while exploiting
parallelism to compensate for frequency loss. NTV processors combined with
"Turbo mode" can also offer peak performance, thereby making them suitable for a
range of dynamic workload behaviors. Despite the promise, applications of these
systems have remained largely elusive due to many issues. This research,
involving VLSI circuits, computer architecture, and software systems, for the
first time, addresses the reliability challenges of NTV/Turbo mode systems in
the context of device aging and variability. Researchers will integrate
distributed system monitors and controls to enable power-efficient fault
resiliency for on-chip NTV/Turbo-mode cores. The work will lay the foundations
for a feedback-directed optimization system that tunes the hardware's execution
to meet application requirements by balancing performance, reliability and
energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our society's productivity
and advancements are intimately tied to the predictable and sustainable
operation of the world's computing infrastructure. Unfortunately, this trend is
beginning to falter due to increasing computer energy consumption. Aggressive
energy reductions are tightly coupled with destabilizing computer system
performance and longevity. The research will uncover observations that are
necessary to overcome the problem in near-threshold voltage systems that hold
great promise for further advanced computing. Using an approach spanning both
the hardware and software layers, researchers will investigate and develop novel
techniques to overcome the energy problem. Such a holistic and joint effort
across the layers is the key for ensuring our society's long-term success based
on advanced computing.