* 1255021
* CAREER: Enzyme Expression in Microbial Communities Oxidizing Emerging Water Contaminants:  An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Shaily Mahendra, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

CBET-1255021&lt;br/&gt;Shaily Mahendra&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how microbes can
degrade and detoxify hazardous chemicals which have an emerging, yet currently
unregulated, presence in water supplies. Bacteria that produce monooxygenase
enzymes are uniquely capable of biodegrading a variety of recalcitrant
compounds, such as chlorinated solvents, petroleum hydrocarbons, pesticides, and
ethers. These enzymes contain transition metals to facilitate transferring
electrons in biochemical redox reactions, and their efficiency can vary over
orders of magnitude depending upon the availability of specific metals.
1,4-Dioxane, a probable carcinogen, whose biodegradation is mediated by
monooxygenases, will be used as a model emerging contaminant in this study.
1,4-Dioxane is a stabilizer of chlorinated solvents, a wetting agent in the
processing of textile fibers, and a byproduct in several personal care products.
In mixed wastes and contaminated sites, metals such as iron, cobalt, copper,
nickel, zinc, and other organics coexist with 1,4-dioxane and will influence the
monooxygenase enzymes as well as 1,4-dioxane biodegradation rates. Data
collected in this research will demonstrate the effects of metals and
geochemical conditions on 1,4-dioxane biodegradation by bacteria growing in
liquid cultures as well as biofilms growing on sand or carbon-based surfaces.
Novel colorimetric and genetic tools will be designed to rapidly estimate the
activities of relevant biodegradative and metal-resistant enzymes under
different types of growth and environmental conditions. Changes in composition
of microbial communities actively engaged in 1,4-dioxane biodegradation will be
assessed by using gene chips and powerful DNA sequencing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional clean-up technologies are expensive, consume
resources and energy, or move the pollution from one place to another.
Bioremediation could be a technically and financially viable option for removing
emerging contaminants from soil, sediments, groundwater, and wastewater. This
project will provide critical data on fate and transformations of environmental
contaminants that have recently fallen under the scrutiny of regulatory
agencies. The results from this study will be leveraged by the PI, in
collaboration with environmental engineering professionals, to design
bioremediation and monitoring systems for industrial and military waste streams.
Research efforts will be coupled with mentoring students of diverse backgrounds
at the middle school, high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. In
addition to publications and presentations at scientific meetings, the findings
will be integrated with curricula of environmental engineering and microbiology
courses.