* 1255816
* Collaborative Research: From High-level Synthesis to Layout: a Cross-layer Methodology for Large-scale Reliable IC Design
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* David Pan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

Designing robust and energy-efficient large-scale systems-on-chips (SOCs) with
high design productivity is a challenge of great interest. However, lack of
coordination among different design layers has caused designers to make worst-
case assumptions at individual design layers, leading to substantially
suboptimal designs with poor reliability/energy/performance co-optimization or
tradeoffs. This project is the first major effort dedicated toward a unified
failure-resistant system from high-level synthesis to physical design with tight
integration. It will build reliability-centric physical-aware high-level
synthesis and high-level-guided physical design to bridge the gap between these
two distant layers. A novel cross-layer engineering change order (ECO) framework
will also be developed to couple high-level ECO with stable physical-level ECO.
New tools and methodologies will be studied and provided to the system and
physical design community targeting reliability while increasing overall design
productivity and quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronics have permeated
modern society, which increasingly depends on reliable operations of these
electronic systems. However, device-level scaling is heading in the opposite
direction from system reliability. This project will transform existing SOC
design methodologies through cross-layer integration. Research from this effort
will be broadly disseminated through publications and presentations, active
interaction with industrial collaborators, as well as infusion of new course
material into classrooms and instructional laboratories. The principal
investigators will continue their efforts in recruiting women and other
underrepresented minorities into their research programs. They have previously
reached out to K-12 students and will continue to do so in order to attract the
best of them into the engineering profession.