* 1255951
* Theory, methods, and tools for cross-layered design of uniquely efficient failure-resistant systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

In the era beyond Moore's law, it will be imperative to consider improving
resistance of integrated circuits to failures due to fabrication defects and
variations, soft errors, and wearout as first-order considerations, to ensure
economic viability of the semiconductor industry and robust operation of digital
systems. This research will develop and demonstrate the benefits of a new multi-
layered approach - spanning circuit, micro-architecture, instruction-set
architecture, system, and user layers - for improving resistance to failures
caused by fabrication, soft errors, and wearout. An approach to characterize
user-layer impact of failures within each module will be developed to
dramatically reduce overdesign and overtesting in future failure resistant
systems. This research will also develop the first infrastructure to support
systematic development of multi-layered approaches for failure resistance,
including the first comprehensive models of layers, the first systematic method
to identify candidate approaches and characterize their performance and
overheads, and to derive globally optimal designs. This approach will identify
efficient designs that will achieve failure resistance at uniquely low
overheads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The utilitarian gains to society should be
immediate and and are likely to be substantial. The methods and tools developed
will provide significant improvements in yield, performance, robustness to soft
errors, and system lifespan. This project will train students and industry
experts in the science and art of of efficient failure resistance, and prepare
them for the era beyond the end of Moore's law. The principle investigator will
also distribute to the community of researchers and industry experts the models,
framework, and tools to be developed as a result of this project.