* 1255181
* CAREER:  Modeling and Estimation of Dynamic High-latitude Ionospheric Loss and Transport Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Matthew Zettergren, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2020
* USD 485,120.00

The investigator will study the details of ionospheric source dynamics through
synergistic use of two- and three- dimensional models and new estimation schemes
involving both incoherent scatter radar and optical spectrograph data. High-
latitude ionospheric plasma density and structure play a critical role in the
coupled terrestrial ionosphere-thermosphere-magnetosphere (ITM) system.
Experimental and modeling studies have convincingly demonstrated the presence of
heavy ions of ionospheric origin in various magnetospheric regions, and that
these heavy ions appreciably affect response of the ITM system to solar wind
forcing. The ionospheric source and its dynamics play a substantial role in
modulating this ion outflow process. This research will directly address several
gaps in the current ability to observe the composition of the high-latitude
ionospheric plasma and our understanding of the temporally dynamic nature of
heating events and associated transients governing composition, ionospheric
upflows, and the generation of mesoscale and small-scale ionospheric plasma
density structures. Specific science objectives will be to provide detailed
data-model analyses to determine the: (1) Location and intensity of storm-time
ionospheric sources for molecular ion outflow (2) Contributions of molecular ion
recombination, current closure depletion, and ion upflows to plasma loss in
realistic auroral current systems (3) Time scales on which major ionospheric
loss and transport processes operate, including the effects of electromagnetic
induction in highly dynamic situations (4) Effects of three-dimensional current
system geometries on ionospheric transport and loss, and the role of these
processes in the development of smaller-scale irregularities (5) Temporal
dependence of low altitude upflow, including transients in upflow initiation and
finite propagation times to higher altitudes, and possible influence of some
types of wave-particle interactions on upflow. The early career scientist
leading this project will focus on supporting a new PhD program in Engineering
Physics at ERAU, including funding of students completing MS and PhD theses, and
refinement of the PI's MS and PhD courses to include contemporary space physics
research topics where appropriate, and student research projects. Efforts to
support undergraduate research will continue through funded summer projects,
independent studies, and development of a new, year-long senior thesis option
for highly qualified students. This project will support and further develop new
and existing academic programs, is heavily pitched toward both undergraduate and
graduate student involvement, and is specifically intended to work in concert
with the university-wide student research initiative IGNITE. Research results
will be made available through prompt publication, and it is anticipated that
many of the contributions will yield student-authored papers. The research
undertaken will represent an international collaboration with both European and
South American institutions supporting some aspects of the work. Methods
developed for addressing the science goals above (i.e. models and estimation
schemes), will likely serve as useful tools for the community to use in other
related studies.