* 1255426
* Organizational Participation in Open Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 07/07/2012,08/31/2015
* Matt Germonprez, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 288,654.00

With the growing use of crowd-sourcing, the interaction between self-forming
communities and traditional organizations is increasing in importance. Existing
research has focused on factors affecting an individual's level of participation
in open sourced work and on the organization of open source efforts, but scant
attention has been paid to the significant strategic organizational involvement
in these endeavors (75% of Linux kernel contributions are from paid developers).
As design and development evolves within open communities, there are an
increasing number of ways that organizations may seek to balance 'contributions
to' and 'differentiation from' an open community, for reasons of cost, resource
management, and time to market.

Building on principles of public sharing, collaboration, and organizational
learning, this project focuses on why and how organizations participate with
open communities. Through action research and a qualitative field study of
organizations participating with the Linux open-source community, we explore how
the open-source environment interacts and merges with traditional organizations.
A two-by-two classification scheme is used to explore the value chain of
participation for organizations that differ in their degree of contributions to
a common product and degree of downstream product differentiation. A pedagogical
framework and curricular materials will be developed and disseminated to improve
organizational decision making about open community involvement.

Open communities provide real options for organizations seeking to improve
systems design, development, and support. This project develops a solution to a
practical problem that is of value to research participants and creates new
theoretical knowledge of value to the academic community involved in research
and pedagogy. It helps organizations understand and navigate the complexities of
actively participating in open communities and benefit from a philosophy best
characterized as 'We all give a little; we all get a lot.' A better
understanding of organizational participation will enable increased
participation in open communities by expanding the number and diversity of
participating organizations and increase the involvement of existing
organizational partners. These advances in both theory and pedagogy will improve
connections among academic and practical issues regarding open communities and
result in improved effectiveness in addressing major societal and organizational
challenges.