* 1255035
* EAGER: An Interoperable Information Infrastructure for Biodiversity Research (I3BR)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Mark Ellisman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Biodiversity comprises all variations of life at all levels of biological
organization, most of which arise from genomic diversity. As genomic
technologies become available across the biological sciences, a full
characterization of biodiversity demands a full characterization of genomes.
Similarly, data synthesis across the full range of biodiversity research domains
demands development, implementation, integration and harmonization of data
exchange standards. Such interoperable informatics would be transformational for
our understanding of biology, with consequent impact on environmental and
conservation policy. Adding to the transformational potential is the fact that
the microbial world represents half of the world's biomass and nearly all of its
biodiversity, yet is still effectively invisible and intractable to traditional
biodiversity research. Metagenomic data are not amenable to the concepts,
standards, semantics, and methods of traditional eukaryotic biodiversity, and
therefore, require an alternate informatics framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EAGER will transform the collaborations between two previously separate research
communities: the informaticists of the traditional biodiversity community, who
employ the Darwin Core (DwC) as a standard, and the informaticists of the
Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), who have developed the Minimal Information
about any Sequence (MIxS) standard for genomics, metagenomics and marker genes.
Together, these groups will engage in a unified informatics effort to develop
three layers of interoperability. The EAGER will harmonize the observational
(DwC) and genomic (MIxS) standards, building on a community dialogue and
interdisciplinary networking hosted and established under an NSF Research
Coordination Network. Standards interoperability is the basis for the next two
layers. Syntactic interoperability (in the context of Internet APIs and a
database Reference Model) will be supported. The EAGER will assemble experts
from the two communities to (a) devise a database Reference Model that
integrates the DwC and GSC MIxS standards; and (b) for effective data
management, create specific implementations for different database platforms to
foster adoption. The practical implementation of the reference model on/for
different database systems will allow, for the first time, systematic
comparative testing of technical performance and of use cases (e.g., which
implementation best serves which complex data query). The EAGER will create task
groups to establish the infrastructure for managing ontologies, and to construct
a reference model on the purely semantic level in order to fuse the two worlds
of data standards, both of which are advanced enough to engage in useful
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing an interdisciplinary
information infrastructure to achieve data interoperability across domains, this
EAGER would advance understanding of complex environmental phenomena and,
thereby, inform future policy decisions. Indeed, by leading to an informatics
standards platform to conceive a novel conceptual and theoretical framework for
the world of microbial ?dark matter,? the EAGER would have a transformational
impact beyond science.