* 1255901
* COLLAB. RESEARCH:   ARTS:  Revising the classification of the temperate zone's largest angiosperm genus (Carex, Cyperaceae), and training the next generation of sedge systematists
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Andrew Hipp, Morton Arboretum
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2017
* USD 364,452.00

A team of three lead scientists from The Morton Arboretum, Washington State
University, and McGill University and 14 collaborating scientists from ten
countries are undertaking a taxonomic revision of the flowering plant genus
Carex, an ecologically and geographically widespread plant group with more than
2,000 species. The project will (1) develop new tools for online biodiversity
data management; (2) solidify a broad international team through online
collaboration, international field-collecting expeditions, and training of
students and young researchers; (3) estimate the phylogenetic placement of
~1,360 species based on DNA sequences; (4) assemble a database of morphological,
climatic, and biogeographic data; and (5) publish a revision of the higher level
taxonomy of Carex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The taxonomy of global plant and animal
groups provides information essential to species and habitat conservation,
ecological restoration, and our understanding of biodiversity. This project will
produce a phylogenetic framework for one of the largest flowering plant genera,
providing an essential tool for understanding global plant biodiversity. At the
same time, this project (1) trains the next generation of sedge taxonomists; (2)
increases taxonomic readiness in students and teachers; (3) publishes diverse
datasets online through eMonocot and Encyclopedia of Life; and (4) contributes
to global biodiversity conservation through an enhanced barcoding resource and
new informatic tools.