* 1255945
* Quantitative and Mathematics Support Center Workshop to Develop Handbook of Best Practices, Professional Organization and STEM Infrastructure
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Michael Schuckers, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 49,652.00

This project is convening a workshop of directors of Quantitative and
Mathematics Support Centers (QMaSCs) from across a range of different types of
institutions. Such centers serve tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of students
across the country each year; and they are present at large universities, at
liberal arts colleges, and at community colleges. While each center services a
diverse set of needs at its specific institution, collectively they all share a
common set of concerns and issues. Yet, there is currently no body of resources
from which directors of QMaSCs and their staffs can draw. To fill this void, the
PI team has set three principal goals for this workshop:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
to begin a national conversation on directing QMaSCs, in support of this key
aspect of the STEM infrastructure on campuses; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) to
establish a sustainable network of people involved in the work of QMaSCs in
order to provide and share resources; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) to create a
handbook of best practices for those who direct QMaSCs or those who may direct
QMaSCs in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop leaders are working with the
participants to formulate a framework for establishing such a professional
organization for staff members of QMaSCs. In addition, the primary product of
the workshop is a handbook for directors of QMaSCs, modeled after the Writing
Center Directors Handbook (Murphy and Stay, LEA Publishers, 2006) used on
campuses nationwide. The QMaSC handbook is expected to be a publicly available
document geared at providing materials and proven practices for QMaSC directors,
including chapters on the various shared aspects of directing a center and case
studies that reflect the broad range of activities undertaken by QMaSCs.