* 1255538
* CAREER:  The Role of Self-Directed Learning in Facilitating Concept Acquisition: Advancing Research and Training in the Cognitive Science of Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Todd Gureckis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2019
* USD 765,614.00

NSF Summary Statement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans, particularly children, are
often likened to sponges, soaking up patterns and regularities in their
environment as they learn new concepts and skills. However, unlike a passive
sponge, human learners are able to alter their experience in important ways by
interacting with the world. For example, when studying for a test, learners can
decide how to allocate study effort across materials. Any complete account of
human learning must explain not only what is learned from the information we
experience, but also the capacity for our actions and choices to expose that
information. Many laboratory studies of learning used in cognitive psychology
are silent on this issue because they limit participants' control over the flow
information (emphasizing instead a type of "passive" learning where the learner
does not have control over which information is experienced). This tends to
create a blind spot in our theories for how people gather information, when they
decide to stop, and for how these ongoing decisions impact
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal seeks to address
this gap by extending theories of human learning to account for self-directed
learning behaviors (i.e., situations where learners can control of the flow
information they experience by way of their ongoing decisions). The proposed
research addresses two specific questions relevant to the cognitive science of
learning. First, how do people decide what information will be useful to know
when learning? Second, what impact does self-directed learning have on the
acquisition of novel concepts? In answer these questions, a computational theory
of human learning is tested which attempts to explain how people make decisions
to gather more information. A novel aspect of the theory is that it can account
for the differences in learning resulting from either self-directed or passive
learning. Understanding self-directed learning is a core issue in cognitive
psychology which has potential implications for education policy. In addition,
the principles identified in this research may translate into assistive learning
technologies which may shorten the time required to develop expertise in a
domain by tailoring training to the capabilities of individual learners.
Alongside this research objective, an overarching goal of this proposal is to
integrate research and training activities in computational cognitive science.
An innovative training plan will prepare the next generation of psychological
scientists for a field that is increasingly organized around computational
approaches to the study of the mind.