* 1255650
* CAREER: Gravitational-Wave Detector Characterization and Science Education in the Advanced LIGO Era
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER award supports an integrated research and education program by the
PI and his students at California State University Fullerton (CSUF) aimed at
hastening the direct detection of gravitational waves with the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). The research is focused on
i) a thorough characterization of the Advanced LIGO instruments, especially the
identification and removal of noise artifacts in the data that could mask or
mimic potential astrophysical signals, and ii) measurement and analysis of
scattered light from optical materials that are important for extending Advanced
LIGO's reach. The outreach component of this award will establish a pathway for
students at nearby community colleges to learn about and become part of the PI's
research group. This project will also increase science literacy through the
development and dissemination of educational materials for learning
gravitational-wave science in the undergraduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Albert Einstein predicted gravitational waves
in his 1916 theory of general relativity. Nearly a century later, we are poised
to directly detect these waves for the first time, and to observe the universe
in an entirely new spectrum. LIGO is an NSF-funded project to measure
gravitational waves from astrophysical systems such as colliding black holes and
neutron stars. This award supports research to thoroughly characterize the LIGO
detectors - work essential for the detection of gravitational waves. In
addition, it supports research on optical scatter aimed at assessing and
improving the quality of commercial optics that will be required to extend the
astrophysical reach of future gravitational-wave detectors. These projects
provide increased opportunities for students to participate in cutting-edge
research at CSUF, a primarily undergraduate and Hispanic-serving institution.
The education and outreach components of this award will engage students, many
from groups currently underrepresented in physics and astronomy, in the
discovery-ready field of gravitational-wave science.