* 1255809
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Characterizing Microarchitectural Mechanisms for Network Delay Signatures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The distinction between computing and communication has blurred with the
improvements in semiconductor technology as well as the speed and reliability of
computer networks. At a macroscopic level, individuals increasingly rely upon
smart phones, cloud computing, and similar infrastructure that combines
computing systems with networking to accomplish their daily tasks. Advantages
are realized from the seamless interconnection of computing systems and the
network. Many end-users even consider the client device, the server, and the
network as one unit that is used for productivity and/or entertainment. At the
microscopic level, similar efficiencies present themselves when computing and
networking blend. In an ideal case, the linkage between the two areas should not
require the use of special-purpose software, because installing software on a
network node to enable this blending can potentially cause the node to be
unstable, more complex, and introduce security flaws. However, there is a
significant challenge in linking the two domains without the use of additional
software. This research focuses on understanding and characterizing the
connection between the computing node and the network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the internal components of a node are shared
resources between all processes, including those that require network-based I/O,
it is possible to infer the load on the internal components by observing
variations in delay between successive network packets that are generated by the
node. This inference materializes as a "delay signature," and can be used to
blend the areas of architecture and networking. Specifically, this information
can be used to develop algorithms for network security and management. For
example, by simply probing a node and collecting its responses, it can be
determined that the internal components (e.g., microprocessor) are heavily
utilized. If the node is expected to be idle, this could be an indication that
the node has been compromised and is running unauthorized software. This
information can also be used for job scheduling in cluster grids. By monitoring
Message Passing Interface (MPI) messages between grid nodes, the loads on the
nodes can be determined without querying nodes directly. As a result, resource
discovery messages are not needed. Another use of this information can be to
predict system degradation and failure. As a node's resources become exhausted,
the node generates a unique traffic pattern. This pattern is emitted prior to
node failure and can be used to signal a switch to a secondary
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a holistic approach that combines
computer architecture and computer networking to investigate and characterize
how the microarchitecture affects the network packet generation process. The
delay signature provides information that can be attributed to the internal
state and settings of the microarchitecture. Architectural settings, such as
processor affinity, multi-threading, and power-saving modes, affect the delay
signature. The PIs use a hardware testbed and a system simulator to characterize
the basic mechanisms within the microprocessor that are manifested in the
observable delay signature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators incorporate
team-based laboratory projects within their computer architecture and computer
networking courses to demonstrate the relationship between the two domains and
to promote integrated learning by students in both areas. Potential applications
of the delay signature include providing security for networked nodes by
monitoring unauthorized utilization and increasing resiliency of a computing
system by detecting patterns that predict a node failure.