* 1255020
* CAREER: Development of traceable metal oxide nanoparticles for examining environmental transport and fate
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Nason, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2020
* USD 464,806.00

CBET - 1255020 Intellectual merit: Many challenges face the emerging field of
nanotechnology. Engineers, scientists and policy makers must balance the promise
of beneficial nano-enabled products and applications with the potential negative
impacts resulting from the release of these novel materials into the
environment. The ability to detect, quantify and track engineered nanoparticles
(ENPs) in the environment is a key to understanding the environmental
implications of these materials. At present, there is a lack of suitable methods
for detecting ENPs in environmental matrices. For some classes of nanomaterials
such as metal oxides, a major challenge is simply distinguishing between ENPs
and the natural background concentration of the element(s) in question. Given
this challenge, the PI hypothesizes that labeling ENPs with elements of low
background concentration will facilitate their sensitive and unambiguous
detection in the environment. This hypothesis will be tested through the
completion of three tasks: (1) synthesis of labeled ENPs using doping and/or
core/shell techniques; (2) characterization of labeled ENP physicochemical
properties and comparison with unlabeled ENPs; and (3) spike and recovery of
labeled ENPs from representative environmental matrices using ICP-MS and
Instrument Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA), an analytical technique with high
sensitivity and low susceptibility to matrix effects.

The complex, multi-faceted and multi-disciplinary challenges facing the emerging
field of nanotechnology environmental health and safety also highlight the need
for a workforce of scientists and engineers with excellent critical thinking
skills and a firm grasp of the scientific method. There is a need for innovative
teaching methods that focus on this type of development. Integrated with the
proposed research, the PI will develop, implement and assess a novel virtual
laboratory pedagogy for environmental engineers focused on ENP removal from
water. The industrially-situated, problem-based instructional design centered on
the iterative process of designing experiments, running virtual trials, and
analyzing data will facilitate the development of key skills and knowledge.

Broader Impact: This research will result in the development of a unique method
to detect and quantify ENPs in environmental matrices. This work is
transformative because it results in a tool that will enable the work of many
others studying environmental transport, fate, toxicity, modeling and risk
assessment of ENPs. The larger body of work made possible by the project, both
by the PI and by many others, will likely facilitate the establishment of real
science-based regulations for the safe handling of ENPs.

The development of a virtual laboratory for environmental engineers has
tremendous potential to improve environmental engineering education both at OSU
and at institutions across the country. Appropriately balancing the benefits of
nanotechnology with the risks to the environment is a key challenge and
preparing engineers for these types of open-ended and ambiguous tasks is
critical for success. The work proposed here integrates fundamental scientific
inquiry and novel tool development with the development of novel pedagogy for
training tomorrow's engineers. The proposed virtual laboratory will expose
students to the emerging field of nanotechnology environmental health and safety
while developing the the broad and universal skills, knowledge and expertise
necessary to tackle these emerging challenges.

Other broader impacts include the formation of human capital through the
education of at least two graduate students in nanomaterial synthesis,
characterization, and presence/behavior in the environment. In addition, the PI
will strengthen the educational experience at all levels in the School of
Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering at OSU through 1) the
incorporation of research findings into undergraduate and graduate courses and
2) providing research experiences for high school and undergraduate students
through established programs at OSU (Johnson Scholars, ASE and SESEY). These
students will become an integral part of the research team on the work in
question.

Results of the experimental and educational research will be disseminated at
national and international conferences and top journals in the field of
environmental engineering and engineering education will be targeted for wide
publication. The developed virtual laboratory pedagogy will be made available
for use by other engineering institutions in the U.S. and abroad.