* 1255277
* CAREER: Understanding Major Intracontinental Strike-slip Faults from the Lower Crust's Perspective: Tibetan Insights from the Canadian Shield
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2021
* Gregory Dumond, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 453,456.00

The relationship between continental collision and deformation along
lithosphere-scale (hundreds of km-long) intracontinental strike-slip faults
remains intensely debated. Debate persists because despite what we know about
this important class of faults at the surface, we know comparatively little
about how these structures work in the lower crust. Questions regarding the
degree of strain localization, the lateral extent of rheological
heterogeneities, and the physical nature of major intracontinental faults at
depth will be answered "in situ" in this project by studying a well-exposed deep
crustal shear zone and its wall rocks, i.e., the &gt;400 km-long
intracontinental Grease River shear zone in the western Canadian Shield (exhumed
from ~30 to 40 km-paleodepths). Preliminary data support the hypothesis that at
ca. 1.92-1.90 Ga, lower crust NW of the Grease River shear zone was melt-
weakened at the same time that lower crust SE of the Grease River shear zone was
dehydrated and strong. This ?rheological dichotomy? may be analogous to lower
crust beneath the steep topographic gradients and major intracontinental fault
systems that mark the margins of the Tibetan Plateau, e.g., the Altyn Tagh and
Longmen Shan ranges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide field-based
constraints on the role of rheological heterogeneity in facilitating strain
localization across a major intracontinental strike-slip fault from the lower
crust's perspective. Anticipated results include: (1) resolving the Pressure-
Temperature conditions and paths for metamorphic tectonites in the Grease River
shear zone and its wall rocks, (2) testing the contemporaneity of deformation,
shearing, and partial melting using in situ Th-U-total Pb dates on monazite via
EPMA, and (3) constraining a &gt;500 m.y. history of shear zone reactivation via
high-precision ID-TIMS U-Pb dates on zircon from a suite of cross-cutting and
variably-deformed dikes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project
include: (1) implementing a program of 6th-8th grade teacher preparation and
enhancement, and (2) public outreach via classroom visits and panel discussions
that are all focused on faulting and earthquakes in intracontinental systems.
These efforts will directly impact teachers and students who live in the
immediate vicinity of unexposed intracontinental faults of the New Madrid
seismic zone ? the most seismically active region east of the Rocky Mountains.
Two professional development summer institutes (workshops + field trips) will be
provided to teachers utilizing inquiry-based modules to be developed by the PI.
Implementation and assessment of these modules will impact middle school Earth
Science frameworks in Arkansas (and nationally via on-line dissemination of the
modules). These efforts will be in collaboration with the University of
Arkansas' Center for Math and Science Education. Training and education will be
provided to at least one Ph.D. student, one M.S. student, and several
undergraduate students who will be integrally involved in the research and
outreach efforts. This project directly impacts the new geoscience Ph.D. program
at the University of Arkansas. Benefits to the EarthScope community are also
anticipated, as this project uses an exposed deep crustal shear zone in the
Canadian Shield to inform our understanding of the structure, rheology, and
timing of a major intracontinental strike-slip fault as it may have existed in
the lower crust near the Moho.