* 1255781
* CIF21 DIBBs: Conceptualization of the Social and Innovation Opportunities of Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Michael Beyerlein, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2015
* USD 99,718.00

CIF21 DIBBs: Conceptualization of the Social and Innovation Opportunities of
Data Analysis This proposal presents an opportunity to work on the problem that
scientists have access to continuously growing data repositories across economic
and geographic boundaries. However, both individual innovation and the formation
of rich collaborations still rely on traditional research and social mechanisms.
While virtual organizations help with access to data environments among groups,
members must still proactively seek to collaborate. The difficulty of sharing
analysis tools, and the lack of understanding of how such tools are used, create
friction that impedes extracting the greatest benefit from data and its usage.
If the scientific community can formalize collection of User Data Interaction
(UDI) data and develop actionable characteristic behavior patterns from it, the
friction can be relieved and scientists can be connected in behaviorally
meaningful ways that are not currently imagined. In this proposal is discussed
the opportunity for working on the problem. Data is the lifeblood of science.
Recent funding opportunities have fueled support for uploading, archiving, and
managing data in more formal and standard ways. However, the actual use of data
through data exploration tools is still a highly variable process. Interactive
data exploration tools provide the opportunity to record researcher interactions
during the exploration process. The pattern of interactions such users undertake
while searching, exploring, and using data is a largely unexploited opportunity
for new connections and new learning that could help researchers identify useful
exploration modes or gaps, and even new collaborative partners that could
increase interactions and innovation. Such data about how users explore data are
here termed, ?User-Data Interaction (UDI) Data.? Creating cyberinfrastructure
building blocks to support a standard for collecting UDI Data, community
development of data exploration tools, and the exploration of UDI data could
fundamentally change the practice of science and engineering. Having such data
and analysis tools hosted within a shared cyberinfrastructure could also allow
for unprecedented study of their use and effectiveness. The goal of this
conceptualization research will be to define an implementation project for the
DIBBs program. To achieve this goal, the approach will be to understand the
kinds of data analysis tools that various user communities currently use, those
that they would like to create and share, and to explore the ensuing UDI data
that could be collected and leveraged. A data source will be characterized as
any service into which a user can specify a query and receive a semi-structured
result. By way of example, this may include an online database with which users
interact through forms, a graphical interface to a data cube, or even an online
simulation tool. The proposing team has access to three such toolkits in use by
thousands of users today (Rappture Toolkit, iKNEER, and DataView) to study as
sources of analysis tools and UDI data. Specifically, access to the developers
of these systems will provide information about how such systems could generate
UDI data and what its important features may be. Having built an understanding
from active communities and small group discussions, the final step of
information gathering will be two larger discussions held in conjunction with
two events: HUBbub 2013 and an NSF S2I2 conceptualization project meeting. The
Intellectual Merit: This research will identify the social and technological
roadblocks to sharing data analysis tools, and the transformational potential of
UDI data. The intellectual merit of this activity will be an evidence-based
blueprint for a cyberinfrastructure environment that will automatically gather
UDI data, develop patterns from those data, and facilitate amplified discovery
and collaboration based on those patterns in a way that acceptably balances
efficacy and privacy. Collaborations will increase and will be of greater
substance. Broader Impacts: This work will pave the way for new scientific
connections among researchers, educators, and students that will accelerate
research and innovation. The difficulties that underrepresented groups
inherently face in traditional methods of establishing scientific collaborations
will be bridged by an implementation of the proposed work, allowing everyone to
connect to tools and other researchers?not solely by established reputation, but
based on their interactions with data. Because the work is not specific to one
virtual organization or data tool, it will have a broad reach across diverse
scientific communities that use data and data analysis tools.