* 1255066
* CAREER: Low-Temperature Growth of High Crystallinity GeSn on Amorphous Materials for Advanced Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 01/31/2019
* USD 565,988.00

Technical Description: The research objective of this CAREER project is to grow
large-grained and single-crystal GeSn directly on amorphous materials at
temperatures below 500 degrees Celsius as a gateway towards advanced
optoelectronics on dielectric layers and glass substrates. Growing high
crystallinity semiconductor thin films on amorphous substrates has long been a
significant challenge in materials science that could break through the
limitations of conventional methods such as epitaxy and wafer bonding. In this
project, the research team investigates a new approach based on eutectic-
mediated growth in Ge-Sn system to achieve high crystallinity GeSn alloy on
amorphous substrates at low temperatures. Incorporation of Sn into Ge during the
eutectic-mediated growth also transforms Ge towards a direct gap semiconductor
with significantly improved optoelectronic properties. Furthermore, nanoscale
geometrically-confined nucleation is applied to achieve single-crystal-like GeSn
on amorphous layers for high performance optoelectronic devices. The fundamental
materials science of related nucleation and growth mechanisms are studied both
experimentally by microscopy and diffraction analyses and theoretically via
Phase Field modeling. The research also investigates defects in GeSn and methods
to reduce and passivate them for optimal optoelectronic properties. Non-
technical Description: This project investigates a potentially transformative
technology for applications in cost-effective, high-efficiency tandem solar
cells as well as three-dimensional photonic circuits on future generations of
silicon microchips. The principal investigator (PI) not only integrates the
research project with graduate and undergraduate education, but also offers
hands-on laboratory experiences related to this research project for 10th-11th
grade students. The PI also plans to share interesting educational activities at
the level of Scientific American with the general public via YouTube and other
public media.