* 1255762
* Exploring Cross-Layer, Integrated Approaches for Improving The Reliability of Heterogeneous Multicore Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2016
* James Tuck, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 188,000.00

As feature sizes in microprocessor devices continue to scale down, the devices'
susceptibility to hardware faults is increasing. While resilient system design
is less cost-critical in high-end business applications where redundant hardware
is an acceptable solution, it is expected that inexpensive consumer electronics
will largely need to be fault tolerant as well. Approaches that double or triple
system costs by replicating hardware are likely too expensive for consumer
electronics, such as phones, tablets, and laptops. This project will investigate
a new way of modeling and supporting hardware fault tolerance that relies on
software and hardware working together cooperatively. The key idea is the design
of a System Vulnerability Model (SVM), which approximates the vulnerability of
an application to a hardware error. Using the model, each layer of the system
offers knobs which can be tuned to control overall system vulnerability. This
allows the design of systems that inexpensively provide the right amount of
fault tolerance for a given application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project could impact how future computer systems provide fault tolerance.
Ultimately, such impact benefits society by helping sustain the demand for
reliable computing devices, a significant driver in the economy. In the
immediate future, it will support the training of graduate students in this
critical area, and it will support enhancement of the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum to include topics in fault tolerance at North Carolina State
University.