* 1255641
* CAREER: New Insights into the Reactivity of S-Nitrosothiols
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Qadir Timerghazin, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes and the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Programs in the Chemistry Division are funding Dr. Qadir
Timerghazin from Marquette University to investigate biological reactions of
S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs) and the mechanisms of the enzymatic control of these
reactions using computational chemistry methods. Formation of protein-based
RSNOs is one of the main mechanisms of the biological action of nitric oxide NO,
and thus of great interest in life sciences and medicine. Based on the
conceptual insights into the RSNO electronic structure, the mechanisms of
protein control of RSNO reactions will be studied using quantum chemistry
calculations, as well as molecular dynamics and hybrid quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics methods. The computational predictions will be
tested by experimental collaborators. This research seeks new insights into the
biological reactions of RSNOs, which are critical for normal physiological and
pathological processes in living organisms. The computational tools developed in
the course of this project could be useful to other researchers for modeling the
properties of protein-based RSNOs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitric oxide, NO, one
of the smallest molecules, has been identified as a very important biologically
active compound that controls a variety of key processes in living organisms. NO
is also behind the action of several important drugs, such as trinitroglycerine,
widely used for heart conditions. One of the main ways NO acts in biology is the
formation of S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs), which in turn participate in subsequent
biochemical reactions. As these reactions are challenging to study
experimentally, computational modeling can provide insights into these
processes. In the course of this computational research, graduate and
undergraduate students will acquire specialized training in the state-of-the-art
computational chemistry methods and will be involved in collaborative
interdisciplinary efforts at the interface between chemistry, life sciences,
physics, and computer science. Computational chemistry techniques will be
tightly integrated throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at
Marquette University and beyond.