* 1255526
* CAREER: Ultracold Molecular Ions Prepared via Sympathetic Cooling - A New Frontier for Quantum Interactions and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 764,305.00

CAREER: Ultracold molecular ions prepared via sympathetic cooling : a new
frontier for quantum interactions and fundamental physics&lt;br/&gt;Eric R.
Hudson, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports the development of techniques to open and explore a new frontier in
physics: ultracold polar molecular ions. Recent work has shown that by spatially
overlapping a cloud of ultracold calcium atoms with a molecular ion trap, it is
now possible to produce samples of cooled polar molecular ions. It is expected
that samples such as these will lead to significant technological and
fundamental advancements, including the study and possible control of chemistry
in the quantum regime, the implementation of a scalable quantum computer, new
probes of quantum matter and charge transport, understanding the formation of
interstellar clouds, and precision measurement of molecular structure for test
of fundamental physics. Thus, the main research objective and intellectual merit
of this project is to further optimize the methods of cold polar molecular
production and begin developing the techniques necessary to enable the expected
technological and fundamental advancements.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In concert
with this research effort, this CAREER award also supports an effort to increase
the broader impact of the work by partnering with the UCLA Graduate School of
Education's Center X Science Project to develop a series of inquiry-based,
hands-on experiments to help local K-12 schools meet the Science Content
Standards for California Public Schools. Center X partners with well over 100
local schools, helping them to improve their curriculum and teaching strategies,
but currently needs help in developing relevant, inquiry-based physics
experiments. Since research shows that when coursework is coupled with hands-on
experience, students learn more effectively, retain knowledge longer, and
develop higher-order skills with the added benefit of reaching a diversity of
students, this lack of curriculum must be addressed. To combat this deficiency,
work under this CAREER award will develop a hands-on laboratory curriculum for
high schools students closely tied to the research performed in our laboratory.