* 1255662
* CAREER: A Multiscale Study of Heavy Particle Transport in Sparse Canopies
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Rob Stoll, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 492,089.00

Particle Dispersion in Plant Canopies is an innovative and comprehensive project
designed to integrate research and education at the university level and to
extend the learning to outreach at local area high schools in Salt Lake City. It
is designed to peak student interest in scientific research while they
participate in lab activities focused on key hypotheses regarding atmospheric
transport of particles through and above plant canopies with applications to
atmospheric scalar transport and plant pathology in agricultural and natural
ecosystems. The project is well founded in learning theory and integrates the
disciplines of meteorology, biology, physics, engineering and mathematics. It is
part of the long-range career plan of the PI, is aligned with the University's
mission, and meets College and Departmental goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle
transport through the atmosphere plays an important role in many ecosystems.
Significant portions of these ecosystems interface with the atmosphere through
plant canopies. Understanding the transport through these canopies, between
canopies and the overlying atmosphere, and between disconnected canopies is
critical to understanding how these ecosystems function, and how to manage any
positive or negative effects. The research objectives of the project are
designed to investigate these issues and are critical towards developing
improved models for net ecosystem fluxes and to prevent the spread of airborne
pathogens that cause plant diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
objectives address the NSF priority of encouraging more women and minorities to
enroll in academic courses preparatory to STEM-related careers. An extensive
evaluation plan is included that will track participating students' attitude
toward STEM careers in high school and follow course enrollment in STEM courses
for three years. Likewise, student tracking will occur at the undergraduate
level, as enrollment data is available from each of the Utah high schools that
feed into the University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project comes from the use of
different approaches to develop a new comprehensive understanding of the impact
of canopy geometry on flow dynamics and particle transport across a wide range
of spatial scales. This understanding will lead to new models that can account
for momentum transport and particle dispersion in and above plant canopies
facilitating the asking and answering of questions related to how canopy
geometry affects ecosystem functioning and services, how ecosystems are
connected across landscapes, food production, the economic security of
agricultural producers, and general heavy particle dispersion. Existing models
for the dispersion and deposition of heavy particles to and from plant canopies
fail to include the effect of horizontal heterogeneity (e.g., non-vegetated
space between plants and land-cover transitions) on flow dynamics. The PI's goal
is to develop improved models that can capture the effect of horizontal
heterogeneity over a wide range of spatial scales to benefit natural and
agricultural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Through direct collaboration with biologists, this project
will contain a strong interdisciplinary component giving graduate students
unique experience working outside their core discipline and promoting
interaction between engineering, atmospheric science and biology. These
interdisciplinary benefits will extend to undergraduate students and to the high
school level in Utah. The active (hands-on) laboratory experiences will be
designed to promote teaching, training, and learning at all of these levels, and
to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups. While the goal is to
engage the students, a critical component of this program will be the
involvement and training of high school teachers and their effect upon STEM
enrollment. Results of the project will be disseminated broadly through the
project's web site and conference attendance at high school and college science
education conferences. Society in general will benefit from research leading to
better management of natural resources and crop production.