* 1255488
* CAREER: Improving Understanding of Antarctic Glacier Dynamics Through an Interactive Numerical Flowline Model
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2021
* Leigh Stearns, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 662,516.00

Stearns/1255488

This award supports a project to understand the flow dynamics of Antarctic
glaciers by means of a physically-based numerical model. The model will be used
to systematically investigate the dynamics of Antarctic glaciers, and to test
their response to a variety of perturbations. The intellectual merit of the
project relates to the fact that outlet glacier speeds exert a major control on
ice sheet mass balance and contribution to sea level rise; it is essential that
their sensitivity to a range of dynamic processes is properly understood and
incorporated into prognostic ice sheet models.

The objectives include estimating the sensitivity of individual glaciers to both
climate and non-climate forcings, calculating changes in mass flux based on a
number of different perturbations, and characterizing how glacier response
varies across the ice sheet. The broader impacts of the project include
education and outreach as well as contributions to the field of ice sheet
modeling. The numerical model used in this project will be incorporated into an
online interactive website, called the DYNamic Antarctic MODel (DYNAMOD) that
will allow students and researchers to investigate Antarctic glacier dynamics,
hypothesize about response behaviors, and test their results. Detailed model
results will be widely distributed to the community through publications, while
the model framework will be available online for student and researcher
exploration. The proposed work will provide significant research opportunities
for several early-career scientists, including the PI, a Post-Doctoral
Researcher, and a glaciology PhD student. The scope of the project provides
unique training in glaciology, modeling, computer programming and science
education for the PI and her entire research team. The award is a CAREER award
and as such the research and education will be integrated through the
development and distribution of a numerical glacier flow model and online
glacier database. Studies show that data-driven explorations, and the use of
dynamic visualizations, increase student understanding of both complex processes
and fundamental (math and physics) skills. This project aims to use a numerical
flowline model to improve understanding of Antarctic glacier dynamics while also
familiarizing students with applied math, science and modeling techniques.