* 1255416
* CAREER: Structured Matrix Computations: Foundations, Methods, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Jianlin Xia, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 413,894.00

The proposed research is concerned with innovative and systematic structured
matrix computations. Large-scale matrices arise frequently in mathematical
computations and engineering simulations. By exploiting the inherent structures,
one can often develop new fast and reliable matrix methods. This work is
especially interested in rank structures and data-sparse matrices, as well as
innovative ideas of using them in the solutions of practical numerical problems
(especially high dimensional discretized problems). The PI proposes to enhance
both the flexibility and the applicability of structured methods. Systematic
analysis for the structures and the methods will be included. The following
aspects will be studied: (1) theoretical foundations of rank properties and new
nested hierarchical structures; (2) new perspectives for exploring matrix
structures, such as matrix-free structured sparse factorization, factorization
update, and nested localization and sparsification; (3) efficient rank
structured matrix algorithms, their analysis, and their use in fast solutions of
large linear systems, least squares problems, eigenvalue problems, discretized
PDEs, and numerous engineering applications.

Matrix computations lie at the heart of most scientific computation tasks. This
research will systematically extend classical dense and sparse matrix
computations to data-sparse ones, and will introduce new structured matrix
theories and techniques into scientific and engineering computations. The
project will result in practical ways to reveal and use structures, which will
further yield fast and reliable algorithms such as stable direct three
dimensional PDE solvers with nearly linear complexity. Understanding the
structures will also provide new perspectives to classical challenges in
numerical solutions, such as large fill-in, ill conditioning, lack of explicit
matrices, and repeated solutions with highly varying parameters. The proposed
algorithms can be used (say, as kernel solvers) in many complex numerical
problems such as PDE solution, seismic imaging, signal processing, nanostructure
modeling, and VLSI circuit simulation. The work will provide a multidisciplinary
opportunity for researchers in different areas to participate. The project will
result in freely available open source packages for practical applications, as
well as courses ad tutorial and test materials for educational outreach programs
that can stimulate the interest and achievement of students from diverse
backgrounds.