* 1255612
* CAREER:  Electric Field Processing of Polyelectrolyte Complex
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Nicole Zacharia, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2014
* USD 165,618.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work to be conducted under this
award is to examine phase behavior of solutions of synthetic polyelectrolyte
complexes and to then use an electric field to manipulate these complexes in
solution with the goal of depositing them as solids onto substrates. Synthetic
polyelectrolytes, both strong and weak, that are typically used in layer-by-
layer (LbL) assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayers (such as polyacrylic acid,
sulfonated polystyrene, polyallylamine hydrochloride, and polyethylene imine)
will be examined. The first part of the work will be to determine phase diagrams
for the complexes of different pairs of polyelectrolytes as a function of pH,
solution ionic strength, molecular weight, and concentration. The thermodynamic
behavior of these complexes is generally masked by kinetic considerations, and
unraveling these components will be one goal. The next phase of the work will be
to look at adsorption of complexes of different stoichiometries onto charged
surfaces. The third phase of the work will be to compare this equilibrium
adsorption to deposition onto charged surfaces under the influence of an
electric field. Factors including ionic strength, dielectric constant of the
solvent, and addition of other components such as metal nanoparticles will be
examined. This process will eventually be generalized to look at the
electrophoretic deposition of other types of soft matter such as micelles or
hollow polyelectrolyte capsules. The last phase of the work is to examine the
solid materials created by this process. It is hypothesized that different
stoichiometries and properties can be achieved through electric field
manipulation as compared to equilibrium adsorption onto a
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes (PEs) can be compared very long molecular
salts, i.e. long-chain molecules made up of a sequence of either positive or
negative charges. They tend to be water-soluble and are often used in
pharmaceutical, cosmetic, or food formulations. Biological materials such as
proteins and DNA are examples of polyelectrolytes. PEs can be processed into
thin coatings with a range of very useful properties by a technique of
sequential adsorption steps. These coatings have possible applications in
alternative energy devices, biomedical devices, energy saving coatings for
windows, and any number of other possibilities. One major barrier to their
commercialization is the long time required to make these coatings. The work
proposed here is to look at electric fields as a tool to enhance the deposition
times for coatings made of polyelectrolytes. This potential has the impact to
make these materials commercially viable. This work will help to train PhD
students as well as undergraduate students, to engage them in science. Outreach
will be done with community college students who are considering transferring
into four-year programs. Special attention will be paid to the mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented groups, especially
female students and those students who are the first in their family to attend
college. The PI already has a strong record of working with students from these
groups.