* 1255584
* CAREER:   Achieving Tunable Nanomagnetism using Charge Defects and Strain
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Pushpa Raghani, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 427,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computation research, education, and
outreach activities on magnetism in nanomaterials. The PI will investigate
mechanisms that control magnetism at the nanoscale. For practical applications,
nanostructures are often deposited on a substrate, and nanostructure-substrate
interactions are known to affect the magnetic properties of the substrate. Very
recently, it was observed that transition metal nanostructures deposited at
defect sites such as vacancies in the substrate, become effectively charged,
which leads to the modification of their electronic properties and enhanced
catalytic activity. The PI will investigate the effects of nanostructure
charging on their magnetic properties using methods based on Density Functional
Theory. The PI aims to focus on ultrathin insulating films, such as copper
nitride and sodium chloride, supported by metallic substrates. The first
objective is to establish electronic and magnetic properties of ultrathin
insulating films in the presence of various kinds of defects and to determine
the stability of various charge states of the defects. The second objective is
to determine the stability of various charge states of nanostructures deposited
on these defect sites and, their effect on the nanostructure-substrate coupling
and the magnetic properties of nanostructures. An aim of the research is to
develop correlations between magnetic properties of nanostructures and their
charge and the nanostructure-substrate coupling. This would contribute to
enabling the design nanostructures with desired electronic and magnetic
properties. This award also supports educational activities. Involving
undergraduate students in research is the primary focus of the education
component of this proposal. Undergraduate and graduate students will have the
opportunity to take part in industrial internships and work with PI's industrial
collaborators. Promoting science education at the secondary-school level is the
next crucial component of this CAREER award. To achieve this goal, high-school
student interns will be recruited during summer to work with the PI. The PI will
also deliver talks on the role of computational physics in nanoscience and
nanotechnology at local Boise schools and at the Discovery Center of Idaho
located in Boise area. To promote enrollment of women undergraduates in
sciences, meetings with women undergraduate students at Boise State will be
organized periodically. Undergraduate students will develop awareness in
materials modeling to discover and design new materials using theoretical and
computational approaches.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computation research, education, and
outreach activities on magnetism in nanomaterials. Continual miniaturization of
devices has enabled many modern day technological advances from smart phones and
tablets to high-density data storage on hard disks. The miniaturization of
devices, however, has reached a point where further reduction in size requires
studying materials at the nanoscale, that is, materials with a size some 10,000
times smaller than the thickness of a human hair. Each atom in a nanomaterial
can behave like a tiny magnet which can be manipulated to develop novel devices
that are not only smaller in size but also consume less power. Creating novel
spintronic devices largely depends on the ability to tailor the properties of
materials at nanoscale. The PI aims to use computational tools to develop
methods to tune or control the magnetic properties of materials at the. This
research contributes to efforts to develop techniques for designing tailor-made
nanomagnets and to accelerate the search for new magnetic materials with desired
properties at nanoscale. This award also supports educational activities.
Involving undergraduate students in research is the primary focus of the
education component of this proposal. Undergraduate and graduate students will
have the opportunity to take part in industrial internships and work with PI's
industrial collaborators. Promoting science education at the secondary-school
level is the next crucial component of this CAREER award. To achieve this goal,
high-school student interns will be recruited during summer to work with the PI.
The PI will also deliver talks on the role of computational physics in
nanoscience and nanotechnology at local Boise schools and at the Discovery
Center of Idaho located in Boise area. To promote enrollment of women
undergraduates in sciences, meetings with women undergraduate students at Boise
State will be organized periodically. Undergraduate students will develop
awareness in materials modeling to discover and design new materials using
theoretical and computational approaches.