* 1255547
* CAREER: The Emergence of New Indo-Aryan--Tense, Aspect and Modality
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Ashwini Deo, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2016
* USD 408,652.00

The Indo-Aryan languages provide us with a rich and continuous historical
linguistic record for over three thousand years. But a large amount of this
record, especially for the Middle Indo-Aryan and Early New Indo-Aryan period,
remains unexplored linguistically. This project will contribute to filling this
gap by undertaking an investigation of the nature of the linguistic transition
from the Late Middle Indo-Aryan period to the New Indo-Aryan period (500 CE--
1500CE). Dr. Ashwini Deo's research will focus specifically on studying the
evolution of tense, aspect, and modality systems in the New Indo-Aryan
languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on two subprojects. The
first subproject aims to digitize a set of diachronic texts created between
500CE and 1500CE, thus creating an electronically accessible and searchable
corpus for the period of interest. The second subproject involves taking a
closer look at the contemporary linguistic situation for under-documented
members of the Central and Southern subgroups of Indo-Aryan for clues about the
structure of the parent Middle Indo-Aryan system. Undertaken in concert, these
two methodologically distinct, but thematically unified subprojects will yield a
picture of the Indo-Aryan historical situation of much higher resolution than
either of them undertaken in isolation. Further, these data will be crucial to
answering broader theoretical questions about the systematic nature of semantic
change, the mechanisms of change, and paths of evolution in tense/aspect systems
in natural languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims, from the very
outset, to create a platform for making the processed textual and field data
(metadata) accessible to the broader research community via a dedicated website.
A sizeable corpus of electronic texts as well as a comprehensive bibliographic
database of material on Middle and New Indo-Aryan will be made publicly
available. Further, a complete archive of documented materials will be
maintained for the fieldwork done. The intellectual infrastructure generated by
the project can be thus employed more generally for future research on Middle
and New Indo-Aryan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's
International Science and Engineering office.