* 1255446
* CAREER: Elucidating the material properties of complex tunable biopolymer networks using single-molecule nano stress-strain transducers and sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Rae Robertson-Anderson, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 520,208.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1255446 PI: Anderson, Rae ORG: University of San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Elucidating the material properties of
complex tunable biopolymer networks using single-molecule nano stress-strain
transducers and sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Actin is a
highly multifunctional protein that polymerizes and forms a wide range of
complex networks with the help of numerous actin-binding proteins (ABPs). These
networks, each designed for specific biological functions, have very different
structural and dynamical properties as well as mechanical responses to stress
and strain. The hierarchical nature and tunability of actin networks provides a
promising route for the bottom-up design of multifunctional biomimetic
materials. However, to implement such design, the molecular dynamics and
interactions that give rise to such attractive material properties must be
understood. Bulk studies have examined the viscoelasticity and mechanical
response of actin networks, but such studies are unable to reveal the molecular
mechanics underlying the material properties or any spatial or temporal
variations within the material. While single-molecule studies have examined the
mechanical properties of single actin filaments and actin-ABP constructs, a
connection between the mechanics of single network components and the bulk
mechanical response is still lacking. Using fluorescence force-measuring dual
optical tweezers and a novel technique in which single molecules serve as nano
stress-strain transducers and sensors, the PI will, for the first time, directly
measure the resistive force exerted by a network at the molecular level
(piconewton precision) in response to a molecular-scale strain
(nanometer/millisecond precision) while simultaneously imaging and tracking
single molecules experiencing the strain in real-time. These measurements -- the
first of their kind -- will reveal the much-needed link between molecular
deformation (strain) and resistive force (stress), and will provide a powerful
description of the connection between the mechanics of the individual network
components and the bulk mechanical response. Thus, results will fill a long-
standing gap in knowledge regarding the mechanical behavior of complex
biopolymer networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The project will
provide critical insights to a range of fields from molecular and cellular
biology to materials science and engineering. If understood at the molecular
level, the broad range of mechanical properties exhibited in biopolymer networks
could be harnessed to spatiotemporally regulate the mechanical properties of
novel hierarchical network-based materials. The innovative techniques developed
and employed are also highly versatile and can be used to probe a wide range of
mechanical properties existing in a variety of different biomaterials.
Undergraduates from all STEM disciplines have and will continue to play a
central role in the PI's research. The PI will also continue to mentor local
high school students, creating a rich interdisciplinary research experience for
all students. To further broaden the impact of the PI's research, she will
develop a highly interdisciplinary Biophysics Major program at the University of
San Diego that will prepare undergraduates to contribute effectively to the
interdisciplinary scientific arena and attract more women to the physical
sciences. The PI will develop and teach three new courses for the major. The
PI's research and instrumentation will play an integral role in each course. The
PI, along with a diverse group of STEM faculty, is also developing a novel
interdisciplinary service-learning course in which undergraduates develop
interactive science projects that they execute with K-6 students in an
afterschool program serving mainly first-generation immigrants. The PI will
develop a summer program in which Biophysics majors who complete this course
refine and disseminate these projects to other afterschool programs and
institutions. Research results, pedagogical findings, and outreach models will
be disseminated primarily via publication in peer-reviewed journals,
presentations by the PI and students at professional conferences, and through
robust web-based methods.