* 1255018
* CAREER: Robust Bipedal Locomotion in Real-World Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Katie Byl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant is
to develop tools for analyzing and optimizing quasi-periodic biped gaits for
high-dimensional models of both humans and humanoid devices. From watching
Olympic athletes to taking a hike along a dirt path, our experiences demonstrate
that biped locomotion provides a highly agile and robust means of mobility.
However, today's humanoid robots are far less capable than their fictional,
Hollywood counterparts. The same inverted-pendulum dynamics that make upright
walking highly maneuverable under desired control inputs also make it highly
susceptible to destabilization. Unlike classic inverted pendulum problems (for
example, a rocket propelled by thrusters at its base stabilized during
continuous flight), the process of walking is complicated by the discontinuities
of impulsive footsteps that vary in both width and height, resulting in a
'quasi-periodic' gait. In particular, work focuses on the challenges of walking
on terrain that is not flat and includes intermittent obstacles. The approach
exploits the observation that step-to-step 'snapshots' of the position and
velocity states of the joints tend to lie on two-dimensional manifolds within a
much higher dimensional state space for such systems. This dimensionality
reduction enables the use of machine learning techniques for control policy
evaluation and improvement to quantifiably estimate fall rates, energy use, and
speed for a given combination of biped walker and stochastic
terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will provide important
tools to analyze and/or optimize a variety of real-world systems. From
evaluation of the risk of falling for a stroke survivor who walks with an
impaired gait, to the design of smart lower-limb prostheses for injured
veterans, the modeling approach developed will provide a means of quantifying
reliability for systems with such high dimensionality and complexity that
traditional guarantees of stability cannot be made. Additionally, robotics
research provides a natural gateway for both K-12 and university STEM education.
This project includes several outreach elements to encourage this interest, from
hosting on-campus field trips for local FIRST Robotics participants and
predominantly Hispanic elementary school students to sponsorship of a new
Robotics Club at UC Santa Barbara.