* 1255040
* CAREER:  Investigating fast motion of the Indian plate with geodynamic models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Dave Stegman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 725,000.00

Plate tectonics is the theory that explains continental drift as the result of
Earth's outer surface being broken into plates that move and slide past each
other over geological time. The youngest portion of the plates are generated by
seafloor spreading at volcanic ridges in the world?s oceans which replaces the
older portions of the plates that get recycled back into the Earth's interior
through a process known as subduction. When this theory was formulated during
the 1960's, it was a scientific revolution for Earth sciences on par with the
theory of evolution for biology and quantum mechanics for physics, as it
provides a conceptual framework for understanding Earth's tectonism and
volcanism in a unifying way. However, this initial theory was merely a
descriptive set of rules for the kinematics of plate motion. Our lack of a
deeper understanding is highlighted by questions such as: How does plate
tectonics work? When did plate tectonics begin? And Why does Earth have plate
tectonics? The answers to these questions are central for learning more about
the evolution of Earth?s continents, oceans, atmosphere, and even life itself.
This project will investigate the dynamical causes for unusually rapid motion of
the Indian plate observed between 70 and 45 Million years ago (Ma), when the
Indian plate was recorded to have drifted 1.5-2 times faster than the typical
speed of subducting plates. By attempting to understand such an anomalously fast
plate speed, our knowledge of how plate tectonics works, and how Earth has
evolved, will be improved. A significant aspect of this project is its
innovative educational component, a pilot-scale nationwide REU program in
geodynamics aimed to strengthen the applicant pool of highly qualified
prospective PhD students within geodynamics and increase participation from
members of underrepresented groups. This program will support four undergraduate
researchers each summer with one hosted by PI-Stegman at SIO and three others
hosted by participating institutions across the nation. All REU participants
will work on an engaging, well-designed project that directly advances the
research and educational objectives of the overall project,including authorship
of subsequent publications to which their work over the summer contributed. This
initiative provides a framework for community building by strengthening ties
between computational geodynamics groups nationally, by offering the mutual
benefit of an enhanced ability to successfully attract and recruit highly
qualified PhD students.

Beginning at 67 Ma, the Indian plate achieved peak velocities in excess of 16
cm/yr, or nearly double the typical velocity of subducting plates (&#8764;6-8
cm/yr), and then sustained speeds in excess 10-12 cm/yr until 52 Ma. The start
of this remarkable event is coincident with the arrival of the Deccan plume head
that is thought to have produced an enormous volcanic eruption known as the
Deccan traps. This project will build upon the recent discovery of a new plate
driving force, the plume-push force (Cande and Stegman, 2011), which may play a
role in explaining the fast motion of India in addition to slab-pull and ridge-
push forces acting on the system. Current observations suggest mantle plumes
influence both plate motions as well as where plate boundaries form, but the
underlying physical process for how and why is not yet known. Numerical models
of mantle convection will be employed to systematically investigate the motion
of India, and will be constrained by a diverse suite of geophysical and
geological observations. Furthermore, the physical mechanism through which the
plume-push force acts will be quantitatively investigated with geodynamic
models. Lastly, this project will investigate the physical mechanism that allows
a plumehead to facilitate plate boundary reorganizations over short intervals of
time (5-10 Myr), as indicated by the tectonic history of the Seychelles
microplate between 70-60 Ma which can be used to add spatial-temporal
constraints on the uplift and horizontal force-balance evolution. The outcomes
of this project will advance the capability to model plate tectonics in a way
yet to be achieved: as a fully-dynamic, time-dependent 3D system with self-
consistently evolving plate driving forces.