* 1255877
* RUI:   Characterizing the Mechanisms Mediating C. Elegans Male Tail Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* D. Adam Mason, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 12/31/2017
* USD 362,201.00

The development of a single-celled fertilized egg into a multi-cellular adult is
an essential part of animal life cycles. Morphogenesis, a critical component of
development, is the process by which embryonic structures are molded to generate
the final adult form. Morphogenesis is driven by changes in the migration and
shape of embryonic cells and tissues. While much is known about the processes
that change cells during morphogenesis, very little is known about how these
processes are regulated to ensure that they occur in the correct time and place.
This research focuses on discovering novel genes and regulatory mechanisms that
mediate morphogenesis. To accomplish this, the project team uses the remodeling
of the tail of C. elegans males as a model of morphogenesis. Male tail
remodeling provides a unique system for identifying novel morphogenetic genes
and regulatory mechanisms because: i) C. elegans is remarkably easy to
manipulate genetically, ii) tail remodeling involves changes in only four cells,
and iii) DMD-3, a conserved regulatory protein, is known to be the master
regulator of this process. It is expected that, upon completion of this
research, the project team will characterize the role of intracellular vesicular
trafficking in male tail morphogenesis, identify novel genes and processes
involved in morphogenesis, and characterize how DMD-3 controls these genes and
processes. The experiments will be carried out by undergraduate students working
in the research laboratory or taking a Developmental Genetics course. This
project will provide students with experience using current genetic and cell
biological techniques and will introduce them to C. elegans, one of the
preeminent invertebrate genetic model systems. In summary, this study will link
aspects of cell biology, genetics, and developmental biology to provide a
detailed description of morphogenesis in C. elegans, and inform our
understanding of similar processes in vertebrates.