* 1255270
* CAREER: Photoactivatable atomic oxygen precursors for the rapid, selective oxidation of biological thiols to sulfenic acids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Ryan McCulla, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2019
* USD 570,000.00

With support of this CAREER award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B and Chemistry of Life Processes Programs, Professor Ryan McCulla of
Saint Louis University will explore the reactivity of atomic oxygen with
biomolecules and the resulting transient oxidation products. Initial studies
have indicated that atomic oxygen is a more selective oxidant than other
reactive oxygen species. This selectivity combined with the photochemical
release of atomic oxygen allows the study of reactive intermediates that would
otherwise be difficult to characterize. In particular, the chemistry of sulfenic
acids in physiologically relevant conditions will be investigated by utilizing
photo-activatable atomic oxygen precursors and computational methods. Sulfenic
acids are often putative intermediates in redox-controlled processes within
cells. Unless specifically stabilized, simple sulfenic acid cannot be isolated,
which makes studying their reactivity challenging.

A complementary educational program that integrates computational chemistry with
guided inquiry method will also be developed. The use of computational methods
allows students to rapidly generate data, which allows students to use their
creativity while exploring chemical concepts. The effectiveness of this program
will be assessed by implementing a short course in local high schools, which are
largely populated by groups underrepresented in science. In addition to improved
understanding of chemical concepts, this program seeks to inspire students to
pursue careers in science by exposing them to the role creativity plays in
scientific discovery.