* 1255574
* CAREER: Heat kernel measures in infinite dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2022
* Tai Melcher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 449,544.00

This research project is unified as a study of smoothness properties of elliptic
and hypoelliptic heat kernel measures in infinite dimensions. The focal points
of this proposal - smoothness, quasi-invariance, and Taylor isomorphisms - are
fundamental principles in the study of measures in infinite dimensions. Although
these concepts have their own intrinsic interest, one may motivate their study
by physical applications. For example, in quantized classical mechanics, it is
standard practice to perform integration over certain infinite-dimensional
spaces with respect to "infinite-dimensional Lebesgue measure." Of course, this
measure does not exist, and the appropriate replacement is Wiener measure or,
for an infinite-dimensional curved space, heat kernel measure. As the integral
computations physicists perform routinely involve changes of variable and
differentiation, quasi-invariance and more general smoothness results for heat
kernel measures are critical in giving a mathematical foundation to these formal
computations. Taylor isomorphism theorems are also significant to physical
applications as they are related to the important problem of quantizing Yang-
Mills fields which form a key part of the "standard model" of particle physics.
The study of hypoelliptic heat kernel measures are important in the study of
sub-Riemannian geometries that appear in physical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an integrated project of research and
training in probability. The research program focuses on the study of so-called
?heat kernel measures? in infinite dimensions. Consider a curved surface (like
the Earth) to which one applies a unit of heat at a fixed point and then steps
away and allows the heat to propagate. The heat kernel measure describes the
evolution of the proportion of heat in subsets of the surface at some later
time. As the manner in which heat diffuses relies heavily on the geometric and
topological properties of the relevant space, the heat kernel measure reflects
these properties and analysis of this measure reveals much about the space on
which it lives. Heat kernel measures are the natural generalization to curved
spaces of Gaussian measures (higher dimensional analogues of the normal
distribution) which have for many decades been recognized as the appropriate
measures to conduct infinite-dimensional analysis. Infinite-dimensional spaces
often show up in physical models; in particular, infinite-dimensional groups
appear in quantum field theory and quantum mechanics. Thus, this research
program contributes to solidifying a rigorous mathematical framework for the
study of quantum physics. Many of the applications have finite-dimensional
models which are accessible to undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Thus, this project has a significant training component, including involving
undergraduates in research on related problems in finite dimensions. The
training program also includes mentoring of graduate students in an introduction
to math outreach and promoting the retention and visibility of women researchers
in probability.