* 1255013
* CAREER: Ecohydrological controls on land-atmosphere interactions in water-limited ecosystems: a framework for education and research
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Shirley Papuga, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 545,938.00

Water-limited ecosystems are especially sensitive to precipitation changes, and
understanding the controls on land-atmosphere interactions and how they
influence larger scale feedbacks will become increasingly important as climatic
and other global changes continue to alter the water availability in these
ecosystems. Despite comprising a relatively large percentage of the Earth's land
surface, water-limited ecosystems are poorly represented in land-surface and
global circulation models. This research will address water limited ecosystems
function by linking small scale processes investigated in field and experimental
efforts with large scale processes using a modeling approach that takes
advantage of a simple conceptual framework combined with remote sensing
products. Over a decade of field work has highlighted the importance of deep
soil moisture in the functioning of water-limited ecosystems. Emergent
hypotheses on the role of deep soil moisture in water-limited ecosystems will be
addressed using a simple framework based on moisture in two soil layers (e.g.
surface layer: 0 - 20 cm, deep layer: 20 - 60 cm). This robust framework is
ideal for developing and testing hypotheses in both educational and research
settings. Furthermore, the project will use this framework to test hypotheses in
other uniquely water-limited ecosystems (e.g. snow-dependent subalpine, arctic
tundra). Plot- to ecosystem- scale findings will be used to support hypothesis
testing at larger scales using a modeling approach capable of multiple layers of
moisture and incorporating remote sensing products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly
40% of the global land surface is classified as arid to semiarid; a percentage
that is almost certain to increase based on current climate trends.
Historically, these water-limited areas have also been locations of major
population increase. This problematic combination of sustained climate change
and population growth creates fundamental changes to native ecosystems that will
undoubtedly have major impacts on watersheds and rivers; these impacts are
likely to exacerbate further climatic changes. This research emphasizes
monitoring in water-limited ecosystems to better predict the behavior and
functioning of these ecosystems under global change and also better understand
their contribution to global water, carbon, and energy cycling. Further, the
project will engage students (especially underprivileged and underrepresented
students) in the process of science as a means to ready them for the workforce.
This is particularly crucial with the growing need to train students to
effectively communicate the importance of scientific research to the general
public. The simple two-layer moisture framework highlighted in this research is
ideal for tackling both of these integrated research and educational challenges.