* 1255793
* CIF21: DIBBs: Building a Unified Infrastructure for Data Integration on Political Violence and Conflict
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Gary LaFree, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2014
* USD 117,176.00

Building a Unified Infrastructure for Data Integration on Political Violence and
Conflict &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal s a conceptualization project
whereby leaders of several major data collections, along with experts in
insurgency, ethnic conflict, terrorism, computer science, and data management,
will build consensus around a unified infrastructure for political violence data
collection and integration. The project will create a scalable ontology focused
on four domains relevant to all forms of political violence: conflicts, actors,
geographies, and events. This ontological infrastructure will allow researchers
and policy makers who study political violence, including its etiology and
consequences, to access and integrate existing data from the major political
violence data collections currently collected at academic institutions and non-
governmental organizations around the world. This infrastructure will also
facilitate the development of new non-linear and semantic analytical methods to
decipher the complex dynamics of conflict and violence. Finally, this
infrastructure will provide a platform for the next generation of data
collection on violence and conflict by creating a flexible framework for new
data collection projects that is both easily exchangeable and adheres to the
consensus-based ontologies developed. The proposed project incorporates a two-
day stakeholder workshop, a schematic design of the ontological infrastructure
for political violence data collection, and a web-based community-moderated
issue-tracking wiki to encourage participatory development and refinement of the
ontologies. Additionally, the proposed project supports one of the core missions
of NSF?s Big Data initiative, focusing on the development of a data
infrastructure relevant to national security. Intellectual Merit: Although
scientists have made major advances in the empirical understanding of political
violence in recent years, nonetheless further advances are being hindered by the
fact that leading projects from around the world are largely autonomous and
uncoordinated. This project will address this weakness by creating a scalable
ontology focused on domains critical to political violence. The major goal of
this enterprise is to design a strategy for integrating the world?s most
important data bases on political violence within an expandable platform that
will allow not only updating original data but the addition of new data and
variables, including rapidly evolving data sets derived from the social media.
The proposal has built in sufficient resources to host a two-day stakeholder
conference, to prepare read-ahead materials for stakeholders before the
conference, to design and staff a wiki for reaching out to the research
community and for developing a final report that will serve as a springboard for
a proposal to implement the ontology designed. By integrating the major data
bases, providing an infrastructure for growth, and making the end product
available to the world?s research community, the proposed activity could have a
transformative impact on the science of political violence. Broader Impacts:
This ontological approach to political violence data collection will offer
critical insights for data integration and for advancing the scientific study of
violent conflict. Effective identification of ontologies across major political
violence data collections will provide an essential roadmap for the integration
of these data structures and the development of new applications and analysis
for research on national security. Additionally, the workshop will serve to
network senior and junior faculty alongside graduate students thereby developing
a new generation of political violence experts. The translation of the workshop
report into a community-moderated and web-based issue-tracking wiki will serve
to expand participation to include other researchers who will be instrumental in
defining and shaping a larger ontological structure for both existing and future
data collection efforts.