* 1255219
* CAREER: Synthesis and Reactivity of Polyaromatic Hydrocarbon Belts: Towards a Bottom-Up Organic Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Ramesh Jasti, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 10/31/2014
* USD 575,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the
research of Professor Ramesh Jasti at Boston University. Professor Jasti will
develop organic synthesis tools that will ultimately enable the preparation of
structurally well-defined carbon nanotubes (CNTs). CNTs are among the most
promising materials in nanoscience due to their unique electronic and optical
properties. Current synthetic methods, however, produce CNT mixtures that have
different arrangements of carbon atoms and, therefore, different physical
properties. To achieve this goal, Professor Jasti and his group will develop
syntheses of several polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) belts - short fragments of
carbon nanotubes. Aside from their relationship to CNTs, these structures have
been long sought non-natural targets of synthesis for decades. A prerequisite to
these syntheses is the development of methodologies that can construct highly
strained PAHs. With these belt structures in hand, a Diels-Alder polymerization
reaction to extend these belts into longer carbon nanotubes will be developed.

CNTs have shown promise as new solar energy materials, components of faster
electronics, and single molecule biosensors. Syntheses of CNTs with well-
defined, homogeneous structures will greatly facilitate engineers, physicists,
and materials scientists in the development of these potentially revolutionary
nanotechnologies. In addition to enabling new CNT technologies, the proposed
program will train interdisciplinary scientists with the ability to apply
complex molecule synthesis to problems in nanoscience. Professor Jasti's choice
of synthetic targets will provide graduate and undergraduate students with a
thorough background in synthetic organic strategy, methodology development, and
reaction mechanism. In addition, in order to provide an interdisciplinary
science experience to high school students, Professor Jasti will develop science
workshops partnering with the Steppingstone Foundation and the Upward Bound Math
and Science Program.