* 1255453
* EAGER: The Conceptual Landscape of Information Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Hans Klein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2015
* USD 250,000.00

A new, emergent cybersecurity frontier is information manipulation, whereby
adversaries may attempt to distort information to influence opinion, thought, or
action. Information manipulation can take many shapes and forms, from blatant
attacks such as search-poisoning, misinformation such as bogus on-line reviews,
to subtle distortion such as personalized search and biased news. Left
unchecked, information manipulation can harm our economy, culture, and
democracy. Past research efforts have been ad-hoc and focused on specific kinds
of information manipulation.

This work aims to lay the foundations of research in information manipulation.
There are three research components: (1) surveying the long line of relevant
scholarly work on information manipulation, and investigating how the
established types of manipulation play out on the Internet and if the Internet
gives rise to novel types of manipulation, (2) generating an overarching
conceptual framework about information manipulation to capture the basic
properties of various forms of existing and possible manipulation practices on
the Internet, and (3) developing taxonomy of information manipulation that
facilitates the development of general countermeasure for each category of
manipulation. This project is tightly integrated with social-science research.
In particular, political and social behavioral study identifies the important
insights from at least two millennia of scholarship on information manipulation
and help define models of the actors, goals, mechanisms, and strategies of
information manipulation in the Internet era. The historical perspectives and
conceptualization of information manipulation provide the foundation for
developing a comprehensive framework to counter information manipulation.