* 1255826
* CIF21 DIBBs: Designing the Roadmap for Social Network Data Management
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Thomas Carsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 12/31/2014
* USD 109,738.00

CIF21 DIBBs: Designing the Roadmap for Social Network Data Management
&lt;br/&gt;Scholarly interest in network analysis has increased dramatically in
the social sciences and beyond. The explosion of social media tools such as
Facebook, Flickr, and Twitter, along with new developments in machine learning
and data mining have produced new types of behavioral data for scholars to
analyze (Mislove et al., 2007). Significant advances in mathematics, statistics,
and computer science have also produced unprecedented opportunities to analyze
?Big? social network data. Social network analysis sits at the cutting edge of
social science and also links the social, natural, and computational sciences.
Understanding the multi-faceted nature of social networks and their effects on
human behavior is one of the grand challenges faced as this project seeks to
maximize our investments in scientific research (NSF-ACCI, 2011). However, the
community has not seen comparable advances in the management, archiving, and
sharing of social network data. This presents a fundamental obstacle to
advancing network science across the social, natural, and computational
sciences. This proposal seeks to begin to remedy this problem. The data
management needs social network scholars are complex. Network data often come
from unstructured environments that require researchers to define and describe a
set of units or actors (called nodes) and the connections (called edges) between
them. Networks might be static or dynamic, include one type of node or multiple
node types, and include edges that are uni-directional or bi-directional and
weighted or unweighted. In addition, as relationships spread within the network
and/or a network grows, the associated data management, data storage, and
analytical memory requirements can grow exponentially. This proposal brings
together the social network analysis, information science, computer science, and
data archive communities to develop a data infrastructure to support advanced
analysis and research on social networks as well as to facilitate data sharing
and archiving within this community. The group will address key questions
concerning data storage architecture and lifecycle requirements, develop design
specifications for creating a sustainable data infrastructure that will be
discoverable, searchable, accessible, and usable to the entire research and
education community, and initialize a prototype solution based on that plan.
Intellectual Merit: The proposed project will bring together the social network
analysis community to work with information technology professionals to design a
robust data management infrastructure to promote the sharing and
interoperability of social network data. Effective data management for social
network data amplifies the impact of research by revealing data quality issues
early in the data collection process, ensuring that required data is retained
and usable throughout the life of a research project. It also facilitates data
sharing and reuse. A key to responsible data stewardship is the application and
auditing of quality data management policies ? something included in this
proposal. Providing a robust infrastructure to store, analyze, curate, share,
and manage important social network data will increase researchers? production
and provide an unprecedented view of the social world only visible through
social network data. Broader Impacts: The project will facilitate data sharing
and increase social network data availability while assuring researchers that
data management policies are followed. It will help formalize a community of
network data experts that will begin developing best practices for the
community. Availability of data particularly benefits early-stage researchers,
and researchers at diverse institutions. Widespread availability of data
facilitates citizen science and the integration of science and teaching at all
levels of education. Managed data sharing is critical to the multi disciplinary
research to answer the critical challenges facing society today. It would be
difficult to overstate the importance of social network analysis to better
understand human networks and social behavior.