* 1255250
* CAREER: A Route to Synthetic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Brian Paegel, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2018
* USD 796,955.00

Richard Feynman famously challenged scientists and engineers to extend the
engineering dominion over biology. While there is progress in this area, the
reality for major achievements remains largely only a vision. Biological
assembly exemplifies mastery over many molecular scales, from small-molecule
nutrients to macromolecular proteins and genes, extending to still higher scales
of the cytoskeleton and cell membrane. Synthetic control at these molecular
scales has remained out of reach, but the microfluidic fruits of Feynman's
challenges in systems miniaturization are poised to unravel the complexities of
membrane assembly. This technology has led to the building of organized bilayer
structures with cellular architecture that are capable of Darwinian evolution.
This project explores layer-by-layer assembly as a route to synthetic cells that
are programmable in terms of size, concentration of contents, and membrane
chemical characteristics such as lipid compositional asymmetry and lamellarity,
which are hallmarks of cellular architecture. The resultant ordered arrays of
trapped cells will provide a platform for membrane prototyping, enabling the
discovery and characterization of entirely novel membrane compositions and
membranes composed of primitive materials that may have been present on the
early Earth.

Biology is rich in complex behavior that will drive the most important
scientific discoveries of this century. For many, this complexity can impede
thinking rationally about its function, diversity and adaptation, and thereby
impede further economic and technological development. The proposed research
unifies synthetic control at the molecular scale with behavior at the cellular
scale. Understanding and appreciating this unity is key to demystifying
biological complexity and evolution by demonstrating the chemical basis of life
on earth. To achieve these goals, the PI has developed educational activities
that teach the scale relationship between atoms, molecules, and cells. Closely
mentored high school and undergraduate summer interns will have the opportunity
to control with their hands the formation of cellular structures through one-on-
one interactions as investments in the nation's future scientific and economic
enterprise. Palm Beach County middle and high school science teachers will be
offered a professional development workshop to become proficient in this area to
impact a large student population through instrumentation and curricula that
connect the elegance of chemistry with the complexity of biological function and
organization.

This proposal is being funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in
the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division and is being co-funded by
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry (CHE) Division.