* 1255378
* CAREER: An Elastic Approach to Strong Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Liping Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 549,938.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The search for strong glasses is of paramount
interest today with the increasing demand for light-weight and durable glasses
for applications such as personal electronics, automobiles, solar panels,
buildings, and submarine communications cables. This project aims to advance
fundamental knowledge of the microscopic structure of glass by studying its
elastic response to external stimuli such as temperature and pressure in
experiments complemented by computer simulations. A fundamental understanding of
glass structure may enable predictive design of glasses with tailor-made
properties and related benefits with respect to energy consumption and
sustainability. The integrated educational plan is to address the computational
materials science curriculum development by: 1) introducing an undergraduate
level computational materials science course into the Materials Science and
Engineering curriculum; and 2) incorporating computational modules into core
materials science classes. In carrying out this project, graduate and
undergraduate students are trained in frontier areas of glass research.
Continuous efforts are being made to inspire and encourage K-12 students to
pursue science and engineering as a career path, by igniting curiosity in young
minds and instilling confidence in women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: An accurate knowledge of
the atomic structure of glass is critical for enabling future breakthroughs in
glass science and technology. However, despite extensive research,
characterizing the disordered structure of glass at the atomic level remains a
grand challenge. This project tackles the longstanding problem by
probing/perturbing the glass structure with thermal or mechanical agitations,
which leads to variations in its elastic moduli. Such changes under external
stimuli inevitably reflect the underlying structural response, and the structure
itself. This response occurs because elastic moduli, simple to define and easy
to measure macroscopically, are closely related to the atomic arrangements and
the interatomic interactions, embodying the microscopic structure and bonding
information. The fundamental understanding of the structure-elastic moduli
relation in glass may help us to understand a striking empirical correlation
observed recently in oxide and metallic glasses: namely that the fracture energy
increases with the Poisson's ratio, with a sharp brittle-to-ductile transition
at a critical Poisson's ratio of 0.31-0.32. At the same time, the correlation
between Poisson's ratio and fracture energy can serve as a guide to search for
strong glasses. In situ Raman and Brillouin light scattering techniques under
high temperature, high pressure and high strain conditions, complemented by
predictive computational methods, are used to accomplish the research goals of
this project.