* 1255544
* CAREER: Emergent Phases of Correlated Electrons in Materials with Spin-Orbit Coupling and Magnetic Frustration
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Natalia Perkins, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2015
* USD 180,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical on novel quantum phases that arise from the
collective behavior of correlated electrons in the presence of strong spin-orbit
coupling and frustration. The main focus is on 5d transition metal oxides, such
as iridates and osmates, in which spin-orbit-coupling is comparable to, or
larger than Coulomb energy. Specific 5d transition metal oxide systems have
recently attracted a lot of theoretical and experimental attention because of
unusual hierarchy of interactions, extended nature of 5d-orbitals, and high
sensitivity to crystal fields. Because of these properties 5d systems are
candidate materials for the realization of various emergent quantum phases, such
as spin liquids, topological insulators, Weyl semimetals, and novel magnetically
ordered Mott insulators. The PI aims to develop and analyze effective spin-
orbital models which describe the low-energy physics of correlated systems in
the presence of strong spin-obit coupling. The PI plans to study the ground
state phase diagrams of these models and identify the nature of possible quantum
states and phase transitions with an emphasis on studying finite temperature
properties of these models, as the presence of anisotropic interactions in these
models significantly affects the nature of finite temperature phase transitions.
The PI will also study the effects of doping, as this can give rise to high-
temperature superconductivity in these systems.

Another thrust of the research is devoted to the analysis of elementary
excitations in systems with strong spin-orbit-coupling. The PI plans to use a
new computational framework to study quasiparticles in the magnetically ordered
ground state in materials with strong spin-orbit-coupling, which she has
recently developed. The method is quite useful for interpreting data obtained by
the resonant inelastic x-ray scattering, which currently is the most effective
tool to study the dispersion of elementary magnetic excitations across the whole
Brillouin zone. The PI will also apply the method to analyze the effects of
strong spin-orbit-coupling in Raman scattering from iridates and osmates. The
PI?s ultimate goal is to provide a better understanding and description of
existing experimental data and to generate verifiable predictions for future
experiments.

This project will be carried out in collaboration with collaborators from Europe
and Japan. The collaboration brings an international dimension to the education
of graduate students involved in the project. The PI plans to develop an
advanced course in strongly correlated phenomena in complex materials and
systems with special emphasis on new trends in magnetism and transport
phenomena. In collaboration with other local faculty, the PI will create a
Wisconsin Winter School on Modern Condensed Matter and Quantum Information and
will organize short-term courses of condensed matter physics. This Winter School
will introduce young researchers to various specific problems in the field and
will also improve collaboration between faculty, students, and postdocs from
different campuses of the University of Wisconsin System. The PI will also
deliver a series of annual lectures for High School students and Physics
lectures and seminars in support of the physics department outreach activity.
The lectures will include the topics of quantum mechanics, computer science, and
the future of material science.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and educational
activities aimed at advancing our understanding of materials, in which the
electron spin, an intrinsic quantum mechanical property of electrons, and the
motion of the electron in a material strongly interact with each other, known as
the spin-orbit interaction. The relevant materials are oxides that include
transition metals, specifically iridium and osmium, in which the way the atoms
are organized in space leads to a spin or spatial distribution of electrons
which can occur in many nearly equivalent and hence, competing ways. The PI will
focus on the case where the spin-orbit interaction dominates the familiar
Coulomb interaction between electrons that arises from the electron charge.
Achieving a theoretical understanding of the resulting properties of these
materials in which the interactions among electrons lead to strong correlations
in their motions is challenging. Interest in these systems stems in part from
the richness of their novel properties: the unexpected variety of ways the
electrons organize themselves, which leads, for example, to various forms of
magnetism, the transformations among these states, and new phenomena that can
arise in these iridium and osmium bearing materials. The PI will use theoretical
and computational methods to investigate the physical properties of these
transition metal oxides, predict new effects in these materials, and contribute
to understanding the intriguing results of experiments.

This project will be carried out in collaboration with collaborators from Europe
and Japan. The collaboration brings an international dimension to the education
of graduate students involved in the project. The PI plans to develop an
advanced course in strongly correlated phenomena in complex materials and
systems with special emphasis on new trends in magnetism and transport
phenomena. In collaboration with other local faculty, the PI will create a
Wisconsin Winter School on Modern Condensed Matter and Quantum Information and
will organize short-term courses of condensed matter physics. This Winter School
will introduce young researchers to various specific problems in the field and
will also improve collaboration between faculty, students, and postdocs from
different campuses of the University of Wisconsin System. The PI will also
deliver a series of annual lectures for High School students and Physics
lectures and seminars in support of the physics department outreach activity.
The lectures will include the topics of quantum mechanics, computer science, and
the future of material science.