* 1255620
* CAREER: Investigating the Relationship Between Mantle Shear Localization, Melt Flow and Water Content
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Jessica Warren, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2016
* USD 345,038.00

The occurrence of shear localization is one of the defining properties of plate
tectonics, but the mechanisms driving shear localization are poorly constrained.
Both melt and water have been proposed as agents that lead to ductile
localization within the Earth?s mantle. This CAREER research project
investigates the relationship between shear localization, melt flow and water
through analysis of well-preserved shear zones in one of the best examples of
mantle peridotite, the Josephine peridotite in Oregon. Terrestrial laser
scanning will be used to map shear zones at high resolution, with the survey
being carried out as part of an undergraduate field class. The survey results
will be merged with GPS data on the location and orientation of shear zones and
melt channels. Microstructural analysis of samples collected during fieldwork
will be carried out to determine the relationship between mineral orientations
and variations in melt and water contents. Analysis of water concentrations in
peridotite pyroxenes will be used to constrain the outcrop-scale variation in
water in relation to shear deformation. The education component of this CAREER
project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with experience in
advanced field methods through the use of terrestrial laser scanning. Experience
with cutting-edge analytical techniques and field campaign planning will prepare
students for future careers in the geosciences. Integration of teaching and
research in this project will expose students to a variety of topics and
techniques across a range of disciplines, including petrology, geochemistry,
rock deformation, tectonics and seismology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in
this proposal lies at the intersection of petrology, geochemistry, rock
deformation, tectonics, and seismology. Project results will be widely
applicable across disciplines. For example, the combination of microstructural
analyses with peridotite geochemistry will provide insight into the factors that
control seismic anisotropy. Results of this project will also be applicable to
themes identified in the 2011 GeoPRISMS Implementation Plan, including (i)
understanding mantle wedge dynamics; (ii) fore-arc to back-arc volatile fluxes
and (iii) metamorphism, melting, and fluid/melt migration in the mantle wedge.