* 1255628
* Geographic variation and comparative gene expression: Nature's gift to resolve the connection between the daily clock and the seasonal timer
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 497,638.00

The known biological world is organized by two powerful timing mechanisms. One,
the circadian clock, organizes the most basic metabolic events that allow plants
and animals to survive on a daily basis. The other mechanism, the photoperiodic
timer, organizes seasonal events including reproduction, migration and
hibernation. Discordance in either of these two timing mechanisms is lethal.
Yet, the connections between and the integration of the circadian clock and the
photoperiodic timer are poorly understood in insects, the most abundant, diverse
and, in some cases, most dangerous animals on Earth. This research will reveal
the evolutionary genetic connection between these two biological timing
mechanisms using the pitcher-plant mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii, which is uniquely
suited to this study. Wyeomyia smithii lives in a strong seasonal gradient that
includes both a mild sea-level climate and a harsh mountain climate, all in
populations located in North Carolina. Hence, W. smithii shows great variation
in its seasonal timing while at the same time expresses typical circadian
behavior at all elevations. Using five well-established circadian clock genes,
we will determine which, if any, of these genes control the seasonal timer in W.
smithii. These experiments will represent the first test of the rhythmic
expression of the circadian clock genes, and of the genetically based
photoperiodic mechanism in a rigorous, real-world experiment. The research on
the evolutionary genetics and physiology of the photoperiodic timer by these
researchers was the first demonstration that recent rapid climate change is
driving genetic change in animals. As the climate continues to warm, increasing
numbers of tropical diseases, including dengue fever, West Nile virus and
malaria, carried by insects in the tropics and subtropics, are invading and will
continue to invade the United States and other temperate regions of the world.
Identifying the genes underlying the connections between the major biological
timing mechanisms will provide a powerful tool for targeting, mitigating and
interrupting these invasions. This lab will continue to participate in a wide
variety of media productions, workshops, and outreach to the lay community. W.
E. Bradshaw and C. M. Holzapfel are collaborating with the US Department of
Agriculture to determine genetic relationships of mosquito vectors of human and
livestock diseases using our next-generation genomic approaches. Funding of this
research will enable these investigators to continue their long tradition of
undergraduate research training.