* 1255813
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Thrombolysis Microcatheter System for the Clearing of Neurovascular Occlusions
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Stephanos Papademetriou, Oramic, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the design
and construction of a medical device that treats ischemic stroke by virtue of
breaking-down endovascular occlusions using a proprietary Electro-Fluidic
Thrombolysis (EFT) technology. EFT utilizes low energy electrical pulses to
create acoustic micro shockwaves (along with vigorous fluidic effects) that will
efficiently emulsify clot into sub-capillary size particles. This effect
generates vigorous fluidic motion with no moving parts based solely on the
interaction of short voltage pulses with conductive liquids (such as saline or
blood). The electrical pulses are delivered via microelectrodes into an
engineered tip design at the distal end of a catheter, causing a suction of the
nearby occlusive material into the tip for further safe emulsification without
causing any damage to the surrounding tissue. Currently available therapies to
physicians offer low performance as they take hours to complete the treatment.
In the case of clot-busting drugs, the added contraindications limit their use
to less than 4% of the population. The expected speed and effectiveness of EFT
will offer improved patient outcomes, and reduced costs; since in the case of
stroke, lack of effective therapies are associated with enormous costs for
rehabilitation and long term care.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of a disposable microcatheter that works as an intelligent delivery system along
with an inexpensive voltage generator for the effective and safe emulsification
of intracranial occlusions for the treatment of ischemic stroke. Ischemic Stroke
remains the third leading cause of death in the US with approximately 20% of the
nearly 700,000 annual victims dying shortly after the initial attack, while most
survivors require full or part?time care. The understanding of the effects of
short electrical pulses with conductive liquids (such as saline or blood) and
the resultant mechanical and fluid-dynamic effects would be essential in
transforming this technology to a true platform technology with several medical
applications. Although the initial market focus is ischemic stroke, it is
believed that this platform technology can also be used to recanalize coronary
and peripheral vessels. The proposed approach to endovascular thrombolysis
offers several advantages over drug therapy and other medical devices, including
improved patient safety, more rapid recanalization and fewer contraindications.