* 1255408
* CAREER: Numerical Methods for Stochastic Reaction Diffusion Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Samuel Isaacson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 434,043.00

A challenge facing numerical analysis, biophysics, computational biology, and
biochemistry today is to accurately compute the stochastic behavior of tens to
hundreds of thousands of interacting and diffusing molecules within a realistic
three dimensional model of a eukaryotic cell. In order to contribute to the
solution of this problem, this project will develop accurate, convergent, and
efficient numerical methods for approximating the solutions to stochastic
reaction-diffusion models of biochemical systems within the complicated
geometries that come from sub-cellular imaging data. This will be done by
creating new convergent reaction-diffusion master equation approximations to
high dimensional coupled systems of partial integro-differential equations.
These equations model the stochastic reactions and diffusion of tens of
thousands of molecules within a cell containing detailed sub-cellular structures
derived from high resolution soft X-ray tomography imaging
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better comprehend how organisms function, respond
to environmental stimuli, and to aid in treating disease, it is necessary to
understand, predict, and control the behavior of individual cells. Each cell
contains numerous complex dynamical processes involving proteins undergoing
biochemical reactions that play a major role in cell to cell communication, in
cell growth and division, in immune system function, and in the development and
progression of cancer. Understanding how proteins move about and interact within
cells is critical to being able to predict and control these dynamical
processes. This project will develop new mathematical equations and
computational methods that can be used to study how proteins move about and
interact within cells. These methods are designed to facilitate the computer
simulation of cellular processes within realistic models of the interior of
cells derived from high resolution experimental imaging data. This project
integrates the theoretical work with an educational program designed to improve
the training of computational mathematical biologists. This interdisciplinary
field requires a synthesis of skills that the project will provide to students
in an integrated manner. These skills include the ability to develop
mathematical models of biological systems; the ability to understand, and
choose, appropriate numerical methods with which to solve these models; and the
ability to implement these methods in a manner that takes advantage of existing
numerical libraries on large scale computing platforms. Thus the planned
research studies are complemented by an educational program designed to address
the need to train scientists and engineers in the computational sciences, with
an emphasis on computational mathematical biology.