* 1255424
* CAREER: Oxidative Reactivity of Pd and Ni Complexes Employing Paramagnetic Oxidation States
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Liviu Mirica, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

In this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Synthesis and Catalysis Programs,
Professor Liviu Mirica of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University
in St. Louis will synthesize novel paramagnetic Pd(III) and Ni(III) complexes
and investigate in detail their electronic properties and reactivity, with the
long-term goal of developing catalytic transformations that involve these less
common oxidation states. Of particular interest are Pd-mediated aerobic
oxidative C-H functionalization reactions and detailed reactivity studies of
organometallic Ni(III) complexes relevant to cross coupling reactions. These
studies include a combination of synthetic organometallic and inorganic
chemistry, catalysis, electrochemistry, and physical inorganic spectroscopy, and
thus will provide the students interdisciplinary training and the opportunity to
develop a broad range of scientific skills. In addition, these studies will be
fully integrated with outreach activities that will expose students from
underrepresented groups to chemistry through lectures and demonstrations at
public schools from the St. Louis metro area.

Palladium and nickel complexes act as catalysts for a wide range of chemical
reactions that are essential for the synthesis of commodity chemicals, fine
chemicals, and bioactive compounds. The proposed research should lead to unique
metal-mediated oxidative transformations relevant to organic synthesis that may
impact how chemists put atoms together to build complex molecules more
efficiently and economically.