* 1255469
* CAREER: The Physics and Cosmology of TeV Blazars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Philip Chang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2019
* USD 456,149.00

The extragalactic universe is abundant with sources that are associated with the
most powerful persistent phenomenon in the universe: accreting supermassive
black holes that form Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN). Numerous AGN launch
relativistic twin jets of plasma from the immediate vicinity of their black
holes which, when oriented close to the line of sight to the observer, give rise
to a class of AGN named blazars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations by the Fermi
satellite and ground based imaging Cerenkov telescopes show that many blazars
are prodigious sources of gamma-rays at tera-electronvolt (TeV) energies. Their
impact on the energetics of the universe, however, has previously been thought
to be slim since their luminous output is a minor component of the total
radiative power in the universe. However, recent work by the PI and his
collaborators suggest that TeV blazars are, in fact, remarkable sources of
energy. By studying pair beams (electron-positron pairs that are produced when
photons from TeV blazars meet extragalactic background light photons) the PI
argues that blazars are the dominant heat source in the intergalactic medium
(IGM) at redshifts 2-3. This would have substantial implications for the
evolution of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will perform a detailed
analysis of the cosmological implications of TeV blazars, which will touch on
many different areas of astrophysics: from linear plasma instabilties, to weak
turbulence and thermalization, to thermodynamics of the IGM, and to the
formation of galaxies and clusters. He will (1) investigate the plasma physics
of ultrarelativistic pair beams, (2) set blazar heating in a cosmological
context, and (3) explore the implications of his work for the structure
formation of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will disseminate his
research to a broad audience in numerous ways. First, he will reimagine
introductory physics classes at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), by
combining traditional lectures with online video lessons and exercises. He will
also work closely with the Astronomy Club at UWM by recruiting undergraduates
and high school teachers for semester and summer research projects. Finally, the
PI will perform public outreach by producing and giving public lectures through
the Astrobreak series at the nearby Manfred Olson planetarium.