* 1255396
* Brain Evolution, Communication, and the Diversification of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Bruce Carlson, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2018
* USD 638,000.00

In this project, researchers from Washington University in St. Louis will
collaborate with researchers at several institutions around the world to
determine how natural selection shapes behavioral variation among species, and
how species differences in sensory perception and communication relate to
underlying changes in the nervous system. Closely related species can differ
dramatically in their behavior, but little is known about why these differences
arise and how they result from changes in brain anatomy and physiology. The
goals of this project are to determine how behavioral differences allow
organisms to adapt to diverse environments, and to identify a neurobiological
basis for this adaptation. There are over 200 species of African electric
fishes, and the unique characteristics of their electric communication signals
make it possible to establish direct links between brain and behavior. Using a
combination of electrophysiology, neuronal imaging, molecular genetic analysis,
and behavioral studies, the researchers will characterize species diversity in
sensory perception and communication, and determine how perceptual variation
relates to differences in neural circuitry and social behavior. This research
will prove broadly applicable by providing an integrated, mechanistic
understanding of how behavioral variation arises among individuals and species.
Electric fish are ideally suited for public outreach in neuroscience and
behavior. As exotic animals, they attract a wide audience. In addition, they
provide a unique opportunity to easily perform neurophysiology experiments in an
intact, freely behaving animal. The researchers will expand ongoing outreach
activities to produce and make freely available a formal lab module that uses
weakly electric fish to expose middle and high school students to hypothesis-
driven science and teach them about the role of electricity in the nervous
system. Providing teachers with the tools needed to perform hypothesis-driven
experiments in the classroom will ensure that these activities have an extended
and enduring impact.