* 1255170
* CAREER: Fundamental Physics Through Precision Measurements of Trapped Charged Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* David Hanneke, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

This CAREER award will enable tests of fundamental physics through precise
measurements of the properties of trapped charged particles. Many atoms,
molecules, and sub-atomic particles have attributes that are of interest but
impractical to measure using a particle in isolation. Often the isolated
particle lacks suitable means for cooling or for preparing or detecting its
quantum state. Techniques developed for trapped-ion quantum information
processing have recently enabled the transfer of the practical tasks to a co-
trapped atomic ion, using the interaction between two charged particles as an
information bus and opening for investigation a wide range of charged particles.
Experiments enabled by this award will focus on diatomic molecular ions,
including the cooling of molecular rotation, the preparation of known internal
states, and the precise determination of the energy differences between states.
These measurements will be applied to searches for time-variation of the
electron-to-proton mass ratio. While no known laws of physics allow for a change
in this ratio, variation arises naturally in many theories seeking to merge
quantum mechanics with gravity.

This work will integrate research and education through the mentoring of
undergraduates at the forefront of research while developing an innovative
physics curriculum at a liberal arts college. Undergraduate students will be
introduced to active questions in the field and the experimental techniques
being used to answer them. Many skills in experimental physics are transferable
to a wide array of future endeavors. In addition, this award will allow for the
development, implementation, and dissemination of a revised physics curriculum
at Amherst College.