* 1255622
* CAREER:Advanced interface methods in heterogeneous porous materials:  a multi-disciplinary and multi-scale framework
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Masa Prodanovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 08/31/2018
* USD 470,720.00

Many natural and artificial processes involve the simultaneous flow of two or
three fluid phases (such as water, oil, and air) through porous media. However,
the prediction of how fast the phases move and whether they can be retrieved is
not trivial. It requires knowledge of the topology of different fluids in a
complex three-dimensional space that ranges from simple soil to root-soil
systems, and from a uniform sandstone to fractured carbonate rocks. Both porous
media (soil or rock) and fluid properties (i.e. which fluid is preferentially
wetting the rock surface) determine the final spatial distribution when multiple
fluids are competing within pores. Furthermore, minuscule rock or soil pores
often control which fluids become trapped and where. Quantifying the spatial
arrangement of fluids in pores of complex geometry and varying wettability
remains an unsolved fundamental problem. The project objective is to explore and
quantify dynamic spatial fluid arrangements from first principles and their
control on flow complexity of porous media. To address the objective, the
project will develop a flexible, multiscale numerical method to describe two-
and three-fluid phase flow configurations in porous materials of heterogeneous
wettability. Through cooperation, detailed 3D experimental data imaged with
x-ray microtomography of two and three-phase flow configurations will be
available for both input and verification of the numerical method. Results will
enable the quantification and upscaling of rock surfaces of different
wettability, porous media roughness and the ultimate arrangement of fluids to
larger spatial regions of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One example region of
application is the Edwards Aquifer in Texas, which provides water for
approximately two million people in the Austin and San Antonio metropolitan
areas. The aquifer is formed by heterogeneous limestone, inter-bedded and
overlain with sand/gravel sediments. Additional flow-path heterogeneity
originates from faults and fractures: 95% of the flow occurs in a highly
conductive fracture network, whereas 95% of water storage is in the rock matrix.
The difference between fracture network conductivity and matrix storage,
combined with highly erratic rainfall, are at the core of water management
issues in central Texas. When it rains and water moves through fractures and out
of the system exceedingly fast (thereby causing flash flooding); after a dry
period, due to wettability changes and water/air competition in this
heterogeneous reservoir, the storage matrix might be 90% full, but wells often
become dry. Controlling a contaminant spill in such a heterogeneous medium (also
known as karst) introduces the competition of three fluid phases in the pore
space. Regardless of this specific example, the findings of the proposed
research will become relevant to many different fields of research such as
carbon dioxide sequestration in depleted oil reservoirs and in remediation and
enhanced oil recovery efforts. Results will be of significant use in the
extrapolation of existing theory and models to mixed wet, two- and three-fluid
phase systems. In addition, a digital image repository for porous materials
initiated along with this proposal will enhance research infrastructure and
benchmarking of porous media theory, models and experiments. Finally, karst
formations and water management issues are part of the everyday experience in
Texas and they are ideal to educate a broad audience on geology, flow physics
and chemistry, engineering as well as applied mathematics and computer science.
Results from this project will be tested by teachers at professional development
projects funded by the NSF and DOE, and then integrated into accessible online
modules and included in an interactive exhibit in the Austin's Children Museum.