* 1255153
* EAGER: Understanding the Scope and Impact of Internet Information Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Michael Bailey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 196,434.00

Recently we have seen the emergence new challenges to cyber security in which
adversaries seek, not to simply to deny service, steal data, or utilize
resources, but rather to use the network to distort information to influence
opinion, thought, or action. Such Internet information manipulation is
challenging in that the scale of the Internet makes it easier to influence large
numbers of users, that the anonymity on the Internet makes attribution and
identity hard, and that the control of information flow is distributed and
highly automated allowing for easy modification of personalization and filtering
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project proposes to study
information manipulation on the Internet. Specifically, it seeks to provide
evidence of manipulation and demonstrate the serious nature of the problem. The
project has three parts: (1) Constructing a corpus of documented cases of
Internet information manipulation, (2) An identification of various players in
Internet information flow and their relationships to each other, and (3) An
empirical analysis of the scope of the information flow between these players.
More broadly, the work will provide data to inform techniques, and methods that
with enhance a truly interdisciplinary set of fields, from the social and
political sciences, to networking and distributed systems, security, information
retrieval, and data mining.