* 1255557
* CAREER:  Maximizing the Science Output of Ultra High Energy Neutrino Telescopes
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Amy Connolly, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 664,059.00

Ultra-High Energy (UHE) cosmic neutrinos (above 10^18 electron-Volts) would be
the most distant and energetic particles that can be observed on earth, and well
motivated models put them within reach of currently funded experiments. The
Intellectual Merit portion of this award is organized around two concepts: 1.
Achieving the Best Sensitivity for UHE Neutrino Observatories; and 2. Cornering
UHE Neutrinos and Exploiting their Astrophysics and Particle Physics Potential.

The key elements of this award are based on two experiments representing the
discovery and exploitation phases of the field: ANITA, an Antarctic, balloon-
borne experiment with its third flight approved, and ARA, an in-ice array being
deployed near the South Pole. ARA aims to exploit radio Cherenkov emissions
(Askaryan effect). Connolly will expand the potential of searches for UHE
neutrinos through a broad program that is carried out through simulations,
instrumentation, data analysis, and optimization of event selection at every
stage, including both hardware and software activities: 1. Simulation
development focused on making simulations part of the data framework and using
data to calibrate the simulations. 2. Improved sensitivity of experiments due to
novel new trigger designs optimized with her simulations. 3. Developing
instrumentation to improve sensitivities and characterizing system components
for simulations and analysis.

Broader impacts: The award will also fund an outreach program that bridges the
established middle school GRASP (Girls Reaching to Achieve in Sports and
Physics) summer science camp with the undergraduate program in the department.
The new program is called BRIDGES (Bringing together Research, Ideas and Data
for Girls to Excel in Science). Many programs aim to keep middle school aged
girls (grades 6-8) interested in math and science, and a few universities,
including OSU, run summer science camps for girls targeting that precise age
range. Few if any such programs follow up with a program aimed at maintaining
their interest in science throughout their high school years and into college.
The new BRIDGES program will pique the interest of female high school students
in physics by introducing them to current research and giving them hands-on
experiences and mentoring them during this important phase.