* 1255849
* CIF21 DIBBs: Building International Data Sharing Capacity in Lake Sciences, with Implications for the Broader Environmental Science Community
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Kathleen Weathers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 06/30/2016
* USD 102,759.00

CIF21 DIBBs: Building international data sharing capacity in lake sciences, with
implications for the broader environmental science community
&lt;br/&gt;Environmental research, and science in general, are being transformed
by the unprecedented amount and diversity of spatial and temporal data available
for analysis. Hosts of new sensors and experimental techniques are driving this
data flood. And while the transformational potential on science is understood,
the reality of managing the data flows from collection through to analysis,
especially integration with other data, insights, plus education, and outreach
has not kept pace. A continuum of approaches exist for data archiving,
publishing and sharing: from the single investigator with limited technical
skills, or limited personal interest in archiving or sharing data, to the highly
structured ecological observatory with an IT (Information Technology) department
and the explicit goal of archiving data and making them accessible to
researchers who were not involved in the sampling (e.g. NEON). Grassroots
organizations like GLEON (the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network) share
many similarities with the single investigator approach without major IT
support, but recognize data sharing as a mandatory first step to answer pressing
research questions addressing climate and land-use change, diminishing ecosystem
services, and large scale disruptions of ecosystem functioning on a global
scale. It is proposed to collaborate with other groups invested in the area of
environmental observations data management and develop a design and
implementation plan for a data publishing and sharing system that will address
not only GLEON?s needs but also those of environmental research communities that
find themselves in a similar place along the outlined data management continuum,
of which there is a growing number. We will leverage GLEON?s experience,
organizational structure, community trust, and recognized need for data sharing,
Our approach will be primarily based on deploying and testing technology
components created by CUAHSI, DataONE, LTER, and DataTurbine in a prototype
setting and to assess their applicability in the GLEON community through
targeted focus groups. The intellectual merits are twofold. First, prototyping
and testing of existing technologies by our community members will provide
valuable feedback to the original creators of the technology. Second, and most
importantly, through our efforts, our community will develop a design and
implementation plan for a data publishing and sharing system that is not only
well conceived and sustainable, but owned and manageable by our community
members, with potential implementation by dozens, if not hundreds, of ecological
observatories. Broader impact: This community is an international and multi-
cultural grassroots organization based on the recognized need for collaboration,
as very typical in the current and future landscape of environmental research
approaches. Therefore, a community level data publishing and sharing design and
implementation plan that considers aspects typical for these research approaches
will benefit many other international grassroots research and education
collaborations, and the approach will be transformational in developing such
global infrastructures. Aspects of primary importance are governance,
sustainability, buy-in, trust, appropriate credit, and last but not least,
usability. Finally, during the evaluation phase many researchers and students
will be exposed to and trained in the use of technology that is currently
available to them, even if in the end it is not considered appropriate for the
entire community.