* 1255754
* Cross-Layer Intelligent System-Based Adaptive Power Conditioning for Robust and Reliable Mixed-Signal Multi-Core SoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2016
* USD 192,000.00

This project seeks to investigate the effectiveness of adaptive power
conditioning in averting failures and enhancing reliability of mixed-signal
multi-core Systems-on-Chips (SoCs), while retaining power efficiency. The
investigation aims to leverage the increasing integration of non-intrusive
sensors for monitoring various operational parameters and cost-effective tuning
knobs for calibrating circuit performance through online power condition
adjustment. The project aims to develop a cross-layer intelligent system, which
will continuously adjust the flow of the entire power distribution network based
on the feedback provided by the sensors. Ultimately, the aspiration of this
project is to demonstrate that a holistic approach to adaptive power
conditioning can (i) ensure operational robustness while minimizing power
consumption, and (ii) enhance reliability and prolong life expectancy of
integrated circuits. The intellectual contribution of this work will be in the
development of a practical, yet theoretically rooted and analytically supported
intelligent system for capturing correlations between circuit performance,
sensor readings, and calibration knob positions, and utilizing them to improve
robustness and reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
complemented by educational and outreach activities demonstrating the principle
investigators' (PIs') commitment to an integrated role as researchers,
educators, and active community members. A new graduate-level course will be
developed and offered by the PIs, who have proven track records of involving the
students of various levels in their research activities, including women and
other under-represented groups. Several opportunities for participation in
interdisciplinary research spanning Electrical Engineering, Computer Science,
and Applied Mathematics as well as internships with industrial partners are
expected.