* 1255847
* G8 Initiative: REO Kiln - Reduced Emission Cement: Cradle to Grave Material Applications and Accounting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paulina Jaramillo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This NSF award funds U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative "Interdisciplinary Program on
Material Efficiency - A first step towards sustainable manufacturing". This is a
pilot collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian
National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils
(RCUK), supporting collaborative research projects selected on a competitive
basis that are comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds research supporting the design
of a redesigned cement plant with improved material efficiency,including reduced
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and enhanced waste disposal. These objectives
will be met by redesigning the manufacturing process, enhancing the re-use and
recycling of waste concrete, and producing longer lasting products by enhancing
the mineral properties of clinker. The redesign will replace air with oxygen in
the combustion process. The required flue gas recycling facilitates the capture
of carbon dioxide as well as the expansion of alternative fuels, in particular
sulfur, which reacts with limestone to produce gypsum, a component of cement.
Increasing the CO2 partial pressure within the kiln changes process conditions
sufficiently to alter the reaction sequence. Recycling will also be investigated
as a unit process that carbonates lime leached from waste concrete using
atmospheric carbon dioxide. The resulting limestone can be re-used as kiln feed
or as filler in the paper industry. Improved mineral quality is derived from the
shorter, hotter flame possible with oxygen combustion, resulting in longer
product life. While additional energy will be required to produce the oxygen,
the optimization will reduce thermal load and carbon dioxide emissions. Life
Cycle Assessment (LCA) will be used to quantify material and energy flows, which
can then be compared to existing cement manufacturing processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the novel cement manufacturing process will
provide a net reduction in carbon dioxide emissions using an expanded
alternative fuel portfolio that consumes its own waste, making a positive
contribution to the upcoming challenges related to an aging infrastructure in
OECD countries, and growing infrastructure in non-OECD countries. Sustainable
development is critical as it is the only ethical means to reduce poverty, raise
living standards and mitigate the impacts of development.