* 1255913
* Energy Scavenging Collar for Animal Physiology and Ecology (ESCAPE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Terrie Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2019
* USD 748,616.00

An award is made to the University of California, Santa Cruz to develop a new
generation of animal tracking collars and tags for terrestrial and marine
mammals that use the animal's own locomotion to power the device. The Energy
Scavenging Collar for Animal Physiology and Ecology (ESCAPE) will revolutionize
the study of wild animals by dramatically increasing the deployment time of
animal biologgers while greatly reducing the cost of and need for re-collaring
or re-tagging wild animals. The ESCAPE will lead to significant advances in
animal physiology and ecology research by enabling scientists to evaluate the
physiological and behavioral responses of wild animals to long-term changes in
the environment. The project will use a laboratory-to-field approach to: (1)
Design a power-scavenging device that uses the locomotion of the animal to
charge an onboard capacitor and battery. (2) Integrate the power generation
device with a GPS, accelerometers, and magnetometers to measure animal behavior,
energetics, and movement. (3) Test the ESCAPE on three terrestrial species
(domestic dogs, trained elephants and wild mountain lions) and its potential
assessed on two marine mammal species (trained dolphins and sea lions).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comparative approach will allow the research to
evaluate the ramifications of locomotory mode, body mass and environment on the
functionality and durability of the collars or tags. These tests will also
provide a "proof of concept" regarding the collar's capability to collect,
store, and send various types of longitudinal data. By relying on animal
movement to charge the device, ESCAPE will provide up to order-of-magnitude
increases in tag deployment time, allowing researchers to compile long-term data
sets crucial for the study of wild animal physiology and ecology. The
development of the ESCAPE will leverage a unique interdisciplinary team from the
Departments of Environmental Studies, Ecology and Evolution, Computer
Engineering and Electrical Engineering. The ESCAPE collar is expected to be
widely adopted by the research community at large and lead to breakthroughs in
animal ecology, conservation and management. The insights gleaned from these
collars will also greatly inform public understanding of animal behavior and
conservation. Outreach activities associated with the research will include
presentations at professional academic conferences, monthly public lectures,
field trips for middle and high school children, as well as the production of a
professional video showcasing the ESCAPE technology. Details on how to purchase
ESCAPE collars will be made available at wildlife.ucsc.edu.