* 1255808
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Genetic and developmental changes associated with the evolution of a hummingbird-pollination floral syndrome
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Lena Hileman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 12/31/2017
* USD 73,305.00

Flowers exhibit a multitude of forms that are astounding to human observers, but
critical to the reproductive success of plants, and much of floral diversity has
been shaped by evolutionary interactions between flowers and pollinators.
Evolutionary shifts from bee- to bird-pollinated flowers have occurred numerous
times, and contributed significantly to flower diversity. Yet there are two
central issues that remain largely unexplored. What are the genetic changes that
allow for an evolutionary transition from bee- to bird-pollination floral
syndrome? And do similar genetic changes explain the many independent
transitions to flowers optimized for bird pollination? The genus Penstemon is
one of a few flowering plant groups well suited to address these questions -
bird pollination has evolved more than ten times independently, and many species
are inter-fertile, allowing for a genetic approach to determine the genes
responsible for a complex suite of floral traits associated with bird-
pollination. This project will develop molecular genetic tools in two closely
related bee- and bird-pollinated Penstemon species. Tools will include
transgenic approaches, genome sequencing and genetic mapping that will allow the
researchers to explore the genetic changes necessary for a transition from bee-
to bird-pollination floral traits. These early insights into the genetics of a
pollination system shift will establish the foundation for a novel, highly
integrative approach involving evolutionary, ecological, genetic and
developmental studies to determine processes that underlie the evolution of
complex traits. This project will contribute to the training of a postdoctoral
researcher and undergraduate students at the interface of plant evolutionary
genetics and development, and provide individuals from the emerging generation
of scientists with skills in applying next-generation sequencing technology to
critical questions of trait evolution. Undergraduates will be recruited through
nationally funded programs at the University of Kansas aimed at increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields.