* 1255440
* CAREER: Core-Shell Interfaces in Colloidal Quantum Dots.
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Colin Heyes, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 664,200.00

Colin D. Heyes from the University of Arkansas is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in research focused on
understanding how the optical and electrical properties of semiconductor quantum
dots (QDs) are related to the structure of the core-shell interface at the
single particle level. As the applications of bandgap-engineered core-shell
nanomaterials approach the ultimate level of sensitivity - single particles and
single photons - improving our understanding of the role of the critical core-
shell interface is of paramount importance. In this proposal, expertise in the
controlled synthesis of core-shell materials of varying composition combined
with single particle spectroscopy and advanced high resolution electron
microscopy techniques will be used to investigate how the trap states at the
core-shell interface contribute to the charge carrier relaxation pathways by 1)
synthesizing a range of core-shell and core-multishell QDs with different
lattice mismatches and structurally characterizing these interfaces in single
particles; 2) determining the ensemble and microscopic optical and electrical
properties and correlating them to the structure of the core-shell interface;
and 3) investigating how these properties are coupled to the shell-ligand
interface and the local environment of the particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core-
shell quantum dots have wide ranging significance for photovoltaics,
optoelectronics, photocatalysis and advanced biological imaging applications.
This broad range of applications stems from the fact that the shell can be tuned
to either enhance emission or to promote charge carrier trapping, separation and
interfacial transfer. In order to advance such a range of technological fields,
enthusing and training students in the multi-disciplinary aspects of modern
physical chemistry is needed. The education and outreach aspects of this
proposal will address this issue on three fronts. 1) expose and enthuse
undergraduates (juniors and seniors) from local primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs) by holding a summer workshop that exposes them to modern
physical chemistry techniques in the form of performing recently published
experiments at the interface of chemistry, physics and biology; 2) use this
workshop to recruit under-represented minorities by targeting PUIs with a large
body of such students, and 3) disseminate videos of the workshop experiments
being performed via the principal investigator's website, YouTube and Facebook
to broaden the educational impact to other PUIs, high schools and the general
public.