* 1255245
* CAREER: Hierarchical Assembly and Organization of Dendronized Helix Bundles
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Jonathan Rudick, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 03/31/2019
* USD 610,887.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1255245 PI: Rudick, Jonathan ORG: SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Hierarchical Assembly and Organization
of Dendronized Helix Bundles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: In their
native environments, proteins accomplish tasks on the nanoscale that manifest in
the form of chemical and mechanical work. The proposed research aims to
transplant the exquisite functionality of proteins to bulk self-organized
materials through the synthesis and characterization of novel biohybrid
macromolecules. An unprecedented level of structural control over material
structure and properties will be achieved by integrating properly folded protein
domains into bulk soft materials. To reach this goal, highly branched synthetic
amphiphiles called dendrons will be attached to the surface of peptides that
mimic helical bundles found in natural proteins to investigate the molecular
features required to produce bulk materials in which functional proteins are
embedded. Three specific aims will be pursued to establish the feasibility of
this biohybrid approach to bulk soft materials: (1) understand the requirements
for site-isolation and self-organization of helix bundles in a nanostructured
array by characterizing libraries of dendronized template-assembled synthetic
protein (TASP) helical bundles, (2) determine the extent to which peptide amino
acid sequence encodes dendronized helix bundle structure by characterizing
dendronized peptides that self-assemble into bundles of two to four helices by
virtue of differences in the amino acid sequence, and (3) establish strategies
for co-assembling nanostructured arrays of dendronized helix bundles by
characterizing blends of dendronized TASPs or dendronized helix bundle-forming
peptides with amphiphilic dendrons. Altogether these aims will elucidate rules
for understanding and anticipating the interplay between folding, assembly, and
self-organization of helix bundles in liquid crystalline mesophases and, hence,
enable a new platform for the design of nanostructured biohybrid materials. The
education component of this proposal integrates the proposed research within the
broader context of soft materials. Soft materials topics are being developed in
the chemistry curriculum at Stony Brook University, and an outreach program is
developing learning modules for high school students that emphasize soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Given that current self-
organizing materials have emerged as crucial elements in applications to
nanofabrication and biotechnology, the proposed research has the potential to
positively impact diverse areas of science and technology. Tuning material
properties with the precision and accuracy traditionally associated only with
molecular biology will empower detailed understanding and optimization of
functional nanomaterials based on dendronized helix bundles. Students at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels involved with this cross-
disciplinary research program will gain exposure to a unique cross-section of
chemical synthesis and biophysical and polymer characterization techniques. An
integrated education and training plan is proposed in conjunction with the
research plan. Soft materials offer visual and tactile experiences that can
engage audiences outside the research program. Hands-on demonstrations relating
everyday experiences to materials chemistry and nanoscience provide a hook upon
which educational modules are being developed. A collaboration with an area high
school has been established to implement these modules in a classroom setting.
The educational components pursue three related goals: (1) outreach to high
school students through educational modules and research opportunities, (2)
integration of soft materials into the chemistry curriculum, and (3) cross-
disciplinary training of diverse graduate and undergraduate students in soft
biomaterials research.