* 1255899
* Thermal-Sensitive System-Level Reliability Analysis and Management for Multi-Core and 3D Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 192,800.00

Reliability has become a significant challenge for the current multi-core and
emerging 3D microprocessor design. Many long-term failure mechanisms such as
electromigration, stress migration, and thermal-cycling are very sensitive to
temperature or to temperature changes. As a result, there is an urgent need for
reliability awareness and optimization at the micro-architectural design stage.
Since temperature has exponential impacts on many failure issues, it is crucial
to have accurate and fast thermal estimation for reliability analysis and even
optimization at the architecture and package levels. In this project, the
principle investigator (PI) first plans to develop architecture-level full-chip
reliability modeling and analysis techniques considering new structures of
integration techniques and dominant hard failure mechanisms. Then the PI will
develop reliability-aware dynamic thermal management techniques for multi-core
and 3D stacking microprocessors. Finally, the PI will develop full-chip thermal
estimation and prediction techniques considering realistic conditions such as
limited physical thermal sensors and presence of errors in thermal and power
models, for run time system-level reliability analysis and optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will add significantly to the
core knowledge of system-level reliability optimization techniques, which will
enable more efficient thermal optimization and design of multi-core and 3D
microprocessors. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will enable
undergraduate and graduate students to acquire unique skills valuable to their
future endeavors in STEM fields. This grant will enable the PI to hire more
female and underrepresented minority students to further contribute to diversity
in the science and technology workforce.