* 1255391
* CAREER: Mantle Hybridization via Melt-Rock Reaction-Implications for Chemical Variability of Oceanic Basalts and Lithologic Heterogeneities in the Earth's Convecting Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Rajdeep Dasgupta, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2019
* USD 635,800.00

The research component in this CAREER award will focus on a series of
experimental investigations of melt-rock reaction in Earth's heterogeneous upper
mantle conditions. Partial melting of the Earth's upper mantle comprising
peridotite and recycled crustal lithologies influences the thermal evolution of
the planet, geochemical variability of the crust, differentiation of the
interior, fluxes of key volatiles to the exosphere, and geophysical properties
of the mantle. While isotopic and trace element geochemistry of erupted basalts
have long-established the presence of subducted mid-ocean ridge basaltic (MORB)
crust and continental sediment at mantle source regions of ocean island basalts
(OIB), the identities of plausible lithologic heterogeneities and how such
lithologies impart major element signatures on erupted lavas remain unresolved.
Experiments thus far have mostly considered direct partial melting of various
lithologies and not the reactive processes involving crust-mantle systems that
should be ubiquitous in the convecting mantle. This experimental study will
explore how subducted crustal lithologies-derived partial melts and peridotite
reaction may produce a wide array of magma compositions and hybrid lithologies.
These experiments will be conducted with the aid of piston cylinder (PC) and
multi anvil (MA) devices, in order to constrain mantle hybridization via (1)
MORB-eclogite-derived partial melts and fertile and depleted peridotite
reaction, (2) metapelite-derived partial melts and peridotite reaction, and (3)
partial melting of end member hybrid lithologies (modally altered peridotite and
pyroxenites) produced by MORB/metapelite melt-peridotite interactions.
Experiments are expected to span pressures and temperatures over which subducted
crusts and sediments are partially molten but peridotite is unmolten. Major
element compositions of reacted partial melts and reacted mineral assemblages
will be determined as a function of depth, temperature, original crustal melt
and peridotite compositions, extent of partial reactive crystallization, and
melt-rock ratio. Furthermore, using high precision electron probe microanalysis
and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, fractionation
of elements such as first-row transition metals, Gallium, and Germanium will be
determined with the goal of using these elements, in conjunction with major
element equilibria, to constrain the mineralogic and lithologic heterogeneities
of the basalt source regions.

This CAREER project integrates the PI's Earth science research and teaching
through a range of educational outreach activities, professional and career
developments of students, and contributions to the broad field of earth science
research. The proposed experiments will generate key data relevant to a wide
range of Earth science disciplines including petrology-geochemistry, mineral
physics, geodynamics, and seismology. The outreach activities will include a
10-week summer internship for one local community college student typically from
underrepresented and minority groups, each year, in the PI's experimental
petrology lab and supporting one high school or middle school teacher every year
for a 4-week lesson plans development on solid Earth topics and research
experience in the experimental lab. These two outreach activities are in line
with the mission of and organized in collaboration with School Science and
Technology (SST) Programs of Rice University. In addition, contents and visuals
depicting the motivation, concepts, results, and implications of the proposed
research will be developed by the PI for the 'Teaching Petrology in the 21st
Century' website, an open-access resource widely used by petrology instructors
for both undergraduate and graduate curriculum across the globe. The research
performed as part of this proposal will facilitate operation of a new MA lab and
will thus contribute towards collection of new MA pressure calibration and
assembly data to be shared with the COMPRES (Consortium for Materials Properties
Research in Earth Sciences). The generated experimental data on crust-mantle
hybridization (with or without volatiles) will contribute towards newer
generation thermodynamic, mineral physics, and geodynamic models of mantle
materials and processes. Finally, with partial support from Rice, it is planned
to engage two PhD students and recruit as many as five Rice undergraduates in
order to advance their academic journey and educational experiences.