* 1255658
* CAREER: Elucidating Surfactin Modus Operandi with 2D IR Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Amber Krummel, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 663,000.00

Through this NSF CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B Program (CSDM-B), Professor Amber T. Krummel from Colorado State
University will identify the means by which a small pore-forming toxin,
surfactin, will interact with model lipid membranes using two-dimensional
infrared (2D IR) spectroscopy. Surfactin is known to have antibacterial,
antiviral, and antitumor activity, but surfactin has also been implicated in
cell-signaling activities during biofilm formation. This project will identify
the differences in the mode of action by surfactin during these different
activities. The structural sensitivity offered by 2D IR spectroscopy will be
utilized to quantify the molecular details of the surfactin-lipid interaction
during the surfactin insertion and lipid membrane disruption
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pore-forming toxins are proteins that are
synthesized by many organisms, including the human immune system. These proteins
insert into cell membranes in order to allow small molecules to move into cells,
cause cell leakage, or to disrupt the integrity of cells such that cell death
occurs. In this work, advanced optical spectroscopy techniques will be used to
monitor the protein-lipid interaction with structural sensitivity. The results
from these investigations will lead to a new understanding of how a small pore-
forming toxin, surfactin, self-assembles and interacts with lipids in order to
drive cell signaling processes and the disruption of lipid membranes. During the
course of this project, undergraduate researchers and graduate student
researchers will be trained in advanced optical spectroscopy techniques,
chemical modeling, and data analysis. The approaches used to train the student
researchers involved with this project will also be incorporated into the
undergraduate curriculum for Chemistry Majors at Colorado State University.
Thus, this project will generate new insights into an important chemical system
and it will generate new approaches to training the next generation of Chemistry
majors at Colorado State University.