* 1255894
* Collaborative Research: Large Scale Structures and Solar Wind Origin from Eclipse Observations of Coronal Lines
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Shadia Habbal, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2018
* USD 248,322.00

The solar wind is the key component of the solar system that shapes the
interplanetary space and planetary atmospheres. Understanding the underlying
physical processes controlling its expansion is key to understanding the
coupling of the Sun to the solar system. The importance of this knowledge is
becoming all the more critical with our increased reliance on access to space by
manned and unmanned missions. Specifically, despite decades of observational and
theoretical studies devoted to the solar wind, we are still far from a consensus
on where and how the solar wind is accelerated. The solar wind is usually
studied with two completely different techniques: in-situ measurements of local
wind plasma properties in the heliosphere, and remote sensing (spectroscopy and
imaging) of regions closer than roughly 1.5 solar radii to the solar surface.
The region of the solar corona between 1.5 and 4 solar radii, where the solar
wind continues to accelerate, however, is largely unexplored. Total solar
eclipse events offer rare, unique opportunities to obtain observations of this
crucial region of the solar corona. The basic idea behind this research
collaboration is to utilize observations of the solar corona during recent and
upcoming total solar eclipse events to obtain measurements of solar wind
parameters for this region, many of which will be first of its kind.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Total solar eclipses are unique astronomical events that
capture people's imagination. The team has a successful record of public
outreach and general education efforts that build on this easy fascination to
raise public awareness of scientific research and engage young people's interest
in science. A graduate student at the University of Hawaii Institute for
Astronomy will be hired and trained to participate in this research and this
work will constitute a significant part of that person's dissertation.
Undergraduate student participation will be integrated into the research at the
University of Michigan through the existing Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program there at no cost to this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is aimed at investigating the coronal region between 1.5 and 4 solar
radii, where the solar wind continues to accelerate and its charge state
composition freezes-in. In this region the evolution of heavy ions becomes a
direct probe of solar wind heating and acceleration processes. This research
uses eclipse observations of visible lines emitted by consecutive stages of
ionization of iron to study the large-scale corona. Line-to-continuum and line-
to-line intensity ratios will be used to build a map of the iron freeze-in
location. Frozen in charge states will be measured and directly compared to in-
situ measurements, linking remote sensing and in-situ observations. Diagnostics
will couple the existing CHIANTI spectral code with user-defined velocity,
temperature, and density of the solar wind. Predicted line intensities will be
compared to eclipse observations, and the input plasma parameters will be
modified until agreement is reached. The resulting empirical model of solar wind
plasma parameters will be able to discriminate between different candidate wind
source regions and will provide a constraint for solar wind heating and
acceleration models.