* 1255288
* CAREER: Mesoscale Modeling of Soft Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 440,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational
research aimed to develop a mesoscale model that can explicitly capture
transport processes and micromechanics of soft polymer gels. This model will be
used to examine the behavior of environmentally-sensitive microgel capsules and
their assemblies. Such microscopic containers that can sense the surroundings,
regulate release of encapsulated solutes, and even actively interact with each
other to build multi-component structures could be effectively utilized in a
broad range of practical applications including drug delivery systems, highly
sensitive surface sensors, colloidal bioassays, and lab-on-a-chip systems.
However, a better fundamental understanding of the dynamic behavior of
swelling/deswelling microgels and how it affects the transport and release of
encapsulated solutes is needed to effectively utilize microgels in various
applications. The PI will use a particle-based computational model to
investigate micromechanics of gels with different internal structures, to
examine transport properties of gel membranes and the effects of capsule shape
on swelling/deswelling transition, and to probe release of encapsulated solutes
from responsive microgel capsules including transport of solutes in capsule
clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance science and engineering education,
the PI will organize a video clip competition among undergraduate students at
Georgia Tech. The students will prepare short educational YouTube videos that
explain various fluid phenomena in a manner accessible for high-school students
and the general public. A graduate level Computational Fluid Mechanics course
will be developed preparing students to use advanced computational methods to
solve engineering problems. The PI will host a science teacher and high-school
students from the Atlanta Public School system that will work on computational
projects in the PI lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
to develop a computational model to explore elastic polymer networks. Polymer
networks involve individual long chain-like molecules that are interconnected to
form a three-dimensional solid-like material. They are common in many biological
and synthetic systems, for example cell cytoskeletons, medical implants, and
cosmetic and pharmaceutical products. The PI will employ the computational model
to investigate the behavior of microscopic capsules made of soft polymeric gels
that change their shape and volume in response to changes in local temperature
or level of acidity. Among the many applications of these responsive
microcapsules, they can be used for delivering drugs to a specific location
within the body thereby enhancing the effect of the drug. The PI will use
computer simulations to investigate the release of different solutes from
responsive microcapsules and will probe how this process can be regulated by
tailoring capsule material properties and geometry. Assemblies of microcapsules
will be also investigated in order to understand how multiple capsules can be
programmed to self-organize and perform complex collective functions. The latter
could be utilized to create new typos of self-regulating drug delivery systems
that could adapt their action to specific therapeutic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance science and engineering education,
the PI will organize a video clip competition among undergraduate students at
Georgia Tech. The students will prepare short educational YouTube videos that
explain various fluid phenomena in a manner accessible for high-school students
and the general public. A graduate level Computational Fluid Mechanics course
will be developed preparing students to use advanced computational methods to
solve engineering problems. The PI will host a science teacher and high-school
students from the Atlanta Public School system that will work on computational
projects in the PI's lab.