* 1255193
* Design Automation for Cost-Effective Implementation of Adaptive Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Jiang Hu, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Variability is a grand challenge that hinders the progress of semiconductor
technology. Adaptive design is considered a promising approach for addressing
this challenge, especially under increasingly tight chip power constraints.
However, its application in practice is limited, largely due to the lack of
systematic techniques for managing its overhead, complexity, and integration
with existing design flows. This research will develop a design automation
framework that optimizes the use of adaptivity resources, maximizes their
efficiency, and balances the tradeoff with conventional design objectives. The
key of this research is capturing the uncertainty and dynamics of adaptive
designs in a lightweight manner, yet with high fidelity. New variability and
adaptivity models will be investigated in conjunction with robust optimization
methods. In addition, a formal technique will be studied to handle the tradeoffs
among competing design objectives. Parallel computing techniques will also be
explored to cope with the enormous problem sizes of current and emerging
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will strengthen some weak
links in adaptive circuit technology and help pave a path toward its wide
applications. It will simultaneously address variability and power challenges
faced by nanometer semiconductor technologies. The potential improvement of chip
power-efficiency will facilitate green computing technology. Furthermore, the
proposed techniques will be applicable to next-generation device technologies
and will therefore benefit the future of the semiconductor industry. This
research will also serve as a test-bed for training students to understand
synergies among various aspects of modern chip design processes.