* 1255724
* Early Career: Acquisition of an Accelerated Solvent Extractor and a Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer for Lipid Analyses in Organic Geochemistry Research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Robert Findlay, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 160,602.00

Early Career: Acquisition of an Accelerated Solvent Extractor and a Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer for Lipid Analyses in Organic Geochemistry
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to acquire an
Accelerated Solvent Extractor (ASE) and a Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer
(GC-MS) at University of Alabama (UA). These two instruments are essential for
reliable lipid analysis, which is the core research tool utilized by the PI to
understand organic matter cycling in aquatic environments. Lipids are important
tracers indicating sources, quality and preservation of organic matter in
contemporary and paleo-ecosystems. Examples of application from the PI's past
and on-going research projects include: reconstructing environmental changes in
the Lake Erie during the development and remediation of its cultural
eutrophication; understanding the effects of human development in watershed on
organic matter cycling within aquatic environments; and developing biomarkers
for sulfide-tolerate microbes that inhabited oceans during past periods of
anaerobicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation provides state-of-the-
art technological support for research and education in Earth Sciences at UA. It
enables the PI, an early career organic geochemist, to develop an independent
research program, establish cross-disciplinary and inter-institutional
collaboration and attract quality graduate students. The instruments further
enhance the research capacity of a research consortium at UA investigating past
climatic and environmental changes, which comprises a group of diverse and
talented faculty members and students. This enhanced infrastructure allows more
effective integration of research, teaching and student training. A variety of
courses in geological and environmental sciences will benefit from hands-on
activities, such as analyzing environmental pollutants or identifying compounds
indicating activities of past organisms. Currently, 12 students (5
undergraduates and 7 graduates) are conducting research projects requiring the
use of the requested instruments. Most importantly, the research topics
supported by the new instrumentation have important society values, including
understanding distribution and metabolism of organic pollutants, and elucidating
factors governing climate changes.