* 1255370
* CAREER: The Jamming Phase Transition in Dimensions 2, 3, and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2020
* Eric Corwin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 01/31/2020
* USD 560,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Materials that undergo a Jamming-unjamming
transition are ubiquitous in nature: a pile of sand, a sack of marbles, and a
raft of bubbles are examples of disordered particulate systems at the edge of
stability. The transition from jammed to flowing, just like the glass-
transition, has many of the hallmarks of a phase transition without fitting
cleanly into any existing phase transitions theories. This project will pursue a
multipronged approach, combining new experimental and simulational techniques to
explore jammed systems in dimensions d=2, 3 and higher. If a mean-field theory
of jamming exists, it is expected that its predictions should become
increasingly exact with increasing dimension. Using newly developed simulations,
this project will measure the scaling behavior of high-dimensional systems close
to jamming. These results will be used both to test the validity of the recently
proposed mean-field Gaussian Replica-Theory of jammed systems as well as to
develop a renormalization approach towards understanding the geometric
structures of such packings. If a full renormalization treatment is achieved,
this will represent a true breakthrough in the study of jammed systems and would
have broad impact for the study of jammed, glassy, and frustrated systems. This
project will support the education and career development of a PhD student well
versed in both cutting edge experimental and simulational science. The
successful completion of these studies will provide a quantitative understanding
of the geometric and mechanical phase transitions underlying the jamming
transition in dimensions two, three, and higher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Jamming is ubiquitous in nature and industry: a
sand dune, a sack of grain, a pile of coal, and the powders that make medicines
are all examples of disordered particulate systems at the edge of stability.
They seem solid enough at first push, but give them a hard shove and they simply
flow out of the way. Yet, for all of their ubiquity, they remain poorly
understood. One of the ironies of nature is that often by imagining what the
world would be like in much higher dimensions, we can better understand and
explain the world as it is. Thus, studying the jamming of particles in (for
example) 7 dimensions will shed light on such prosaic questions as "How does one
design a better grain hopper?" This project will pursue a multipronged approach
to explore jammed systems in the real world, in dimensions d=2, 3 and higher.
This project will: measure the static and dynamic properties of a jammed
emulsion, a model system for studies of jamming; drive the state of the art
forward in high speed microscopy techniques; develop new computer programs and
algorithms to harness cutting-edge supercomputers and simulate the interactions
of an enormous number of particles in dimensions as high as the thirteenth
dimension; and support the education and career development of a PhD student
well versed in both cutting edge experimental and simulational science; pioneer
a Visiting Artist program designed to spark public interest and appreciation in
real science in ways that a purely scientific discourse cannot.