* 1255649
* CAREER:   A Comprehensive Investigation into Cloud-Aerosol Interactions Using Satellite, Aircraft and Model Data
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Small Griswold, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 569,596.00

This CAREER project merges state-of-the art research in the fields of cloud
physics, aerosol science and climate change with novel instructional tools,
community education and outreach, and improvement of undergraduate and graduate
education initiatives in meteorology. Insufficient knowledge of aerosol effects
on clouds and precipitation (via cloud modification) causes a large uncertainty
in quantification of the overall climatic effects of aerosols and results in
poor predictions on global climate models. These needs will be addressed through
the analysis of aerosol-cloud interactions via three innovative research themes:
(i) Remote sensing studies on the impact of aerosols on clouds and precipitation
via the direct, indirect and semi-direct effects using A-Train Satellite data
sets; (ii) Observational studies on mixing processes with investigations into
aerosol-cloud interactions based on cloud size, lifetime and aerosol type and
surface characteristics; and (iii) Model Evaluation of cloud-aerosol
interactions using collocated A-Train Satellite observations to identify
inconsistencies between observations and global climate models to guide future
development and improvement in global climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
utilizing three distinctly different data types this project allows for the
analysis of aerosol-cloud interactions on a variety of spatial (individual
clouds to global scale) and temporal scales (micro-seconds in cloud to yearly
means). The variety of platforms used for this study will also provide graduate
student researchers with an exceptionally broad background and varied skill
set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described above is closely intertwined
with the education goals of this project. State-of-the-art research on clouds,
aerosols and climate will be integrated into undergraduate courses to increase
the overall scientific literacy of a "hot" media topic. The adoption of group
class activities utilizing multi-media teaching techniques (i.e. YouTube and
Podcasts) will encourage students to identify connections between the "real
world" current weather events and climate issues with course material.
Additionally, an innovative undergraduate-graduate student mentoring program
will guide undergraduates while simultaneously developing supervising and
mentoring skills in graduate students as they embark on the research outlined
above. The research program will also foster collaborations between the
University of Hawaii and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory by providing graduate
and undergraduate students the opportunity to intern and work with elite
scientists at a renowned research facility. To broadly impact the community the
PI will organize an annual Expanding Your Horizon (EYH) conference in Hawaii
(the first for that state). The PI will recruit local Hawaiian women scientists
and industry leaders with the goal of educating and attracting young women to
the STEM fields. As part of the EYH conference the PI will sponsor hands-on
workshops using data collected through the described research efforts.