* 1255570
* CAREER / SusChEM: Understanding and Utilization of the Secondary Coordination Sphere of Novel Biomimetic Catalysts for Small Molecule Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* John Gilbertson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2019
* USD 470,000.00

Professor John D. Gilbertson of Western Washington University is supported by
the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
bioinspired, pyridinediimine (PDI) metal complexes containing redox-active,
?non-innocent? ligands. These systems consist of nucleophilic/basic substrate
directors and/or H-bond/proton-directors in the secondary coordination sphere,
as well as ligand-based redox active sites in the ligand scaffold. These ligands
will be used to synthesize catalysts containing earth abundant metals and will
be studied in order to develop extensive knowledge concerning the molecular
level catalytic activity and selectivity for the conversion of carbon dioxide
into useable feedstocks and fuels (namely CO, methane, etc.). The investigation
of these bioinspired conversions of carbon dioxide will provide a better
understanding of how the secondary coordination sphere of metalloenzyme mimics
can be regulated to provide better structural/functional biomimics. These data,
in turn, will be utilized to design structural/functional mimics that are active
in the useful, bioinspired transformations of carbon dioxide. In addition to the
investigation of carbon dioxide reduction, an outreach program consisting of
undergraduate researchers and WWU chemistry majors that aims to introduce
chemistry into the local media will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon
dioxide is a significant environmental contaminant and sensible methods of
carbon dioxide utilization are needed for its mitigation as a greenhouse gas.
The production of CO (or methane) from carbon dioxide is an attractive route to
the utilization of carbon dioxide as a feedstock. Carbon dioxide is inexpensive
and abundant, and it is important that catalysts utilized for its conversion(s)
into renewable products contain metals that are also inexpensive and abundant
(such as iron, cobalt, and zinc).