* 1255761
* First Steps in Exploring Pervasive Persistent Identification for Information Centric Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 112,630.00

Information Centric Networking (ICN) is a new networking architectural paradigm
in which information rather than packets (units of transmission) are given
primacy. This concept is central to several of the NSF's recent Future Internet
Architecture projects as well as other US based and international projects. The
paradigm is transformational because the objective is not to move bits from one
place to another but rather to provide access to information, without regard to
location. Hence at the core of an information or content centric networking
design is identifiers. This research focuses on identifiers and the system that
services them. In this EAGER proposal, the PI plans on a set of first steps in
validation and evaluation of a design for identity management that supports both
persistence and pervasiveness of identifiers. The plan is that this capability
can reside on top of any one of the approaches to ICN. Thus, this identification
approach can provide effective persistence and pervasiveness and can be
translated into current ICN identifiers, which generally are intended for
delivery of bits in a location-independent way.

The project is to validate and evaluate the effectiveness of providing an
indirection layer on top of two of the current ICN projects that are
significantly different from each other. The demonstration of validity will
focus specifically on persistence and minimization of opportunities denial of
service attacks, two capabilities not supported in the ICNs themselves. The
requirement for persistence of identifiers and identification management is
critical to supporting longevity of the information itself. Mitigation of
denial-of-service attacks is selected as the second challenge for two reasons.
First, denial-of-service attacks are only possible in pervasive systems, in
which attacks can be coordinated widely across a system. Second, one of the key
questions across the set of ICN projects is the security and integrity of the
infrastructure. All these systems support end-to-end integrity, privacy,
confidentiality, but none focuses on the security of the infrastructure that is
providing that end-to-end service. Hence denial of service attack mitigation has
been selected as the second challenge for this project.

This project is a necessary proof of concept setting the stage for a larger
effort to explore a whole Pervasive Persistent Identification System (PPInS). At
the core of the design is a set of idspaces that are distinct in several ways:
the id syntax they support, the management of ids (such as assignment and
resolution of them) and the security they provide. Each will translate a
globally unique, persistent identifier into the identifiers of the underlying
ICN. A global resolution scheme will map each id to the appropriate idspace
management facility. In this preliminary work, the researchers will design one
of those idspaces and evaluate it on top of two of the competing ICN approaches,
for validity and evaluation. The contributions of the larger project can be
enumerated by intellectual merit and broader impact.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed clean separation of identification from the
supporting ICN layers, if successful, will result in three specific
contributions: the persistence and ubiquity of identification, achieved through
isolation and layering; the extensibility and evolvability of approaches to
identification to meet varying performance, security, and scalability
requirements through modularity within the identification layer; and the
extension of the end-to-end principle over time by recognizing the separation of
identification from the activities of location independent expressions of
interesting and delivery including differentiated end-to-end and infrastructure
security.

Broader Impact: There are three central broader impacts of this work: the role
and support of persistent information (Independent of information centric
networking, as the Internet continues to expand in its role and influence on
economic, civic, and military/intelligence components of contemporary
society?the value of information is not only in its short term effect, but in
the persistence over extremely long periods of time); the education and training
of women (The PI is a woman and has consistently supported and will continue to
support young women in science, through her research. ) and international
collaboration (This work is part of a productive research collaboration between
MIT and the University of Cambridge, specifically the leadership of the PURSUIT
ICN project.)