* 1255046
* CAREER: Fundamental Investigation of Surface Fatigue Crack Initiation Mechanisms in Nanocrystalline FCC Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Olivier Pierron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 550,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The overarching objective of this CAREER proposal is to
identify the surface fatigue crack initiation mechanisms in nanocrystalline
face-centered-cubic metals as a function of three material parameters (grain
size, generalized stacking fault energy curve, oxidation behavior) and three
loading factors (maximum plastic strain, frequency, environment);
Nanocrystalline metals (grain size < 100 nm) exhibit extraordinary mechanical
properties and can combine ultra-high strength with considerable ductility.
However, there is so far little quantitative, mechanistic-based understanding of
their fatigue properties, such as the observed improved fatigue limit compared
to their coarse grained counterparts (grain size > 1 micrometers). Accordingly,
this proposal seeks to monitor cyclic plasticity and measure initiation fatigue
life on nanocrystalline face-centered-cubic nanobeams tested with a state-of-
the-art MEMS device, for Al, Cu, Ni, and Au, as a function of three loading
factors. In addition, this proposal seeks to identify the fatigue crack
initiation mechanisms using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations,
and whenever possible, establish relevant statistics of the operating mechanisms
(such as frequency of occurrence) as a function of the aforementioned
experimental parameters. Particularly, quantitative in-situ TEM fatigue testing
will be performed to observe fatigue damage accumulation during cyclic loading.
The proposed research offers original contributions to obtain mechanistic
insight into the length-scale effects in fatigue processes. Particularly, this
research program is expected to yield a mechanistic model linking the
characteristics of cyclic plasticity (including, importantly, irreversibility
mechanisms) to surface fatigue crack initiation in nanocrystalline face-
centered-cubic metals. Such a model can provide a scientific basis for
predicting the fatigue behavior of this class of materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Nanocrystalline metals are a promising class of ultra-
strong materials. The reasons for the increase in strength due to decreasing
grain size are fairly well understood, and several plastic deformation
mechanisms have been identified to operate in this grain size regime. However,
there is currently no satisfying model linking the plastic deformation
mechanisms under cyclic loading and the resulting fatigue degradation properties
of nanocrystalline metals. This proposal seeks to investigate the governing
fatigue mechanisms of nanocrystalline metals using a state-of-the-art
experimental technique, and to use this understanding to promote research and
teaching in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics to
high school students and teachers. Particularly, the PI will create a summer
enrichment program, entitled FAMED (Failure Analysis for Mechanical Engineering
Detectives), targeted for high school students, that will involve high school
teachers, graduate and undergraduate students to develop and implement it.
During the one-week-long program, the students will learn about the fundamental
science related to the failure of materials in the form of short lectures and
hands-on demos. They will also have a chance to act as failure analysis experts
in idealized litigation cases whose outcome depends on the correct analysis of a
failed object.