* 1255281
* CAREER: Self-Assembly of Anti-Cancer Drugs into Well-Defined Supramolecular Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Honggang Cui, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 03/31/2019
* USD 499,713.00

This Career Award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials
Research to Johns Hopkins University will support the development of new
strategies to direct the self-assembly of anticancer drugs into supramolecular
nanostructures with well-defined structural features for increased drug loading
capacities. Current approaches for the delivery of cancer chemotherapeutics in
using nanoscale carriers through encapsulation within liposomes or polymeric
nanoparticles, or by conjugation to hydrophilic polymers tend to modify the
drug's pharmacokinetic properties and biodistribution. Additionally, there are
inherent difficulties in achieving a high and quantitative drug loading per
carrier. This project explores the potential molecular interactions that drug
molecules can offer for self-assembly into a variety of nanostructures, and
seeks to understand how these supramolecular nanostructures affect the ability
of the system to release their therapeutic payloads. The quantitative drug
loading in the prepared nanostructures would be ensured by the very nature of
themolecular design features. Notably, the proposed drug delivery system does
not require any additional carriers, easing potential concerns associated with
the long term toxicity of synthetic drug carriers. Since targeted drug delivery
and controlled release are the foundations in the development of effective
chemotherapies for tumor treatments, the fundamental knowledge developed from
the proposed research activities will open new avenues for cancer
chemotherapies. The proposed education plan aims to promote training, learning,
and teaching of students at all levels, and broadening the participation of
students from underrepresented groups in the Baltimore City Public School
system. For K-12 students in particular, the provision of an experiential
learning opportunity in drug delivery research would spark their interest in
science, and helps in creating the next generation of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemotherapy is currently the most effective
method available for the treatment of metastatic cancers, producing the highest
survival and cure rates. The toxicity of anticancer drugs to healthy cells,
however, requires the development of methodologies that can deliver these drugs
exclusively to the tumor sites at higher doses. A successful delivery strategy
promises immense benefits through both the reduction of side-effects and a
greater treatment efficacy. Accordingly, the creation of nano-sized vehicles for
the effective delivery of hydrophobic anticancer drugs to tumor sites has
garnered justifiable attention in cancer chemotherapy research for several
decades. A fundamental limitation of this strategy, however, is the difficulty
in achieving a high and quantitative drug loading content per carrier. Also,
concerns regarding the short-term and long-term toxicities of the synthetic
nanomaterial carriers other than the drugs to be delivered often lead to
exhaustive preclinical evaluation, representing a difficult hurdle for the
drug's translation into clinical use.The proposed work aims to address these
challenges though the development of delivery vehicles made of anticancer drugs
themselves. Such drug nanostructures would contain a specific drug content, and
do not require the use of additional drug carriers.The multidisciplinary nature
of drug delivery research provides ample opportunities for education and
outreach.The proposed educational plan is expected to have a significant impact
on the interests and STEM careers of participating students. With programs
designed to educate and provide hands-on research experience, the plan aims to
increase interest in the pursuit of higher education and doctoral studies of
STEM for high school and undergraduate students respectively. These experiences
will reinforce their interests in the various science related disciplines and
boost confidence in their abilities through programs that focus on creative
problem solving and teamwork, such as the proposed Engineering Innovation
initiative.