* 1255257
* EAGER: Stress Sensitive Smart Particles for Investigating Damage Initiation in Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Lenore Dai, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 02/28/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This EARLY concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) focuses on developing
a novel multifunctional composite material with self-sensing capabilities for
identifying damage initiation and propagation for civil infrastructure
applications. Specifically, multifunctional core-shell composite particles,
composed of a polymeric core and an inorganic shell, which are responsive to
stress, humidity/temperature, degradation, etc, will be designed and
synthesized. The chemistry, physics, and structure/property relationship of the
smart composite particles will be explored. In addition, the synthesized smart
composite particles will be embedded into polymer composites to understand the
mechanics of damage initiation through the length scales and monitor/sense
damage evolution. The fundamental questions to be addressed are: 1) How to
validate environmental responsiveness and multifunctionality in composite
particles for civil engineering applications and what are the structure/property
relationships? 2) What are the particle-matrix interactions and detection
capability of damage precursor under stress, humidity/temperature, or
degradation? 3) How does damage affect the mechanics of structural
composites?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is anticipated to be transformative
since it explores next generation smart composite materials with potentially
optimized self-sensing, thermal, electrical, and future self-healing properties.
The research output is expected to make a significant impact in a number of new
and aging civil infrastructure applications where composite structures are
currently inspected with low resolution techniques. The number of failures in
civil structures due to environmental conditions or natural phenomena has
increased in the past few years. Current state of the art inspection techniques
cannot detect damage precursors or even small scale damages. This project has
the potential to bring sensing and inspection technologies to the level
necessary to provide critical risk assessment information. In addition, the
research team will continue their ongoing outreach efforts to mentor graduate
and undergraduate students and to engage high school students and teachers. The
research team will also participate in the Mathematics, Engineering, Science
Achievement (MESA) program at Arizona State University to broaden the
participations of underrepresented groups. Finally, the project illustrates a
good example of the importance of applying fundamental research to addressing
some of the grand challenges in engineering