* 1255439
* CAREER: Subduction Zone Hazards: Megathrust Rupture Dynamics and Tsunamis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 569,409.00

Subduction zones are home to two of the most spectacular and dangerous natural
hazards on Earth: megathrust earthquakes and tsunamis. To mitigate risk, we must
better understand the earthquake cycle in subduction zones: What fraction of
relative plate motion is accommodated aseismically instead of seismically, and
to what extent do estimates of the seismic coupling coefficient allow one to
predict the extent of future megathrust earthquakes? What role does inelastic
deformation of the accretionary prism play in rupture dynamics? What determines
the up-dip extent of slip, a key factor controlling the seafloor uplift and
tsunami height? And what causes the slow rupture process of tsunami earthquakes
that produce vastly larger tsunamis than expected from the amplitude of seismic
waves at periods less than ~10 s? These questions will be addressed with three-
dimensional numerical simulations capable of resolving interseismic loading,
creep and slow slip, and fully dynamic spontaneous ruptures, with realistic
geometries and heterogeneous material structure. The solid Earth component of
the model will be fully coupled to a compressible ocean, in order to
simultaneously capture seismic waves, hydroacoustic (ocean sound) waves, and
surface gravity waves (tsunamis). Attention will be placed on the hydroacoustic
signature of subduction earthquakes, as recorded by ocean bottom pressure
sensors. Hydroacoustic waves excited by seafloor displacement arrive at the
coast many minutes before the tsunami, and could potentially be used to estimate
tsunami wave heights for use in early warning systems. Simulations will be
conducted for the 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake and other recent events, and
comparisons made to seismic, geodetic, tsunami, and ocean acoustic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest earthquakes on Earth occur in subduction zones
along the boundary between tectonic plates, such as the Cascadia subduction zone
offshore Washington and Oregon. These earthquakes cause vertical uplift of the
seafloor, generating tsunamis. This project is aimed at characterizing hazards
from these earthquakes and tsunamis using computational simulations coupling the
response of the solid Earth, including frictional sliding along faults, and the
ocean. The simulations will capture the earthquake rupture process, as well as
excitation and propagation of seismic waves, hydroacoustic waves (sound waves in
the ocean), and tsunamis.&lt;br/&gt;Specific models will be developed for the
2011 Tohoku-Oki, Japan, earthquake and other recent events, and comparison made
to a range of geophysical data to validate the modeling approach. Preliminary
simulations of the Tohoku-Oki earthquake suggest that hydroacoustic waves, which
can be recorded by cabled ocean bottom pressure sensors deployed tens or a
hundred kilometers offshore, might be used to rapidly estimate tsunami wave
heights for use in an early warning system. This research effort will be
complemented with an outreach education program aimed an increasing awareness of
and preparedness for natural hazards in the Central Coast region of California,
through a partnership between Stanford and Allan Hancock College (AHC), a
Hispanic-serving community college in the Central Coast. The PI will work with
faculty and students at AHC to develop earthquake and tsunami demonstrations and
activities for use in AHC?s Friday Night Science outreach programs attended by
600?1000 members of the community. Each summer, the PI will host an AHC student
in an eight-week research internship at Stanford.