* 1255975
* Biochemical and Biophysical Mechanisms of Hydroid Allorecognition
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Matthew Nicotra, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 02/28/2017
* USD 445,000.00

Colonial animals such as sponges, hydroids, corals, and ascidians can
discriminate between their own tissues and those of other members of their
species based on cellular contact, leading to a response in which they either
fuse or reject. This phenomenon, called allorecognition, is controlled by
genetic systems encoding highly variable allorecognition molecules. Despite
their importance to the life histories of colonial organisms, the biochemical
and biophysical basis of these invertebrate allorecognition systems remains
poorly understood. The goal of this project is to elucidate these mechanisms in
the cnidarian, Hydractinia symbiolongicarpus. In Hydractinia, allorecognition is
controlled by two highly variable genes, alr1 and alr2. In this project the
investigators will use a combination of in vitro biochemical assays and in vivo
genetic approaches with transgenic animals to identify extracellular and
intracellular ligands for the alr proteins and to characterize their role in
cell signaling. These results will explain how the alr proteins, by themselves
discriminate self from non-self, and how they signal allorecognition effector
systems. Data generated will also enable comparisons to other self-recognition
systems, including plant self-incompatibility loci and fungal mating type loci.
Within animals, if homology is discovered between the Hydractinia
allorecognition system and the ascidian allorecognition system or the vertebrate
immune system, it would suggest that extant self-recognition systems evolved
from a system present in the last common ancestor of all metazoans. This project
will include training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral students, research opportunities for area high school students, and
educational outreach to middle and elementary school students in southwestern
Pennsylvania. Results of this work will be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate immunology courses at the University of Pittsburgh, as well as
presentations and a newsletter for transplant patients at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center.