* 1255568
* CAREER: Probing the Extremes of Star Formation: A Census of Very Low-Mass Stars and Brown Dwarfs in the Local Neighborhood
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Andrew West, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 401,759.00

Very low-mass (VLM) stars and brown dwarfs make up the smallest, least luminous,
but one of the most dominant baryonic populations of the Milky Way. They are
vital probes of the smallest extremes of the star formation process, and their
properties inform us about the boundary conditions and variations in the
formation and evolution of all stars. However, despite their ubiquity and
importance, samples of VLMs have historically been small due to their intrinsic
faintness.

The PI will build a comprehensive, cross-matched catalog of VLMs that were
observed in the UKIDSS, WISE, 2MASS and SDSS all-sky surveys. He will measure
proper motions for more than 100,000 VLMs, which will be the largest sample of
VLM common-proper motion pairs ever assembled. He will also conduct a parallax
program at the 4.3m Discovery Channel Telescope to measure accurate distances to
more than 100 VLMs within 33 parsecs of the Sun. This work is essential to
address the previous deficiencies in our cataloging of VLMs and VLM binaries,
and it will provide a vital new understanding of how low mass and very low-mass
stars form.

The PI will integrate his science mission with diversity efforts by creating the
Boston University (BU) Pre-Majors (Pre-MaP) program. His program will directly
address the national need for additional STEM majors by increasing the number of
underrepresented students in the physical sciences. BU Pre-MaP will expose
first-year underrepresented students to research, and it will increase the
participation and diversity in astronomy and STEM disciplines.