* 1255228
* CAREER: Microbial Allocation of Assimilated Carbon: Interactions between Temperature, Substrate Quality, and Microbial Physiology Determine Efficiency of Arctic Soil Carbon Cycling
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Matthew Wallenstein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 968,096.00

This CAREER proposal aims to understand the fate, in a warming climate, of the
large stocks of carbon that are currently sequestered in Arctic soils.
Specifically, the principal investigator (PI) will study the complex response of
soil microorganisms to increasing temperature and changing substrate
availability. The work will address the following objectives: (1) Determine how
the quality of dissolved organic matter produced by enzymatic degradation
changes with temperature, (2) Determine how microbial allocation of carbon to
new growth, respiration, and enzyme production changes with temperature and
substrate chemistry, and (3) Evaluate whether the temperature effect on
microbial allocation of labile carbon affects the decomposition of old soil
organic matter. The approach will involve both field-based and laboratory
experiments. An improved understanding of how climate warming will affect
microbially-driven soil carbon cycling in the Arctic is critical to reduce
uncertainty in our predictions of global climate-carbon feedbacks. The awardee
will integrate research, teaching, and outreach through a set of activities
designed to teach undergraduates critical research skills and provide real
research experiences, in addition to working with graduate students to learn how
to be effective mentors. He will (1) Serve as a faculty coordinator for a formal
undergraduate training program called Skills for Undergraduate Participation in
Ecological Research (SUPER), which aims to develop basic research skills prior
to student participation in hands-on research and to recruit students from
underrepresented groups; (2) Provide opportunities for up to 26 undergraduates
to directly participate in this proposed research after completing the SUPER
program; (3) Teach a three-week module in a senior capstone course focused on
Arctic soil ecology. Students would collect soils in a local alpine environment
and analyze them in the laboratory. Students that had previously participated in
this Arctic research would teach the other students about how the alpine
environment compares to the Arctic.