* 1255679
* 2013 UNAVCO Community &amp; Facility Bridge Proposal: Geodesy Revealing the Earth in Action
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 3,401,963.00

1255679&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Cooperative Agreement (CA)
between NSF and UNAVCO, Inc. supports continued management and operation of the
national Earth sciences Global Positioning System (GPS) and geodetic technology
support facility (?the UNAVCO Facility?). Activities supported include planning
and engineering support for GPS and geodetic technology field projects, active
management of continuously operated GPS networks, campaign GPS project and
terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) project support, technology development and
testing, data services and education and community engagement activities. All
these activities are external to activities UNAVCO manages on behalf of the
EarthScope Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) and which are currently and
separately funded via a Cooperative Agreement managed by the EAR/EarthScope
Program. Support for this CA includes NSF Division of Earth Sciences and Polar
Programs funding as well as support from the National Aeronautics and Space
Agency (NASA). UNAVCO, Inc. is a non-profit corporation governed by a Board of
Directors elected by the UNAVCO membership comprised predominantly of U.S.
academic institutions with active research programs in geodesy. There are
currently over 100 member institutions and nearly 80 associate (non-voting
members) which including foreign universities, international government
observatories, academies, and agencies. It is noteworthy that the consortium
membership has grown by some 53% since the time of submission of the last
Facility support proposal in 2007. Specific activities to be supported under the
CA include: &lt;br/&gt;1) maintenance of a pool of state-of-the-art GPS
(currently 350 receivers in the Facility pool) and portable tripod mounted
?terrestrial laser scanners? (TLS; currently 6) available to NSF-supported
scientists;&lt;br/&gt;2) continuing support for maintenance, telemetry and
ultimate archival of semi-permanent continuous GPS station observations with
station locations spanning the globe (currently &gt; 2,200 cCPS stations provide
data to the UNAVCO Facility archive, not counting the ca. 1,110 cGPS station
that comprise PBO);&lt;br/&gt;3) provision of personnel dedicated to NSF and
NASA funded GPS and TLS project planning, logistics and field engineering
support (ca. 60-70 non-Polar region projects supported each year and 30-40 Polar
projects per year and ca. 30-40 TLS projects supported each year with rapid
growth in the latter);&lt;br/&gt;4) maintenance and operations of the 61
stations in the NASA Global GPS Network (GGN), a subset of the International GPS
Network (IGS) that provides crucial data to the International Earth Rotation and
Reference Systems Service (IERS) needed for International Terrestrial Reference
Frame (ITRF) solutions;&lt;br/&gt;5) development and maintenance of a GPS data
archive (now approaching 39 Tb of storage with rapid growth forced by the
evolution of near 100 cGPS stations that now record observation at high rate , 1
Hz or greater, and web-based access tools;&lt;br/&gt;6) maintenance and
development of an archive and distribution system for synthetic aperture radar
(SAR) scenes used for interferometric (InSAR) study of the continuum deformation
fields associated with tectonic, volcanic, seismic and subsurface fluid dynamics
over spatial scales of 100s of kilometers (the archive contains thousands of
scenes of spaceborne SAR imagery from the European Space Agency ERS 1, ERS2,
EnviSAT, Canadian RadarSAT and German TerraSAR X SAR satellites; some 20 Tb of
holdings);&lt;br/&gt;7) planning and coordination of various geodetic community
activities (e.g., scientific workshops, steering committee
meetings);&lt;br/&gt;8) development, evaluation and testing of new commercial
GPS and geodetic technologies (e.g., antenna phase center calibrations, novel
power and telemetry solutions for semi-permanent cGPS and co-located
environmental sensor stations, testing of new GNSS capable receivers that are
capable of recording new U.S. GPS, European Galileo and Russian GLONASS carrier
frequencies);&lt;br/&gt;9) ensuring a representative and responsive governance
process on behalf of the U.S. academic research community using precision
geodetic techniques; and&lt;br/&gt;10) provision of education and outreach
materials and web-based tools to students and the public about precision
geodetic research applications, the Earth sciences, and UNAVCO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;