* 1255603
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of Indentation-Induced Two-Way Shape-Memory Surfaces Made From Nickel-Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Carl Frick, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 04/30/2019
* USD 463,795.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Shape-memory alloys are capable of undergoing
deformation through a reversible thermoelastic martensitic phase transformation.
Given a prescribed combination of deformation processing and/or heat treatment,
the shape recovery may be "trained" to elicit a two-way shape-memory effect
(TWSME). This effect is characterized by the alloy's memorization of both a high
and low temperature shape, allowing for spontaneous change between the two
shapes as a function of cycling temperature. This project is to investigate the
microstructural mechanisms which control indentation-induced TWSME surfaces. The
central hypothesis is that the internal stress-state dictates the preferentially
directed martensitic plate formation responsible for the TWSME, and this is
primarily governed by (1) the dislocation structure and/or stabilized martensite
created during indentation, (2) the alloy composition, and (3) the presence of
precipitates. The approach will involve systematic manipulation of the initial
microstructure, followed by multi-scale indentation and planarization known to
create a TWSME surface. Surface topography and underlying microstructure will be
investigated through localized characterization using advanced microscopy
techniques. Students at both the high school and university levels will benefit
from the proposed research through the PI's involvement with the University of
Wyoming's Engineering Summer Program (ESP) and EPSCoR Undergraduate Fellowship
Program. The ESP program invites high school juniors, with emphasis on
recruiting female students, to participate in educational laboratories aimed at
generating excitement about engineering and to raise awareness of research
opportunities available at the University of Wyoming. Students at both the high
school and university levels will benefit from the proposed research through the
PI's involvement with the University of Wyoming's Engineering Summer Program
(ESP) and EPSCoR Undergraduate Fellowship Program. The ESP program invites high
school juniors, with emphasis on recruiting female students, to participate in
educational laboratories aimed at generating excitement about engineering and to
raise awareness of research opportunities available at the University of
Wyoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Shape-memory
alloys are capable of undergoing deformation through a reversible thermoelastic
martensitic phase transformation. Given a prescribed combination of deformation
processing and/or heat treatment, the shape recovery may be "trained" to elicit
a two-way shape-memory effect (TWSME). This effect is characterized by the
alloy's memorization of both a high and low temperature shape, allowing for
spontaneous change between the two shapes as a function of cycling temperature.
Such materials are of potential interest for actuator and sensor applications.
This project looks to elucidate the material science principles that lead to
TWSME and develop understanding sufficient to produce and control this effect.
Student training will span graduate students, undergraduate students and high-
school students. Graduate students will benefit from international experience
with collaborators in Germany.