* 1255298
* CAREER:   Welfare Gains from Economic Integration: A Unified Approach
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Konstantinos Arkolakis, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2018
* USD 429,877.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: CAREER: Welfare Gains from Economic
Integration: A Unified Approach&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES -
1255298&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Arkolakis,
Konstantinos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international trade field has seen a
dramatic shift of its research agenda over the past decade. New evidence on the
size advantage of exporters has motivated the modeling of firm heterogeneity,
resulting in a new analytical framework for international trade. These changes
in the field have also lead to a reconsideration of the old pressing question:
how large are the gains from economic integration?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal outlines a plan to advance the understanding of this question and to
begin disseminating this work to the general public. The intellectual merit of
the theoretical techniques suggested in this proposal derives from the fact that
they maintain a tight link with the data. Thus, they deliver simple and
analytically tractable relationships linking barriers to economic integration
and openness and, in turn, openness and economic welfare. This theoretical work
is complemented by careful quantitative policy analysis. The proposal is
composed of four different research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
assessments of the welfare gains from international trade focus on models with
constant markups, thus ignoring the so-called pro-competitive effects of trade.
The first project plans to develop a unified framework to analyze the pro-
competitive effects of trade in models with variable markups. The main result
implies that gains from trade are tightly associated with the degree of price
pass-through of firms, a statistic measured independently by many
economists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project aims to offer a theoretical
characterization of the impact of innovation on trade and welfare in a model
with variable markups. The goal of this project is to understand the link
between innovation and welfare and how pro-competitive effects shape this
relationship. For this purpose, the project will assess how different
assumptions on the demand and competition structure affect innovation and how
trade can intensify innovation and affect welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third project develops an extension of a baseline trade framework that can
seamlessly accommodate production of multinational firms and provide a new
analytical tool for the understanding of the gains from multinational activity.
A component of this project is the development and implementation of a procedure
to estimate the model. The end product will be a useful tool for evaluating
policies that reduce barriers to trade and multinational
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final project will attempt to strengthen the
tenuous link between dynamic open economy models and static trade models by
developing a multi-country trade model that incorporates the fact that trade
adjustment may take time. Using this framework as a basis the proposed project
will study the dynamic adjustment of trade to macroeconomic shocks and the
welfare implications of the sluggishness of trade responses to these
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a framework to
analyze the main forces that shape the gains from economic integration. It will
also provide necessary tools to exploit the rich data on international trade and
understand the workings of the world economy. Part of these tools will be
integrated to the material of an undergraduate class in International Finance.
The simple link between barriers to economic integration and economic welfare
derived by this research agenda bypasses the various abstractions of economic
theory and makes it a useful tool from a policy perspective. It is thus ideal
material for the education of not only future economists but also policy makers
and other future leaders in an interdependent world.