* 1255127
* CAREER: Locomotion Through Particulate Environments by Invertebrates and Vertebrates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* David Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2019
* USD 556,584.00

In this project the PI will elucidate two novel biological mechanisms for living
systems to contend with particulate environments. Flying insects must avoid or
negotiate droplets in rain and mist. Larger organisms use eyelashes to diver
particle-laden flows from delicate organs such as the eyes. In parallel with the
research efforts, the PI will use these familiar and highly visual topics to
naturally guide an educational program to broaden the scope of biophysics past
the traditional cellular level and increase its visibility to all audiences. The
PI will study experimentally the interactions of mesoscale objects (mosquitoes
and eyelashes) with particulates in a surrounding fluid medium. The following
hypotheses based on preliminary work will be tested. (1) Insects survive
collisions with raindrops by tumbling their bodies to reduce impact impact
force. The universality and limits of this ability will be examined across a
range of insect sizes. (2) Using high-speed video, the PI observes that
mosquitoes are unable to stabilize their flight in fog. The failure of an
otherwise robust system is surprising. The PI hypothesizes that gyroscopic
signals from their halteres are overcome by signals created by inertial impact
of fog drops and subsequent water accumulation. This hypothesis suggests a novel
mechanism for the action of pesticides, and is of interest to his collaborators
at the Navy Entomological Center. (3) Investigate how mosquitoes shed dew
collected on their bodies using high frequency vibrational energy harvested from
their wing flaps. The PI will conduct a parallel study on particle deposition on
vertebrate surfaces, hypothesizing that mammalian and avian eyelashes divert
incoming flows to reduce particle deposition onto the ocular surface. The PI
will recruit undergraduates, high-school students and teachers from
underrepresented groups. He will establish a photography internship at GT to
increase the use of aesthetic and scientific photography in labs to facilitate
scientific communication to the public. He will also teach "Living with
particles," a new lab course on biophysics of locomotion. With a 10th-grade
teacher, he will develop "Snakes on a Plane," one of a series of educational
modules to teach Georgia Physical Standards. The PI will test and disseminate
these modules by hosting students and teachers during "Wet Week," a weeklong
workshop at our institution.