* 1255720
* Travel Support for the 2013 American Meteorological Society (AMS) Robert A. Duce Symposium; Austin, Texas; January 6-10, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Renyi Zhang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides travel support for the "2013 AMS Robert A. Duce Symposium"
as part of the 2013 American Meteorological Society (AMS) Annual Meeting in
Austin, TX from 6 to 10 January. The theme of the symposium is "Air-Sea Chemical
Exchange: Impacts on the Atmosphere and Ocean" and will honor Dr. Duce's
distinguished contributions to research related to chemical cycles of pollutant
and natural substances in the global atmosphere including atmospheric transport
of chemicals from the continents, their deposition to the ocean and impact on
marine biogeochemistry, atmospheric chemistry, and climate. The symposium will
also recognize his leadership of the atmospheric/oceanic science community both
in the United States and internationally. Session topics will focus on the air-
sea exchange and coupling between atmospheric and marine chemistry, global
biogeochemical cycles, long range transport of dust and associated effects on
climate, deposition of anthropogenic pollutants to open-oceans and associated
effects on oceanic biological productivities, trace gases and greenhouse gases
in the marine atmosphere, and formation and transformation of marine aerosols
and their climate impacts. In addition, a joint session entitled "Chemistry-
Aerosol- Cloud/Climate Interactions: From Ocean to Continents" will be held with
the Fifth Symposium on Aerosol-Cloud-Climate Interactions and 15th Conference on
Atmospheric Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include advancing scientific understanding of atmosphere-ocean interactions and
related implication for climate. In addition, the conference will bring together
established researchers and early career scientists, providing invaluable
opportunities for professional interactions in a focused and productive forum.
The award will provide partial support (transportation, registration, and/or per
diem expenses) for the participation of approximately four young investigators
(undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) and one invited
speaker.