* 1255776
* Collaborative Research: Localized, Layered Formal Hardware/Software Resilience Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2016
* USD 131,498.00

The drive for increased performance and functionality has pushed computer chips
to their physical limits of power/energy and reliability. Future computing
systems are likely to suffer from high fault rates, undermining their
programmability and usability. This research project will leverage existing
techniques and invent new techniques to detect, isolate, and recover from faults
and to ensure overall system resilience, with minimal impact on performance. The
project taps into the rich body of past work on formal methods, which have been
successful in finding logical errors in systems. Newly developed formal methods
will focus on resilience enhancement. The project will also explore the inherent
trade-offs between performance, power, and resilience. The project will develop
an extensible platform for empirical evaluation of resilience methods. This
platform will be comprised of programmable chips and accompanying software
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster the development of new
system design methods which take reliability into account. It will help fill a
serious void in readily usable infrastructures for resiliency studies in the
realm of parallel systems by developing and releasing tools for evaluating the
methods. The project will also develop and release rigorously specified
resilience-aware system interfaces. The project emphasizes student training,
including student recruitment and introduction of new classes that are
integrated with resilience research.