* 1255694
* EAGER: Adolescents Learning Social Problem-Solving Skills Using an Interactive On-Line Graphic Novel
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Elizabeth Ozer, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 02/28/2015
* USD 299,999.00

The long-term goal of this project team is to learn how to design interactive
graphic novels and associated serious games to help adolescents learn social
problem solving skills. The intention is that these skills will not simply be
learned in a way that allows the teens to say what they should do but, rather,
that they will be learned in a way that results in behavior change. The project
is investigating the use of graphic novels to engage teens in thinking about
difficult social situations and to model for them ways of dealing effectively
and in non-violent ways with those tricky situations, and they are investigating
the use of associated serious games and other interactive components to promote
reflection on what has been read, promote discussion around the situations, and
provide opportunities for practice. This novel idea has its foundations in the
approach to therapy called Cognitive Behavioral Modification and resonates with
what the approach to education called Cognitive Apprenticeship suggests about
promoting skills learning. The project brings together experts in Cognitive
Behavioral Modification, social psychology, interactive narrative, design of
graphic novels, serious games, and adolescent health and well-being. The goals
of this EAGER project are to (i) synthesize social psychology, interactive
narrative, and serious games approaches to envision the experiences learners
need to have to learn and take on new social problem solving behaviors, (ii)
begin the design of an interactive graphic novel and experiences around it that
has a good chance of promoting behavior change among the targeted population of
at-risk teens, and (ii) develop a strong research team that will collaborate
over the long term in following through on worthy ideas that come from this
initial effort.

The potential broader impacts of this work lie in the potential for (i) using
graphic novels, which are easily accessible and can be of high interest to young
people, to promote thinking and doing that can help teens learn new problem
solving behaviors, (ii) learning how to promote productive behavior change, and
(iii) identifying the roles technology can play in such learning and how to use
technology well as a resource in promoting productive behavior change.