* 1255729
* Software Susceptibility-Driven Non-Uniform Memory Error Protection
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Kai Shen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

A memory device may exhibit errors due to manufacturing defects, device aging,
or particle strikes from cosmic-ray-induced neutrons. Memory errors are an
important threat to computer system reliability as semiconductor technologies
continue to scale. This project develops a new approach that protects against
memory errors non-uniformly by exploiting unequal error susceptibility at
different memory regions in a computer system. Collaboration with industry
researchers facilitates the integration of developed techniques into real-world
memory technologies. Results of this project will contribute to comprehensive
computer system reliability that is critical to society and the health of the
world's economy. Curriculum enhancement and student training in this project
enable advanced human resource development that is necessary for today's and
tomorrow's digital workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and development
efforts within this project include four synergistic components: First, this
project introduces a new software approach that systematically uncovers
important characteristics of memory error propagation and its consequences.
Second, research develops new energy-efficient hardware support for flexible,
dynamic adjustment of memory error protection on each memory area. Third, this
project devises non-uniform memory error protection policies that optimize for
reliability and efficiency based on software error susceptibility and hardware
protection costs. Finally, the developed error susceptibility assessment and
non-uniform protection techniques are evaluated using real application
scenarios. Cross-layer (software/hardware) technologies developed in this
project enable wide utilization of advanced memory reliability mechanisms
without significant loss of performance or energy efficiency.