* 1255991
* IDBR:   Microfluidic Platform for Accurate Sampling of Biological Signaling Events
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Maria Lazar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2018
* USD 781,494.00

An award is made to Virginia Tech to develop a microfluidic device that will
enable real-time monitoring of fast cellular events, to increase the fidelity of
in vitro generated phosphor-proteomic data necessary for the elucidation of
biological signaling pathways. Reversible protein phosphorylation in response to
external stimuli represents a key regulatory mechanism that triggers essential
cellular signaling events. Aberrant phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr is often
involved in diseases such as cancer, inflammation, diabetes and metabolic
disorders. The time-scale of signaling phosphorylation events is very short,
ranging from sec to min. Therefore, if the sampling strategy and frequency of
the stimulated cells is not adequate, accurate time-dependent concentration
profiles of phosphorylated proteins, as well as global profiling of signaling
pathways, cannot be performed. The microfluidic device that will be developed in
this research will integrate a series of functional elements that will enable
the acquisition of accurate time-dependent protein phosphorylation profiles and
unambiguous mass spectrometry detection and localization of phosphorylation
sites. Phospho-signaling events will be sampled with less than 1 sec delay from
occurrence, from phosphor-proteins present in concentrations as low as ~1 fmol.
Large-scale integration of functional elements on the chip will lead to 10-100
fold reduction in sample consumption and costs. The microfluidic device will be
used to explore the signaling pathways that control cell cycle progression and
cellular innate immune responses to Newcastle disease virus in cancer cells. In
a broader context, the microfluidic platform will enable the collection of
biological data that could help elucidate the mechanisms of aberrant cell
behavior, the properties of dysfunctional signaling cascades and of cross-talk
between signaling networks, and the development of effective drug treatments for
various diseased cell states. On the computational level, it will help discover
and validate novel theoretical principles that describe the rate and
characteristics of the signal propagation process. On the engineering level, it
will facilitate the development of high-performance instrumentation and
biomedical infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable students
and researchers to become visionary scientists that can further advance the
forefront of biological research. The education/outreach program will include
on-line and on-site interdisciplinary student training in chemistry, biology and
engineering concepts, the development of new laboratory modules for graduate and
undergraduate students at VT, summer internships to high-school students and
under-represented undergraduate minorities, and enhancement of infrastructure
for research and education. A dissemination plan will be put in place to engage
faculty and scientists with diverse background in collaborations that can
benefit from the newly developed technology. The knowledge generated through
this research will be disseminated through publications in scientific journals,
conference presentations and workshops, and on-line and news-room articles that
raise the scientific literacy of the public. Industrial partners will be
identified to promote the commercialization of the device.