* 1255159
* LTREB Renewal:   Response of a reservoir ecosystem to declining subsidies of nutrients and detritus
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2020
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2020
* USD 517,292.00

This research examines how changes in agriculture affect streams and lakes,
using a landscape in southwestern Ohio as a model system. Observed changes in
agricultural practices include a pronounced increase in conservation tillage,
reduced fertilizer use, and fewer farm animals (especially hogs). These changes
are reducing the amounts of soil sediment and chemicals that run off from farms
into streams. This project will quantify these changes along with the subsequent
responses of a downstream lake. The amount of algae in the lake has been
increasing, because the lower sediment in the water has allowed more sunlight to
penetrate. However, it is predicted that algae in the lake will decrease over
time as the nutrient supply continues to decline. Another prediction is that the
common sediment-eating gizzard shad will decline because of lower sediment
inputs. These fish recycle large quantities of nutrients from the sediments to
the algae. Therefore, if the fish decline, algae should decline even more
rapidly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in agricultural practices that are
occurring in Ohio are also occurring throughout the United States, yet there is
a lack of information on the long-term responses of lakes and streams. Because
agriculture is a major source of non-point sediment and nutrient pollution to
streams and lakes, this project will provide critical information for decision
makers involved in water quality protection, sustainable agriculture, and
fisheries management. In addition the project will provide numerous educational
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, who will be actively
engaged in all aspects of the research. Finally, a planned watershed education
center, when completed, will showcase this research and help educate the general
public on the extent to which activities on land affect water quality.