* 1256695
* The evolution of gene expression and functional specialization in Siphonophora (Cnidaria)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Casey Dunn, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Different species have different degrees of specialization between their cells,
genes, and organs. Understanding the evolutionary origins and genomic
underpinning of this functional specialization is critical to understanding the
diversity of life on Earth and the implications of division of labor for complex
systems. This project will investigate functional specialization in a group of
marine invertebrate species with some of the most extreme divisions of labor,
the siphonophores. Siphonophores are made up of hundreds of specialized bodies
that each perform particular tasks, such as feeding or defense. The
investigators will measure gene activity in multiple types of specialized bodies
in twelve species of siphonophores, and characterize the anatomical differences
between these bodies. Evolutionary analyses will indicate which genes have
shifts in activity that are associated with shifts in the division of
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test general hypotheses about the
evolution and impact of the division of labor in complex, integrated organisms.
It will also develop new statistical methods and computational tools that will
enable evolutionary analyses of gene activity in other species. In addition,
this grant provides support to produce new animations that communicate findings
to a broad audience (posted at http://creaturecast.org).