* 1256640
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Thermal Scanning Probe Development
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ami Chand, Applied Nanostructures, inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2016
* USD 688,378.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to
commercialize a unique scanning probe capable of mapping thermal properties with
nanoscale resolution. A large number of physical science, engineering, and
biological materials and phenomena require thermal conductivity and temperature
measurements with high spatial resolution and sensitivity. Yet such measurements
are challenging, with conventional thermal probe technology limited to a lateral
resolution of only about 100 nanometers. This phase II project will overcome the
major challenges of scanning thermal microscopy. The intellectual merits of the
proposed activity are related to new and innovative designs and processes to
realize thermal sensing elements integrated into a scanning probe design. This
design maximizes heat flow from a sample to the probe while minimizing
background heat transfer to areas away from the sensor. These devices will be
nanofabricated using both unique and scalable semiconductor processing
techniques to minimize the cost of manufacturing and ensure repeatability and
reproducibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is the availability of a high resolution thermal measurement
tool which will enable scientists and engineers to investigate new materials and
develop next-generation products. In the semiconductor industry, the tool will
aid in process monitoring, material characterization, and failure analysis. The
data storage industry will find applications ranging from mapping thermal
effects on recording head "fly heights" to the characterization of recording
technologies incorporating integrated laser pulsing to the investigation of
superparamagnetic effects which limit areal densities. These are both multi-
billion dollar industries that have broad impacts on society. Moreover,
applications of this new technology will be geared towards soft-structure
thermal mapping, which is not possible with current technologies because of
large probe size. These measurements will also be ideally suited for medical
research. For example, thermal microscopy of heated gold nanospheres localized
in tumors and magnetic nanoparticle tracking inside cellular structures under
radio frequency magnetic fields are areas where the impact of this technology
will be very high. Such research has the potential to improve therapeutic
interventions targeting a number of diseases.