* 1256253
* SBIR Phase II:  Simple Device for Measuring Nanosecond Laser Pulses
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Dongjoo Lee, Swamp Optics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase II project proposes to
develop a simple, single-shot, inexpensive, and complete laser-pulse measurement
device for ~100-picosecond to ~10-nanosecond pulses. Long (>10 nanosecond)
pulses are easily measured, and recently developed techniques completely measure
ultrashort pulses (<10 picosecond). But intermediate-length, ~1-nanosecond,
pulses remain only partially, roughly, and expensively measurable, and so
generally remain complex and unstable. This is unfortunate because most laser
pulses are in this intermediate range. The proposed measurement device is based
on frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG), a very successful technique for
measuring the complete intensity and phase vs. time of femtosecond pulses. The
main challenge in extending FROG to much longer pulses is the generation of a
many-nanosecond delay range on a single pulse-currently an unsolved problem in
general. The proposed innovation solves it by tilting the input pulse by a
remarkable ~89.99Â° without distorting it in time. As a result, one side of a
~1cm-wide beam precedes the other by over a meter. The proposed nanosecond FROG
can completely measure even complex pulses and will cost less than one tenth as
much as the high-bandwidth oscilloscopes currently used to only partially
measure such pulses.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project follows from the fact
that most pulsed lasers, from solid-state lasers to fiber lasers, emit pulses
about a nanosecond long. They are the least stable lasers in the world, yet they
have billions of dollars of applications, from materials processing to distance
measurements to remote sensing to medical, military, and scientific uses. With
the proposed device, nanosecond lasers will finally have a previously
unavailable device to monitor their performance and to diagnose problems before
expensive materials are ruined or patients are harmed. It will also be essential
for combining pulses from multiple fiber lasers, generally regarded as the next
important step in the development of compact and convenient high-power pulsed
lasers. Finally, using this device, laser engineers in general will be better
able to improve the quality of nanosecond laser pulses, thus greatly benefitting
all pulsed-laser applications. If the spectacular progress in much-shorter-pulse
lasers that occurred after analogous complete pulse-measurement technology was
introduced there is any indication, such an inexpensive and simple device for
measuring nanosecond pulses should make a huge difference in the generation of
cleaner, more stable nanosecond pulses and consequently in the many fields that
use such lasers.