* 1256403
* EAGER: Microfluidic platform for regulating transport in particle suspensions using synthetic cilia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

1256403 PI: Alexeev

The goal of this project is to develop a microfluidic platform for studying the
dynamic behavior of particle suspensions in microchannels with walls covered by
biomimetic synthetic cilia. The microfluidic platform will be used to test a
hypothesis that synthetic ciliated surfaces can be utilized to regulate
transport of microscopic particles suspended in a flowing fluid. Computer
simulations predict that synthetic cilia can create circulatory secondary flows
that can either direct microscopic particles towards the ciliated wall or
hydrodynamically repel them, and this cilium action is defined by their tilt
with respect to the flow direction. Responsive compliant cilia will be
manufactured from poly(dimethyl)siloxane (PDMS) with addition of magnetically-
sensitive nanoparticles using soft lithography technique. In an alternative
approach to make cilia responsive to magnetic field, cilia will be first
sputtered with a very thin layer of Ti and then they will be coated with Ni
using electroplating or e-beam evaporation. Experiments will be conducted in
microchannels with regular arrays of responsive cilia that can be bent by either
an imposed fluid flow or an external magnetic field. A combination of
experiments in the microfluidic test cell with direct numerical simulations will
be used to probe the interactions of the synthetic cilia with flowing fluids and
examine how they affect deposition of micrometer-sized particles.

By creating synthetic, controllable cilia that can be incorporated into
microfluidic devices, this project will establish a new approach for regulating
motion of microparticles in microfluidic systems. Synthetic ciliated surfaces
can be employed in a variety of applications that involve particle transport by
fluid flow. In particular, ciliated surfaces could be used to selectively
attract and trap particles from fluid. This will enable the development of novel
filtration and sensory methods that could detect and isolate specific synthetic
particles and biological cells. The ability of synthetic cilia to repel
suspended particles could be harnessed in creating new self-cleaning and
antifouling surfaces.