* 1256080
* SBIR Phase II:  CoPilot -   An Active Wheelchair Driving Aid for Independent Living
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Thomas Panzarella, Love Park Robotics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2016
* USD 750,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop and commercialize an&lt;br/&gt;active driving aid that enables semi-
autonomous, cooperative navigation of an electric-powered
wheelchair&lt;br/&gt;(EPW) both indoors and in dynamic, outdoor environments. It
uses intelligent sensing and drive control&lt;br/&gt;systems that work in
cooperation with the driver to aid in negotiating changing terrain, avoiding
obstacles/&lt;br/&gt;collisions, and maintaining a straight path. Additionally,
the system allows for higher-level path planning&lt;br/&gt;and the autonomous
execution of non-linear routes of travel in a safe and efficient manner. The
goal of&lt;br/&gt;the project is to enable active, safe, and independent living.
The innovation is that as an individual begins to&lt;br/&gt;lose cognitive,
perceptive, or motor function ? due to age, injury, or disease ? the system can
augment that&lt;br/&gt;loss because it can interpret the user?s intent and it
can ?see? out into the environment on their behalf. This&lt;br/&gt;exteroceptive
sensing capability is enabled by leveraging the latest in 3D imaging technology.
The team will&lt;br/&gt;exploit their experience in commercializing smart-EPW
technologies (including acquiring FDA approval),&lt;br/&gt;and will apply the
knowledge they have gained in developing autonomous driving solutions through
their&lt;br/&gt;participation in the DARPA Urban
Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will have significant impacts in the U.S. Socially,&lt;br/&gt;it will
have a direct positive effect on the quality of life and independence of the
elderly and disabled.&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging robotics for personal mobility can
help Americans with disabilities to participate fully in
basic&lt;br/&gt;activities such as employment, education, worship, recreation,
and other activities of community life often&lt;br/&gt;taken for granted.
Economically, a serious side effect of the rapidly growing elder population, to
over 70&lt;br/&gt;million by 2030, is that it will place unprecedented strains
on the U.S. healthcare system. This impact can&lt;br/&gt;be moderated in part by
enabling individuals to maintain their independence and live at home longer. It
is&lt;br/&gt;estimated that adding a single month of independence and health to
America?s elder population would save&lt;br/&gt;$5 billion, while decreasing
hospitalization and institutionalization 10% would save $50 billion
annually.&lt;br/&gt;As a result, technology for home-centered approaches to
healthcare, such as the proposed system, are necessary.&lt;br/&gt;In research
terms, while the immediate focus is in the field of assistive robotics, this
research will be&lt;br/&gt;extendable to general field and service robotics as
much of the work is related to 3D perception.