* 1256375
* LTREB:   Reconciling innovation and adaptation during ongoing range expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Alexander Badyaev, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 463,432.00

To what extent are current adaptations of animals shaped by past adaptations,
random events, or current necessities? Why do some species have exceptional
adaptive and invasive abilities while their relatives go extinct unable to cope
with environmental change? The principal investigator will address these
questions by studying a bird species that over the past seventy years had
successfully colonized much of North America, acquiring the widest ecological
range of any living bird and a range of diverse beak morphologies that enables
it to survive in new environments. Capitalizing on recently discovered
developmental mechanisms that produce such diversity, the principal investigator
proposes and tests a novel explanation of how complex structures, such as avian
beaks, can evolve rapidly and reversibly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
twenty years the principal investigator, in close collaboration with local
ranchers, citizens, tribal councils of three Indian reservations, as well as
college students, established a unique temporal sequence of study populations
that span hundreds of miles on both slopes of the Rocky Mountain Continental
Divide in Montana. This work has been broadly advertised because of the highly
visible nature of bird invasions, the well-established local media contacts, and
wide public involvement in this large-scale project. Further, the principal
investigator will continue to capitalize on the specialized undergraduate
recruitment program in the University of Arizona to train minority students in
modern scientific approaches to real life biological problems of species
invasion and adaptation.