* 1256147
* Conference Support for eMRS Symposium Q; Strasbourg, France; May 27 - 31, 2013
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Catherine Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 8,250.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1256147 PI: Murphy, Catherine ORG: University of
Illinois-UC

Title: Conference Support for eMRS Symposium Q

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The proposal requests NSF travel support for three young
scientists (or engineers) to attend the European Materials Research Society
(eMRS) Spring 2013 Meeting, Symposium Q, "Bionanomaterials for Imaging, Sensing,
and Actuating" in Strasbourg, France, May 27- 31, 2013. The supported
participants will include one untenured faculty member from a US institution,
and two graduate students or postdocs from underrepresented groups (women,
minorities) at U.S. institutions. Young US investigators are frequently unable
to participate in key international meetings due to limited funds. The upcoming
2013 eMRS Symposium Q will highlight the most exciting recent research in the
areas of nanobiotechnology, including (i) design, synthesis, and
characterization of biologically relevant nanomaterials; (ii) self-assembly and
self-organization; (iii) imaging of nanomaterial localization and fate in live
cells and model organisms; (iv) nanotoxicology - the effect of material, shape,
size, and surface properties on adverse responses from cells to organisms; (v)
applications of nanomaterials to biosensing, diagnostics, imaging and contrast
agents, vectorization; (vi) nanomedicine and nanopharmacy. Many eminent workers
in the area will attend and speak at this meeting. This proposal seeks to
increase the intellectual excitement and diversity of the meeting by supporting
three young investigators (one faculty member, two graduate students or
postdocs) to give last minute, "hot topic" talks at this Symposium.

BROADER IMPACTS: The location of the Symposium in France will provide an
opportunity for the young US participants to broaden their range of contacts and
experience. These participants will gain access to an international network of
colleagues and potential collaborators and mentors they would have not otherwise
realized. The organizers of Symposium Q (including the PI) will write a joint
Perspective article for ACS Nano, a major nanotechnology journal published by
the American Chemical Society, that will highlight the key topics, discussion
points, and emerging research directions as revealed at the Symposium,
propagating the ideas from the Symposium.