* 1256488
* Mechanisms of pheromone signaling in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Piali Sengupta, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2018
* USD 880,003.00

A major mode of communication among animals within a species is via chemicals
collectively called pheromones. Pheromone communication can alter both
development and behavior, but the exact response elicited is determined by both
the internal state and the external environment of the animal. The overall goal
of this project is to understand how animals integrate pheromone signals
together with other cues to direct the appropriate response. The nematode C.
elegans provides an excellent experimental system in which to study pheromone
signaling. These animals communicate with each other using a complex mixture of
chemicals, which regulate both the development of young animals, as well as
behaviors of adult animals. The genetic pathways by which pheromone signals are
sensed and interpreted in the context of other signals such as food availability
to regulate development will be identified and characterized. In collaboration
with physicists and engineers, assays will be designed to examine behavioral and
nervous system responses to pheromones in different environmental contexts, and
the underlying mechanisms of signal integration will be investigated. This work
will lead to a greater understanding of how animals interact with each other and
their environment, and how natural or artificial environmental disruptions
impact animal survival and reproduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
enhance student learning and training and improve public awareness of chemical
communication. In addition, it will promote interdisciplinary collaborations
among biologists, chemists, physicists and engineers improving on technology
development that can be used to understand how the sense of smell affects animal
behavior. This is important for overall human wellbeing since the sense of smell
is known to affect human stress, mental and physical performance, pain, sleep,
and weight control.