* 1256436
* SBIR Phase II:  Sulfur-infused carbon nanostructures for High Energy Density Secondary Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2015
* Navaneedhakrish Jayaprakash, NOHMS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 599,998.00

This proposed Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
novel nano- scale process for synthesizing sulfur-infused carbon composite
cathode materials to produce high- energy density lithium-sulfur (Li-S)
secondary batteries with a high rate of charge/discharge and extraordinarily
long cycle life. Lithium-sulfur batteries with a long cycle-life are a
potentially disruptive technology in the $11-$13 billion lithium-ion battery
market because of their three to fourfold energy density advantage over existing
chemistry platforms. The technical objectives of this Phase II proposal include
the optimization of the electrochemical performance of Sulfur-Carbon composite
materials as well developing and implementing scalable unit processes for
materials and cell manufacturing. This project will assemble and test pouch
cells in sufficient quantities to demonstrate &gt;600Wh/kg operation for 700
cycles with minimal product-to-product variability and reliable performance.
Success in Phase II will provide an important pathway to receiving institutional
venture funding and building joint-development partnerships to successfully
transition NOHMs unique Li-S battery technology to commercial markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
significant. Secondary lithium-sulfur batteries employing sulfur as the cathode
and metallic lithium as the anode offers the highest energy storage potential of
any two solid elements. They offer more than twice the specific energy of
currently deployed lithium ion battery technology with half the weight. Li-ion
batteries currently have a $14 billion market and are expected to reach $44
billion by 2020. They account for close to 75% of all secondary (rechargeable)
batteries used in portable electronics. If the potential of these batteries can
be harnessed and scaled economically, they are expected to disrupt current
lithium ion cell technology because of their higher energy density and the low
cost and wide-spread availability of sulfur. Li-S batteries could transform the
mobile device market, the electric vehicle market, and energy storage market,
enabling greater efficiency and power in all those sectors.