* 1256129
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Photodegredation in deserts: litter optical and structural considerations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Christopher Ruhland, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2019
* USD 294,433.00

Carbon cycle models are used to assess how future carbon policy scenarios will
influence atmospheric carbon pools and climate. The accuracy of those models
depends on our understanding of major pathways in the carbon cycle. One such
pathway, the decay of dead plant material (litter), is responsible for releasing
more carbon into the atmosphere each year than the combustion of fossil fuel.
Litter decay in forests is reasonably well understood, but both the rate and
temporal pattern of litter decay are different in deserts. The effects of direct
sunlight on litter may increase the rate of decay, while the lack of moisture
may reduce microbial activity and decrease the decay rate. This project will
test whether the optical properties of litter produced by desert plants
contribute to the different pattern of litter decay. Laboratory and field
experiments will be used to test the importance of sunlight as an agent of
litter decay relative to other mechanisms such as microbial activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, which will be conducted in the Sonoran
Desert, will contribute to our understanding of carbon cycling in deserts and in
other ecosystems where litter is exposed to intense sunlight (e.g. grasslands
and agricultural systems).The investigators will develop a website that contains
a guide to litter decomposition for K12 students, a companion guide to aid
teachers in conducting litter decomposition experiments, and they will solicit
K12 teachers to take part in this experiment. This project will provide research
experience for K12 students and teachers, and undergraduate and graduate
students.