* 1256689
* Origin, diversification, and integration of nutrition-dependent development in horned beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2019
* USD 750,071.00

The forms and functions of organisms and their parts emerge in development
through the interactions between genetic inputs and environmental conditions.
Changes in form and function, whether during development or evolution, must
arise through changes in these interactions. This research seeks to identify and
characterize which genes and developmental processes that (a) enable the
differentiation of males and females, and (b) facilitate development in high and
low nutritional conditions. Lastly (c), it investigates how changes in the
interactions between gender- and nutrition-specific development allow the same
traits in males and females to exhibit different responses to nutrition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives are addressed by advancing the study of a
specific group of insects famous for how their development and evolution have
been shaped by gender- and environment-specific differentiation: horned beetles.
Horned beetle species differ greatly in the extent of male-female dimorphism
(ranging from none to extreme) as well as nutrition-induced differences (ranging
from none to gradual to discrete, akin to caste differences in ants and bees).
Most importantly, horned beetles are easily kept in captivity and amenable to
experimental analysis, including genetic manipulations and genome-wide
expression studies. This research uses these approaches to investigate
regulation and evolution of gender- and nutrition-dependent growth and
differentiation. In so doing it addresses a fundamental, long-standing, and
largely unresolved question in biology: how do genetic, developmental, and
environmental mechanisms interact to shape the formation, integration, and
diversification of complex traits?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research interfaces
tightly with several educational and outreach efforts. (1) Using a collaboration
with a local children's museum this research will help provide training and
educational resources in insect biology to approximately 200 local and regional
K-12 teachers over the course of 3 years. (2) This research will help train at
least 8 young scientists in intensive interdisciplinary research. (3) Lastly, it
will facilitate educational outreach by helping recruit 8 high school teachers
and 8 minority high school students for summer research immersion and introduce
them to research in genetics, development, and evolution.