* 1256163
* Envisioning Success:  A Workshop for Next Generation EarthCube Scholars and Scientists
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 99,978.00

The diversity of data and data types in the geosciences and their dispersal
among various academic institutions and federal agencies, all of which have
their own data formats and associated search and discovery criteria have
prevented maximum effective utilization of this tremendous wealth of
information. To ameliorate this situation, a new NSF initiative, called
EarthCube, which is jointly funded by the Directorate of Geosciences and the
Office of Cyberinfrastructure, was initiated in 2011 to create an interoperable
and integrated data and knowledge management for the geo- and environmental
sciences. An integral part of the process is geoscience and cyberinfrastructure
community engagement, at all levels, to ensure that EarthCube's final design and
implementation serves all end user needs. Crucial to the success of EarthCube is
its ability to serve the future needs of geoscientists and its ability to scale
to new developments in computer science and technology. To enable input from
early career geo-and cyber scientists, a workshop, focused on the expected
career trajectory of early career scientists likely to be end users and
infrastructure developers, has been funded to examine their needs and to project
into the future how these early career professionals envision how EarthCube will
impact their science and career trajectories. The workshop is being held at the
Carnegie Institution of Washington. It is being hosted by a diverse team of
convenors and is focused on collecting input from this crucial early career
demographic. The two-day workshop will involve participants from 41 different
disciplines within the geo and cyber sciences from around the US. Broader
impacts of the work include providing key stakeholder input into the design of a
major NSF activity focused on building infrastructure for science and engaging
early career scientists in the process.