* 1256993
* Integrating Fossil Data into Likelihood-based Phylogenetic Analyses with Trilobites as a Model System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Bruce Lieberman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2019
* USD 449,216.00

While a rich set of statistical models have been developed to study evolution
using DNA sequence data, many biological questions require information from
organisms which are only known from the fossil record. In this project, the
investigators will build models that account for biases inherent in using trait
data from fossil species. The models will be tested and evaluated using the
exceptionally rich fossil record associated with two groups of trilobites.
Existing statistical tools will be extended to take full advantage of the
estimates of the age of fossils. The new methods will be incorporated into
widely used, open source software. Online educational materials in the form of
virtual labs will be developed and distributed on the
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the computational and
statistical machinery required to integrate information from fossil species into
studies of the evolutionary tree of life. This will allow researchers to study
extinction and speciation with unprecedented precision. Understanding these
processes is crucial to understanding how Earth's biota will respond to the
current biodiversity crisis. The virtual labs will teach junior high school
students what data from these beautifully preserved organisms teaches us about
evolutionary processes.