* 1256150
* Collaborative Proposal: Millipede Systematics: Developing phylogenomic, classification, and taxonomic resources for the future
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Petra Sierwald, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 04/30/2019
* USD 201,780.00

The arthropod class Diplopoda (the millipedes) comprises ~12,000 described
species that are distributed worldwide in nearly every biome. The group has a
deep evolutionary history that includes some of the very first terrestrial
animals, dating from the mid-Silurian over 400 million years ago. Despite their
ecological importance as decomposers in forests, wealth of diversity (estimated
20,000-80,000 species), and prominence as chemical warriors owing to their vast
array of defense secretions, the group is woefully understudied. The research
team will revise the current ordinal and family-level classification systems
using a modern phylogenomic framework based on next generation sequence data and
then employ these data to explore the evolution of chemical defense secretions
and their precursors.

This project seeks to greatly enhance the accessibility of millipede diversity
through the development of a morphological atlas for the group, production of
the first illustrated key to millipede families, and publication of the first
complete millipede species catalog. The project team will develop a strong
collaborative research and training network and will partner with collaborators
worldwide. Training in millipede systematics, morphology, and genomics will
include a broad range of individuals from high school students and teachers,
undergraduate researchers, a postdoctoral trainee, to students participating in
organized training workshops, to be held in the Southeastern US and in Bangkok,
Thailand.