* 1256446
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Proteolysis-based Tools for Metabolic Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Jason Kelly, Ginkgo BioWorks
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,314,964.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project aims to engineer microbes
for the cost-effective production of specialty chemicals. Currently, engineered
microbial strains bear mutations that increase the production of chemicals of
interest by inhibiting the cell's ability to produce off pathway chemicals.
These "loss-of-function" mutations are critical as they effectively channel the
cell's metabolic flux toward the product of interest. This both boosts the
production efficiency and eases downstream purification by eliminating the
accumulation of undesirable but chemically-similar contaminants. Unfortunately,
these mutations may also decrease the fitness of the cells and, as a result, the
growth media must be supplemented with costly nutrients. Technical research
herein will assess the feasibility of applying novel regulated proteolysis
technology to simultaneously direct maximal metabolic flux toward the target
chemical of interest while avoiding the need to supplement the growth media. If
successful, this technology would provide a great cost savings and enable
fermentative production to be applied more broadly in the production of
specialty chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to provide a stable and cost-effective fermentative
production route to a specialty chemical. Fermentative production of chemicals
offers many advantages over traditional petrochemical or extraction-based
production processes. Petrochemical production maintains the nation?s reliance
on an unsustainable feedstock (oil) and also leads to national security issues
as the US is largely dependent on foreign oil sources. Chemical production via
extraction from plant materials also has ecological challenges. The process
often uses toxic solvents, and may rely on unsustainable farming practices for
many plants that are not traditional food crops. Engineered microbes fermented
on sugar feedstock produced using high-efficiency agricultural practices offer a
stable alternative for producing specialty chemicals, both in terms of supply
and price.