* 1256792
* LTREB Renewal:   Population and community ecology of desert winter annuals
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/29/2020
* USD 487,500.00

This project extends a 30-year study of desert plant populations to understand
how populations persist and coexist in the face of short-term environmental
variation and long-term climate shifts. Data on seed germination, plant
survival, and reproduction will continue to be collected to determine how seeds
are triggered to germinate and when - or why - germination is delayed to take
advantage of different environmental conditions. These decisions are largely
responsible for changes in plant abundance and species coexistence in this
community. Field measures will be combined with experiments to develop models to
explore how seed 'banks,' or accumulations of ungerminated seeds, buffer
populations and communities against short- and long-term environmental
variation. These models will also be used to investigate how differences among
species promote their coexistence and species diversity and to predict how
desert plant communities will respond to emerging novel climatic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like human communities, natural communities are
challenged by increasing environmental variation and shifting climate. This
research will determine how plant communities cope with normal environmental
variability and how they will respond to a hotter, drier, more variable
environment. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive hands-on training
in research that complements formal coursework. Several activities will extend
the impact of the research to the public, K-12 students and teachers, and
ecosystem management professionals. These include an educational kiosk at the
University of Arizona's Biosphere 2 facility, coordination with the Arizona
Center for STEM Teachers, and participation in a new Center for Environmental
Biology that brings together land managers and university scientists from the
southwestern U.S.