* 1256526
* OPUS:  Understanding Ecosystem Processes in Response to Climate Variation in a Subalpine Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Russell Monson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 147,482.00

This project involves an integrative synthesis of 52 studies published by Dr.
Monson over the past 14 years on how a subalpine forest exchanges carbon dioxide
and water with the atmosphere. The project will enhance the utility of this body
of work, improving its potential to inform stakeholders and land managers about
the causes of several environmental challenges that have emerged in the Western
US. These include an epidemic pine beetle outbreak, mass tree die-off due to
persistent drought, high frequencies of wildfires, and uncertainty in the
contribution of forests to regional carbon budgets. The investigator plans to:
extract new, longer-term insights from a 14-year data set of forest carbon and
water fluxes; use the longer-term insights to re-assess conclusions from the
previously published papers; and disseminate the synthesis to those attempting
to understand and manage forest ecosystems of the Western US. The synthesis will
be conducted using an advanced computer modeling procedure known as Artificial
Neural Network (ANN) analysis. The ANN analysis will be conducted in a manner
that elucidates how changes in weather and climate affect the ability of the
forest to exchange carbon and water with the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the work of a Graduate Research
Assistant (GRA) to implement the ANN analysis. The results will be disseminated
to the through: (1) an article intended for professional ecologists; (2) an
invited Spotlight Article intended for foresters and land managers; (3) a book
chapter intended for beginning graduate students; and (4) a chapter intended for
college undergraduate students in a Wiki and hardbound book.