* 1256100
* The Role of Software and Software Institutes in Computational Science Over Time
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Miron Livny, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 74,430.00

The workshop will bring together Principle Investigators of the leading software
cyberinfrastructure projects and discuss issues relevant to the community as we
move into the future. In 2011 and 2012 the OCI Software Infrastructure for
Sustained Innovation (SI2) program funded software efforts in small development
efforts that can provide software pieces that can be integrated into the larger
cyberinfrastructure, and larger collaborations that were delivering significant
community software. In addition, new SI2 awards aimed at conceptualizing large-
scale software institutes, aimed at providing a fabric for the software needed
by domain scientists to achieve breakthroughs in their intra and inter-
disciplinary efforts, will be awarded. New NSF initiatives such as EarthCube are
defining roadmaps for cyberinfrastructure development in Earth sciences. This
workshop will bring together the Principle Investigators of the recent SI2
awards to discuss potential synergies and collaborations, define challenges
ahead, discuss the relationship of the SI2 efforts to the planned Software
Institutes, and explore the relationship of the OCI-funded software in the
context of the broad NSF initiatives such as EarthCube, DataWay, and other
planned community-focused efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals,
the workshop will focus on these main themes: (i) Discussing SI2 projects within
the context of SI2 Institutes and NSF-wide initiative such as EarthCube,
DataWay, and others; (ii) sharing experiences in building quality software and
services; (iii) fostering collaboration and providing incentives for
collaboration and cyberinfrastructure development as a career; and (iv)
sustaining the software capabilities in the long term, defining software
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will solicit participation from major
science and engineering projects that rely on the national cyberinfrastructure
for their computations and data management needs. Their participation will help
ensure that the cyberinfrastructure software developed as part of SI2 projects
will be relevant and broadly applicable to a number of science and engineering
domains. The results of this workshop will then potentially guide
cyberinfrastructure development and testing in the future.