* 1256782
* Nitric oxide-dependent synaptic plasticity in the retina
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Evanna Gleason, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2018
* USD 478,836.00

This project addresses the role of nitric oxide in generating flexibility in
neuronal communication in the central nervous system. Nitric oxide is a gaseous
signaling molecule that is generated by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase in
response to neuronal activity. Communication between neurons occurs at synapses
and the activity of neurons and neuronal circuits are dependent upon the balance
of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic interactions. Inhibition is dependent upon
the concentration of chloride in the neuronal cytoplasm and it has been
demonstrated that nitric oxide increases chloride concentration in the
cytoplasm. Increasing cytosolic chloride has the effect of either reducing
inhibition or converting it into excitation. Hence, nitric oxide can switch
inhibition to excitation and alter the activity of neuronal circuits. This
project will determine the sources of internal chloride that can be released by
nitric oxide and the mechanisms involved in the release. The goals of the
project will be achieved using a combination of electrophysiology and molecular
biology. This work is fundamental to our understanding of nervous system
function because control of cytosolic chloride by nitric oxide is a previously
undiscovered mechanism that dramatically increases the flexibility of normally
inhibitory synapses. Furthermore, the project explores the nitric oxide release
of internal chloride in a retinal neuron but this chloride release has also been
demonstrated in neurons from elsewhere in the brain. As such, these results will
have important ramifications for regulation of synaptic function in multiple
regions of the central nervous system. The broader impacts include participation
by graduate students and undergraduates in the PI's laboratory. The PI will
participate in the College of Science Louisiana Biomedical Research Network
Summer Research Program, and the LSU Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Undergraduate Summer Research Program. In these programs, the PI will recruit
underrepresented minorities and women. In addition, the PI is a mentor at the
Louisiana Math and Science Teacher Institute, which provides additional science
education for local public school teachers.