* 1256200
* IDBR:  Development of a device to improve accuracy and reduce variability of in situ fluorometric measurements in aquatic environments
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Todd Miller, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2018
* USD 375,948.00

An award has been made to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee to develop a new
device that improves automated monitoring of algal pigments in aquatic
environments. The ability to monitor algal pigments such as chlorophyll and
phycocyanin in lakes, rivers, and oceans is central to our understanding of
aquatic ecosystems and algal ecology. Autonomous in situ fluorometric sensors
allow these pigments to be measured at highly resolved timescales (minutes to
hours) on a continuous basis. These sensors have advanced our understanding of
processes that occur at subdaily timescales and on day/night cycles. Currently
the interpretation of this sensor data is complicated by at least two major
confounding variables. Fluorescent yield per unit of pigment varies by orders of
magnitude due to algal light history since light exposed cells produce a lower
fluorescent yield per pigment molecule. In addition, extreme variability in
sensor signals (i.e. from detection limits to sensor saturation)occurs due to
the heterogeneous distribution of algal cells in colonies or particles. No
technology currently available addresses these issues. A device will be
designed, built, and tested that significantly reduces these confounding
variables. The "Chamber for Pigment Incubation and Grinding," or CPIG
autonomously samples an aliquot of water, holds it in the dark for a
predetermined period of time allowing for dark recovery of light exposed algal
pigments and homogenizes the sample before taking fluorescent measurements using
commercially available fluorometric sensors. The device accepts a variety of in
situ fluorometers, is completely programmable via USB input and can interface
with typical data logger/modem setups used at continuous monitoring stations
globally. It is shoeboxed sized, small enough for installation on data buoys or
at fixed monitoring stations and has low power
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ fluorometers are used by thousands of
scientists and resource managers around the world engaged in water quality
monitoring. They have the potential to reduce time-Â­consuming manual water
sampling and costly laboratory analyses of algal pigments. The CPIG will
significantly reduce two of the largest confounding variables affecting in situ
fluorometric measurements making them more widely applicable at thousands of
water quality monitoring sites across the globe. The project advances science
education by supporting a graduate dissertation research project and engages
undergraduate research fellows from underrepresented groups, including incoming
freshmen and McNair Scholars. Data from the device will be deployed at
monitoring stations in the U.S. and internationally, providing monitoring data
for a variety of stakeholders. Furthermore, the device will be introduced to the
Global Lakes Ecological Observatory (GLEON) network, a grass roots international
organization composed of hundreds of scientists and students using and managing
in situ sensors deployed in lakes around the world. All data produced by the
CPIG testing will be immediately available for free via GLEON online databases.
This project crosses disciplines as it engages undergraduate students enrolled
in a marketing course within the UWM School of Business. These students will
design a marketing plan for the CPIG in order to advertise, and disseminate the
device to the larger scientific community while simultaneously learning about
challenges in marketing scientific instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funded by
the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR) program in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure.