* 1256510
* SBIR Phase II:  Batch Wafer-Scale Fabrication of Improved Probe Tips for Scanned Probe Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Scott Lockledge, Tiptek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 839,296.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will perfect a
proprietary batch-scale processing technique for fabricating ultrahard and
ultrasharp atomic force microscopy (AFM) tips. The new process involves two
steps. First, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is used to coat the tips with a
chemically inert, highly conductive, and extremely hard material. Second, a
patented process that we have developed, field directed sputter sharpening
(FDSS), sharpens the probe tip to atomic dimensions (1- 4 nm radius of curvature
at the tip apex). Hard, sharp tips are of considerable scientific and market
interest because tip geometry and mechanical properties significantly impact the
results of AFM measurements. The current project will carry out research to
perfect a batch wafer-scale process able to manufacture hundreds of tips at
once. In order to bring the technique to market, the following research and
development tasks will be carried out: (a) optimization of process conditions to
reproducibly sharpen arrays of AFM probes fabricated on 4-inch wafers, (b)
investigation of the ability to coat and sharpen AFM probes with a variety of
hard film materials, and (c) assessment of the performance of batch-fabricated
probe tips for market-driven probe microscopy applications.

The broader/commercial impact of the project arises from the development of
robust, reproducible, and durable tips that are more resistant to wear (due to
the high hardness) and have favorable characteristics for AFM imaging (small
radius of curvature, controlled aspect ratio, and electrically conductive). The
project will benefit the academic and industrial communities who use scanning
probe microscopy imaging. Although AFM and related probe microscopies have many
advantages over electron microscopy (e.g., they can be used under ambient
conditions and they can be easily interfaced with optical spectroscopy), one
significant drawback is that the probe tips have limited lifetimes owing to wear
during use. The development and commercial introduction of probe tips that are
ultrasharp, very hard, conductive, and relatively inexpensive will significantly
enhance the capabilities of AFM and related techniques such as scanning
capacitance microscopy (SCM), a technique of great interest to the
microelectronics industry because it is useful for the on-board testing of
integrated circuits for delay faults. The research will also be of benefit to
those who image insulating surfaces such as polymers and other soft materials
where static charge build-up limits efficacy, and to those developing multi-tip
probe arrays for lithographic and nanomanufacturing applications.