* 1256754
* OPUS: Soil organisms, carbon and nitrogen interact in the control of soil organic matter dynamics in ecosystem functioning
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Eldor Paul, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 142,626.00

Carbon and nitrogen in soil, and the microorganisms that both form and degrade
it, constitute a critically important natural resource. Soil organisms likely
harbor the greatest biodiversity on this globe and by their decomposition
activities maintain the global carbon and nitrogen cycles. In this OPUS project,
hundreds of papers will be digitized for further analysis and placed on the
internet for international usage. Breakthroughs in instrumentation and molecular
biology are providing new ways to interpret the extensive historical data.
Analyses of all these data will lead to new interpretations on the age, chemical
characteristics of soil organic matter and identities and activities of soil
microorganisms. The information will be used to produce a series of syntheses to
help scientists better predict and mediate interactions between this important
resource and other aspects of global change. Soil organic matter and soil
organisms form the base of the world's food and fiber production, and are
equally important in rangelands as they are in forests. Improved biogeochemical
models will help predict future changes and will influence management decisions.
The information gained will be especially useful to scientists, and will also be
presented in formats such that news media can use to inform the general public.
Knowledge derived from this synthesis will be incorporated into the next
generation of university textbooks, as well as public school curricula.