* 1256774
* EAGER: Anticipating The Future of STEM+SC Interactive Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Alan Kay, ViewPoints Research Institute Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The PIs' vision is that high school and college students of the future will be
fluently and routinely able to better understand "important ideas" by creating
dynamic simulations via a new kind of literacy akin to both mathematics and
writing. That is, they will be able to express their understanding of how things
work -- devices, systems, and phenomena -- in the language of systems and
computing. The kinds of "important ideas" the PIs refer to include systems- and
process-related ideas across STEM and other disciplines, including, for example,
history and governance. The proposed new medium for expression is called
"Dynamic Simulation", and in this EAGER project, the PIs are identifying what a
dynamic simulation needs to include so that a new and better medium for
representing, understanding, exploring, and communicating complex relationships
can be developed. The idea is that this new medium will allow more complex
relationships among functions and workings of systems to be expressed than can
currently be done with easily accessible mathematical, visual, programming, and
natural languages. It is expected that the new dynamic language for expression
will be a qualitatively new and considerably better follow on to systems such as
Etoys and Scratch. Those languages, though very successfully used to express
important ideas of elementary-school and middle-school complexity, are too
limited for expression of more sophisticated systems-related ideas. It is
envisioned that the new language will allow expression of relationships in
natural systems, social systems, technological systems, and the biological,
psychological, and anthropological systems we are as individuals. Furthermore,
the goal is that use of such expressive tools and the representations will allow
learners and users to "see" the dynamic artifacts they are creating from a
variety of different perspectives, allowing them to extract meaning and
significance that otherwise might be too abstract to envision. Foundations for
bringing the vision to fruition are in computing itself. As the proposal states,
"[s]ince computing is about processes, the science of computing is the science
of processes. And within computing, as with many other fields since the 17th
century, science and engineering are in a dynamic yin-yang of making and
experimenting, observing, and creating models to further both arts."

As appropriate to the EAGER program, this is "vision-directed" research; it is
focused on what might be and its activities are aimed toward "problem finding"
so that a later concrete plan can be formulated. The results of problem finding
will be concrete characterizations of many of the problems that will need to be
solved to turn parts of the vision into reality. The claim is that we can help
our youth better understand process- and systems-oriented phenomena by giving
them better means of expressing their understanding. What is needed for that is
an expressive computational language that will allow them to express
relationships between parts of a system and the ways those parts interact with
each other in a dynamic way. The expressive language, the focus of this early
project, is a first step in achieving the bigger vision and is conceived as a
concrete resource that will allow others to envision educational possibilities.