* 1256642
* SBIR Phase II:  Evaporative Cooling Building Envelope Materials Created from Recycled Glass
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Grant Marchelli, EnVitrum Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 531,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on
the reuse of waste glass to generate high-value replacements for traditional
masonry products. Masonry manufacturers cannot meet the construction industry's
needs with their status quo product and are therefore losing market share. The
industry seeks products with higher quality, consistency and performance that
address environmental concerns, while remaining cost competitive. The material
which has been developed meets or exceeds all required performance standards,
and its high recycle content and low embodied energy significantly reduce
production costs. The research objectives for this Phase II project include
scale-up of this process via extrusion and expansion of the usable waste glass
supply. The transition to extrusion will require increasing the plasticity of
our material and research will result in extrudates that are compatible with
masonry production equipment. The effort will also explore the impacts of
contamination on the microstructure and mechanical performance of glass
materials sintered at low temperature; this work will be the first of its kind.
The ultimate project goal is successful development of the first high-recycle
content glass composite paste that is ready for industrial manufacturing via
cold extrusion.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant.
Successful completion of the Phase II activities will have a positive impact on
both the glass recycling and construction industries. One key result will be the
development of a novel, high-efficiency glass manufacturing process. This work
will contribute to the scientific understanding of plasticity theory and
mechanical behavior with respect to glass composites and porous materials. The
evaluation of organic and inorganic contaminants, as they relate to advanced
glass processing technologies, will be the first research of its kind. This
research will provide a commercial outlet for waste glass, particularly the vast
quantity that cannot currently be recycled, and therefore is simply hauled off
to landfills. This material will allow manufacturers to adopt high-value, cost-
competitive product lines and will also bring value to the construction industry
by providing a truly green alternative to traditional facing materials. The
environmental and societal impacts of this novel building material include
improving environmental quality by decreasing energy consumption and associated
greenhouse gas emissions, and also by minimizing the burden on solid waste
storage infrastructure.