* 1256221
* WIDER: EAGER: Metrics to Shift Institutional Culture Toward Evidence-Based Instructional Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2013,03/31/2016
* James Fairweather, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 294,597.00

The Association of American Universities (AAU) has launched a five-year
initiative with the overall goal of influencing the culture of STEM departments
at AAU universities so that they will use sustainable, student-centered,
evidence-based, active learning pedagogy in their classes, particularly at the
freshman and sophomore levels. Reform of undergraduate STEM education has
focused until now on change at the level of faculty and student activity or
student support services, with much less attention to cultural change at the
institutional level. The crucial first step in the AAU initiative, supported by
this grant, is to gather baseline data to identify institutional objectives in
improving STEM education, and articulate the problems these objectives seek to
address. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project is focusing on metrics
for assessing institutional support of evidence-based instruction for those
institutions making a public commitment to be part of a cultural shift to
evidence-based instruction as a new norm. Metrics are needed that can be used
both to assess institutional culture with respect to evidence-based teaching,
and to measure the impact of actions taken to increase the extent of use of
evidence-based teaching. The centerpiece of the AAU initiative is developing a
framework to foster institutional commitment to effective STEM teaching and
learning practices. This framework is being informed by a set of demonstration
projects at AAU universities. These demonstration projects are being selected
based on their commitment to STEM pedagogical reform and to represent the
variety of challenges confronting universities in improving STEM undergraduate
education. The project is assessing their effectiveness at reform efforts, which
is providing benchmarks by which the success of reforms can be judged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will result in a more complete
documentation of the status of current efforts to document pedagogy in
undergraduate STEM courses and a template for baseline data collection for
demonstration sites: both to guide their own projects and to share results with
other institutions.