* 1256188
* IDBR: Development of  Higher Eigenmode Ultrasound Bioprobe for Sub-Cellular Biological Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2019
* USD 545,559.00

There is an acute and timely need for innovative and non-invasive imaging
modalities in biology, especially to identify early manifestation of disease
state, and efficacy of potential cell-based therapeutics. This project at
Northwestern University will help develop higher eigenmode "Ultrasound Bioprobe"
for sub-cellular biological imaging. The objective of this project is to develop
Ultrasound Bioprobe with higher order harmonics capabilities to detect and track
subcellular defects at nanoscale resolution under physiological conditions.
Anticipated applications will investigate the dynamics of endothelial cells
under cellular transfection to develop potential therapeutics for acute lung
injuries in the early stage. It will further be extended to study the
progression of tumorous cells at onset of their development. In Ultrasound
Bioprobe, the cantilever monitors the perturbation to the surface acoustic
waves, especially their phase, which carry information about embedded or buried
sub-structures reflected in the scattering of specimen acoustic waves due to the
difference in their respective viscoelastic properties. Variations in the
amplitude and phase of the bulk wave due to the presence of the sub-surface
nanostructures/defects as well as the variations in near surface affect the
amplitude and the phase of the difference frequency signal (beats) which is
detected by cantilever. These variations are used to create spatial mappings
generated by subsurface and near-surface features/defects. To realize these
efforts requires a way to combine scanning probe microscopy hardware,functional
electronics and its integration into an FPGA (field programmable gate arrays)
for simultaneous generation and detection of multiple harmonics in scan using
labVIEW codes. By leveraging the nanoscale resolution of scanning probe
microscope and use of higher order harmonics, this innovative approach may
provide a new way to perform sub-cellular biological imaging of living cells in
close to real-time, uninhibited by traditionally cited challenges in electron
microscopy methods that require chemically fixing of the cells or cryo
preservation and conventional confocal/fluorescent microscopies that require
fluorescent tags to image and have micro scale resolutionThe ability of the
Ultrasound Bioprobe to detect features at nanometer scale has important
implications to study the nanomechanics of human pulmonary artery endothelial
cells which are transfected with plasmid. It will help understand how to
regulate endothelial cell structural arrangements that result in the barrier
function properties of the pulmonary vasculature and to assist therapeutics
targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of the project promises to
open new vistas in high resolution non-destructive and non-invasive imaging of
biological and soft structures under physiologically viable conditions. The
ultrasound bioprobe will be positioned to provide abroad user base with exposure
to the developed technology. Once developed, the technology will be accessible
to other institutions, broadening their user base to include life sciences. In
undergraduate course material, the PI?s will use examples from this research
project to highlight how integration of engineering and physical principles is
incorporated into real biological research. The PI?s will promote the active
participation of women and other minorities in science and participation in
classroom visits to elementary schools through the Science Chicago program in
Midwest and Chicago public institutions for broader audience. The education plan
focuses on development of a teaching module in sub-cellular imaging which
includes hand-on-laboratory demo and classroom tutorials. The educational
objectives will be achieved by (a) providing hand-on, team experience to promote
active and collaborative learning; (b) exposing promising students at the
undergraduate level to research opportunities in emerging field of sub-cellular
biological imaging, and (c) to recruit and retain traditionally under-
represented students though MIN (Minority Internships in Nanotechnology)
programs which provide opportunities for undergraduates to participate in hands-
on research in the area of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thsi award is
co-funded by CBET/Biophotonics Program, and Instrument Development for
Biological Research (IDBR).