* 1256583
* SBIR Phase II:  Epitaxially Grown GaSb Thin Films on GaAs Substrates For Near-Field Conversion of Heat to Electricity
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Jose Borrego, MTPV LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,089,905.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project goal is to
produce GaSb photovoltaic devices of multicell (MIM) construction for TPV use.
Current devices use single cell. MIM devices have significant advantages over
single cell in efficiency and cost. A MIM device is composed of many sub-cells
physically isolated on the same substrate. This proportionally increases output
voltage and decreases output current resulting in lower internal power loss. To
date there have been no publications describing MIM Ge or GaSb MIM devices. The
Phase I Program demonstrated that high lifetime GaSb can be epitaxially grown on
semi insulating GaAs and an IR&amp;D program demonstrated that 50 subcell MIM
devices can be fabricated from epitaxial germanium on semi insulating GaAs.
Combining these elements will produce an ideal device. Although the Ge MiM is
suitable for TPV a GaSb MIM would give a three to tenfold improvement in
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is to economically &amp; efficiently recover waste heat as
electricity. 57% of all power generated in the US is rejected as waste heat,
however, to date there have been no successful attempts to recover this heat as
electricity as opposed to steam for heating purposes. MTPV is developing a
thermophotovoltaic solution to address this problem and is a pioneer in the use
of near-field evanescent coupling to dramatically increase the power density
obtainable from a heat source at a given temperature. MTPV has published a clear
demonstration of this phenomenon and is engaged in commercializing its use.
Silicon emitter chips designed to transfer energy from a heat source in such a
manner as to facilitate the formation of a sub-micron gap are currently being
produced in a foundry as well as both single cell and MIM Ge devices. The unique
housing that is required to contain these chips and allow insertion into an 1100
degree C furnace is designed/ fabricated at MTPV?s facility where power
generation tests are conducted.