* 1256114
* Understanding the chromatin remodeling factor kismet in glutamatergic neuron development and function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Daniel Marenda, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2018
* USD 750,399.00

The proper regulation of gene expression is critical for the normal development
and function of the nervous system. "Chromatin remodeling", or the alteration of
DNA structure, is a key step in gene regulation and is an important process in
nervous system development and function. In mammals, the amino acid glutamate
mediates the majority of signaling in the nervous system, and regulates
processes that underlie learning, memory, and neurodegeneration. Factors that
control the development and function of glutamatergic neurons (neurons that use
glutamate) are of considerable and broad interest. Yet, these factors are
largely unknown. The objective of this project is to better understand the
function of the chromatin remodeling protein Kismet in the development and
function of glutamatergic neurons. This proposal will utilize both genetics and
molecular biology to accomplish this goal. This project will determine which
signals activate Kismet, and subsequently, which genes Kismet activates in
glutamatergic neurons to regulate their function.

The broader impacts of this project are manifold. First, though these studies
are particular to Kismet function in glutamatergic neurons, the results from
this research will help us understand how chromatin remodeling factors regulate
the function of other cells as well. Second, this project will provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students to perform directed research in the
Marenda laboratory. Third, this award will support a hybrid class for
undergraduate students that will addresses a significant problem in multiple
universities: accommodating the large number of undergraduate students who want
to participate in undergraduate research, but can not due to limited faculty to
student ratios. Importantly, the outcome of this hybrid class is assessed
through pre- and post-class surveys. Therefore, this project not only addresses
important questions in neural development, but also addresses important concerns
in science education and training.