* 1256675
* Temporal profiling and functional analysis of temperature-dependent gonad determination
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Blanche Capel, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 700,183.00

Gonad determination, the process by which an individual initiates development as
a male or female, is controlled by many mechanisms. In mammals, including
humans, genad determination is insensitive to environmental influences like
temperature and external hormones, but instead is responsive to a dominant
genetic switch on the Y chromosome, such that individuals with a Y become males
and those without a Y become females. Other vertebrates such as alligators and
many turtles, are sensitive to non-genetic influences such as egg incubation
temperature. In these species, no genetic determinant of gonads is known, and
little is known about how temperature or other environmental signals influence
gonad determination. The goal of this project is to identify common principles
that govern gonad determination across vertebrate species. Using methods
developed with mice, experiments will be carried out to determine the sequential
gene expression events induced by temperature that initiate male and female
development in turtles, and to identify the similarities and differences between
turtles and mice. Preliminary results from incubating turtle eggs at the
midpoint between male- and female-producing temperatures suggest that an
additional underlying temperature-independent mechanism exists for determining
gonads exists in turtles. This project will characterize this additional
pathway, pinpoint when and how temperature influences the outcome, and provide
large quantities of sequence and expression data valuable to this and other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work provides an outstanding opportunity for
training in evolutionary and developmental biology for Duke graduate and
undergraduate students, and visiting high school students from the North
Carolina School for Science and Math. Special emphasis will be placed on
introducing young students, including those from underrepresented groups, to
field work during the summer turtle season. In addition, we plan to use this
project to stimulate scientific literacy by engaging the public in conversations
about basic science, the impact of the environment, and conservation via the
Science Caf√© in Durham.