* 1256582
* SBIR Phase II:  Advancing a Novel Low-voltage Electric Arc Method to Oxidize Organic Material in Contaminated Water
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Justin Bzdek, Symbios Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,151,436.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will support the
final development and commercialization of Symbios Technologies plasma treatment
system to allow produced water in the oil and gas industry to be effectively
treated, thereby allowing its safe discharge to surface waters or recycling to
stimulate production in new wells, rather than being disposed of in injection
wells. Produced water is the water brought to the surface, with or without
hydraulic fracturing, along with the intended fuel products during extraction of
oil, gas, and coal bed methane from formations underground. In general, produced
water is contaminated with hydrocarbons, salts, and harmful microorganisms,
meaning that it must be treated before it can be discharged or reused for
agriculture and other purposes. This is an important environmental, public
safety, and economic problem in the US. Research conducted during this project
will be used to evaluate reactor improvements including process sensors and
control systems, electrode geometries and surface coatings, degradation of
contaminants in produced water, field testing, and techno-economic modeling. The
anticipated technical results are that the Symbios plasma system will degrade
hydrocarbon contaminants and kill microorganisms in frac flowback or produced
water, leaving the waters suitable for safe reuse or discharge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
that it will facilitate cleanup and reuse of a critical resource, water, in the
oil and gas production industry, with crucial societal benefits for protecting
the environment, guarding human safety, and keeping domestic energy costs down.
The proposed technology is based on an innovative, low-voltage plasma discharge
that creates powerful oxidizing species for destroying biological and chemical
contaminants in produced water. Symbios Technologies has developed relationships
and executed agreements with key companies in the produced water treatment
field, which have identified numerous near-term business opportunities and
provided crucial insights into preparing the technology for commercial success
during Phase II. The customer-centered emphasis on solving water contamination
problems in the oil and gas industry, which was estimated to have a global
market size of $45 billion in 2010, will result in a high likelihood for
commercial success. The Phase II R&amp;D plan will enhance scientific and
technical understanding as well as commercial impact by addressing reactor
improvements pertaining to corrosion resistance and automated operation for a
market-ready system, treatment of microbial and organic contaminants in produced
water, on- site testing, and demonstration of economic competitiveness of the
developed system.