* 1256963
* Collaborative Proposal:   Phylogenetics and Floral Symmetry Development of the Core Goodeniaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Dianella Howarth, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The seemingly endless diversity of flower shapes and colors captivates humans
but evolved to entice pollinators in one of the most intricate and crucial
biological interactions. This project tests the impact of floral diversity on
speciation in the plant family Goodeniaceae, which is closely related to the
large sunflower family. Goodeniaceae (400+ species) is one of the most species-
rich and beautiful plant families in Australia and the Pacific Islands, and is
particularly important to the Southwestern Australian Floristic Province, a
threatened global biodiversity hotspot. The current taxonomic classification of
these plants does not accurately reflect their evolutionary history, so a
comprehensive revision of the group will be made using DNA sequences. Digital
image analysis, floral symmetry gene expression, and the patterns of symmetry
throughout development will be examined to quantify the species' floral shape.
Hypotheses of the impact of these shapes on rates of diversification will be
assessed using this new information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
researchers will help study the interaction of insect pollinators with a subset
of species in Western Australia. Students from the diverse communities of
Memphis, Tennessee and Queens, New York will be an integral part of the project
and will gain expertise in many aspects of molecular and evolutionary biology.
This project will also help establish the conservation status of new and
potentially rare species.