* 1256529
* WIDER: EAGER: A Self-Assessment of Evidence-based Instructional Practices and Outcomes in STEM-related Core Courses for STEM Majors and Non-Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Stephanie Adams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 295,712.00

This project will engage five study components in sequence:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Conduct a needs assessment focused on (a) faculty
members' use of evidenced-based instructional practices, and (b) faculty
members' attitudes toward the use of evidence-based instructional practices to
determine the current state of evidence-based instructional practices in STEM-
related core courses for STEM majors and non-majors, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Carry out a phenomenological study of faculty members' justifications for
instructional choices to better understand the rationale underlying the
pedagogical approaches to the teaching of STEM-related core courses,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Conduct a curriculum mapping of the STEM-related core
courses to document the focus of faculty members' instructional practices to
better understand the relationship between the knowledge and skills taught
within and across STEM-related core courses for STEM majors and non-majors,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Conduct an outcomes assessment of students' (a)
learning of essential content, (b) complex cognition, and (c) epistemological
belief to understand the practical outcomes of evidence-based instructional
practices for STEM majors and non-majors in STEM-related core courses,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Design, develop, and implement a pilot program based on
the findings of the needs assessment, phenomenological study, curriculum
mapping, and outcomes assessments.