* 1256086
* Enhanced Knife-Edge Scanning Microscopy for Sub-micrometer Imaging of Whole Small Animal Organs
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Louise Abbott, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2017
* USD 502,398.00

Award Abstract #1256086: Enhanced Knife-Edge Scanning Microscopy&lt;br/&gt; for
Sub-micrometer Imaging of Whole Small Animal Organs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF award, made to the Brain Networks Laboratory at Texas A&amp;M University,
will help enhance and transform the Knife-Edge Scanning Microscope (KESM), a
"one of a kind" microscopy instrument, into a more widely available system for
biological research. KESM is capable of sectioning and imaging whole small
animal organs at submicrometer resolution (that is, in very fine detail, smaller
than the size of a single cell). A prototype KESM instrument was constructed,
and its capability was successfully demonstrated by scanning diverse biological
organs including whole mouse brains, octopus brains, and the mouse lung at
submicrometer resolution. This project will enhance this prototype
significantly, and transform it into a robust system that can be replicated and
operated with ease by other research groups and industry partners. The enhanced
instrument to be built by this project addresses at least two major emerging
directions in biological research: (1) "omics" (the study of a total collection
of some biological entity, for example, genomics for genes) and (2) multi-scale
modeling (modeling systems across a range of scales, for example from the cell
up to the whole organ). With the tremendous success of genomics in the 1990's
and beyond, biological research is increasingly moving toward various forms of
omics. Much of the omics research depends on anatomical information (e.g.,
connectomics, studying the complete wiring diagram in the brain) or genomic
information (e.g., gene expression levels) at the whole-organ-level. Multi-scale
modeling has also become a major methodological process in biological research.
In many projects in omics and multi-scale modeling, sub-micrometer microscopy
data from whole biological organs are essential yet available tools are unable
to meet the current demand. KESM is expected to fill this gap. The specific
enhancements of the instrument include: (1) enhanced imaging (higher resolution
optics and camera, fluorescence imaging [key to genetic and molecular studies]),
(2) enhanced mechanical control (more rigid, accurate, and higher resolution
motion control), (3) enhanced cutting (vibrating knife, real time monitoring),
and (4) enhanced robustness (quality monitoring, calibration). The overall
resulting improvement can be summarized as follows: (1) 3X improvement in
imaging resolution, (2) 10X improvement in robustness of operation, (3) 10X
improvement in imaging speed (compared to competing methods), (4) new
fluorescence imaging capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: (1)
Impact on the research community: The enhanced KESM will allow researchers to
obtain high resolution, whole-organ data for multi-scale, omics investigation of
various types of biological organs. (2) Impact on education: Microscopic atlases
of whole biological organs, such as the web-based KESM mouse brain atlas
developed by the project team, will serve as an educational resource for
students and educators at all levels (K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and general
public). As part of this project, graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in a multidisciplinary environment (neuroscience and computer science).
(3) Instrument dissemination plan: The project team will collaborate with a
start-up company, to streamline system integration and manufacturing of the KESM
instrument for broader dissemination. The design of the instrument and the
operational instructions will be made available to the biological research
community for those who wish to build their own instrument.