* 1256631
* SBIR Phase II:  Integration of Custom, Printable Batteries in Robotic Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Christine Ho, Imprint Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,128,850.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase II project will
expand the performance of a novel zinc battery chemistry which leverages a high
conductivity polymer electrolyte, and further characterize the battery system to
increase its commercial attractiveness to interested customers and partners,
particularly for small portable and flexible electronics applications. The novel
zinc battery chemistry is an ultrathin, flexible and rechargeable battery
technology. This battery chemistry utilizes an air-stable, earth-abundant,
robust, and non-lithium materials set that is manufacturable by print-based
processing and is scalable to large dimensions with sheet or web manufacturing.
The goals of this project are to increase understanding of this new battery
chemistry, demonstrate and characterize its unique flexibility, scale the
technology to pilot-level manufacturing, and improve its commercially relevant
performance properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts/commercial
potential of this project are diverse. They include the establishment of new
battery chemistry and manufacturing paradigm which can be disruptive to markets
requiring novel device functionality and form factors. This technology also
allows for significant reduction of the cost and environmental impact of
batteries for growing and potentially ubiquitous application. Lastly, this new
approach to battery manufacturing presents the opportunity to repurpose the
printing industry to produce next generation batteries. Despite considerable
prior work in the field of batteries, there is a large mismatch between
available battery technologies and the performance, form factor, cost, and
manufacturing requirements needed to serve as a platform battery system to power
flexible and wearable electronics, robotics, sensors, energy harvesters,
displays, and wireless electronics. The novel battery technology being developed
in this project can alleviate these constraints and potentially revolutionize
the portable electronic market to achieve new form factors, capabilities, and
spur adoption into new application areas.