* 1256123
* SBIR Phase II:  Composites Based on High Bio-content, Low Toxicity, Green Matrix Resins
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Paula Watt, Premix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,739.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
development of Epoxidized Norbornylized Linseed Oil (ENLO) resin as a matrix for
reinforced composites. This ENLO resin is a high bio-content, low hazard system
with roughly three times the bio-content of any commercially proven resin. In
Phase I feasibility was demonstrated and benefits of the system were explored.
Phase II funding will be used to scale and refine the resin manufacture process
and to develop and demonstrate performance of Bulk Molding Compound (BMC) and
Sheet Molding Compound (SMC) utilizing the ENLO resin matrix. The research
objectives are to scale the resin process to 1000-gallon reactor size, to
identify a cost effective initiation system, to formulate compounds for improved
fiber wetout, to characterize and benchmark performance relative to competitive
molding compounds, to develop compounds and component prototypes for specific
applications, and to explore enhancements to the technology that would provide a
wider range of potential market segments. The anticipated technical results are
the realization of cost competitive molding compounds based on the ENLO resin,
the demonstration of performance in targeted initial application components, and
the realization of an ENLO resin chemistry and process for the coatings market.

The broader impact / commercial potential of this project will derive from the
regulatory and green benefits that customers desire to meet strengthened
Environment Health and Safety (EHS) demands. The ENLO resin is derived from
rapidly renewable raw material streams that can be domestically controlled,
liberating the U.S. from the dependence on depleting oil reserves from unstable
regions of the world and providing U.S. jobs for our farmers, plant oil
processors, and resin manufacturers. Commercial composites resins include
unsaturated polyesters, which contain styrene, epoxies made from Bis-phenol A,
and urethanes with isocyanate. The ENLO resin contains none of these chemicals
of significant EHS concern resulting in safer processes, workplaces, and
products. Another major benefit of the technology is that the molded end
products will sequester carbon dioxide for the life of the composite, reducing
the life cycle contribution to global warming. These benefits will be magnified
well beyond the scope of the $18 billion composites market because the same
matrix resin can be used in the much larger $99 billion coatings market.