* 1256333
* WIDER: EAGER: Recognizing, Assessing, and Enhancing Evidence-Based Instructional Practices in STEM at Arizona State University, Polytechnic
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Yun Kang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,352.00

This project is documenting the extent of evidence-based STEM instructional
practices on the Arizona State University Polytechnic campus and assessing and
enhancing their impact. Evidence-based practices are based on research in
learning and teaching. They yield objective evidence of improved student
learning in actual classroom situations. They typically incorporate classroom or
laboratory activities that require students to express their thinking though
actions that go beyond copying notes or executing prescribed procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is: (1) collecting and examining course
syllabi and instructional materials to determine whether and to what degree they
incorporate evidence-based instructional practices; (2) using standard protocols
to carry out observations of selected classes and laboratories to assess
implementation of evidence-based instructional practices; (3) assessing student
learning in STEM courses, allowing measurement of the effectiveness of future
course reforms; and (4) working with instructors to facilitate and enhance the
adoption and use of evidence-based instructional practices in their STEM
classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is using state-of-the-art, research-
based assessment instruments in diverse STEM fields for gauging student learning
and monitoring the effects of reformed instructional practice. It is a key step
in the process of increasing effectiveness of STEM instruction through evidence-
based practice at Arizona State University, which has the largest student
enrollment in the nation. Successful implementation and dissemination of this
model of enhancing evidence-based instructional practice will provide both an
incentive and a roadmap for other educational institutions that wish to take
effective action to improve STEM learning for their students.