* 1256431
* EAGER/Collaborative Research:  Web-architectures for Extensible, Adaptable and Scalable Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
collaborative project is to conduct a critical review and to develop a set of
set of requirements for protocols and architectures for extensible, adaptable,
and scalable manufacturing. Revolutionary advances in Information Technology
(IT) have fueled the ubiquitous use of the Internet which has rapidly changed
the manner in which we work, live and play. Impact of Internet technologies can
be seen in diverse areas of national priority such as health care, energy and
public safety. These advances have also promoted e-commerce for cyber shopping,
communication and other service markets. However, in the general domain of
manufacturing, the adoption of these IT advances has not been widespread due to
unique challenges. There is a great need to investigate issues related to web-
architectures that can foster an organic, community-involved development of
software tools. Based on these requirements, the plan is to either identify
existing architectures or propose an innovative architecture for the
manufacturing context outlined. This architecture needs to enable enterprise
partners (in the broader manufacturing community) to use, modify and adapt
existing software tools essential to their own activities but also interface
with this web-based architecture so that various manufacturing and related
service activities can be realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such a web architecture
will seek to foster a larger community-involved development and response that
promotes more widespread use of software tools by the enterprises involved in
manufacturing and related activities. At a functional level, such an
architecture needs to also facilitate related entities (i.e., humans, services,
resources) to adapt, modify and collaborate to achieve simple-to-complex
manufacturing activities. Findings will be published in a peer-reviewed
conference as well as other journal publications in order to engage the
pertinent manufacturing and computer science communities. Findings will also be
posted on the project website.