* 1256841
* Cohorts, Diffusion, and Attitude Shifts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Fred Pampel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 72,936.00

SES-1256841 Fred Pampel University of Colorado

A key component of widespread changes in family life and fertility levels has
been the greater tolerance of diverse forms of social behavior. Yet some groups
have changed more than others in their views. This project addresses a key
question for social scientists: How has the socioeconomic distribution of social
attitudes changed across cohorts, periods, and nations?

The question raises issues about social change that generate considerable debate
in the scholarly literature. Some say that changes in social attitudes occur
through increases in the proportion of the population coming from high status
backgrounds, having attained high education, working in high status jobs, and
enjoying economic security - those groups most prone to adopt tolerant views.
Others say that the economic prosperity and material security in rich nations
during the post-World War II decades have led to new values of self-expression
and secularism. This broad value change has fostered tolerant attitudes among
all or most social groups.

This project develops and tests a third theory. A diffusion theory posits that
social equality and economic growth initially increase tolerant attitudes among
high SES groups, thereby leading to polarization in attitudes. However, tolerant
attitudes steadily diffuse across cohorts and time periods to other groups, with
social differences in views narrowing as tolerant attitudes become more
widespread.

This project tests the competing theories with three data sets: 1) the General
Social Survey with 22 surveys from 1973 to 2008; 2) the International Social
Survey Programme with up to three waves of data (1994, 1998, and 2004) for 32
nations; and 3) the World Values Survey of 71 nations located in all major
regions of the world and with up to five waves of data. The findings from
statistical analysis of the data will contribute new understandings of how
attitudes and values change in populations.

Broader Impacts

The project will have impacts that extend beyond scholarly research. Tolerance
of non-traditional behaviors and groups is an essential goal of a free and civil
society. Given the historical and continuing discrimination and mistreatment of
sexual minorities, it helps to have a better understanding of changes in the
social distribution of tolerant attitudes. Toward that end, the project will
incorporate research results into graduate classes and publicize the results in
articles written for general readership magazines.