* 1256630
* SBIR Phase II:  GEMM Materials for High-Efficiency and Low-Cost III-Nitride LED Technology for Solid-State Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Robert Jorgenson, Lightwave Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will support the
development and commercialization of Lightwave Photonics, Inc.?s novel light
emitting diode (LED) technology for use in solid-state lighting. Adoption of LED
solid-state lighting is still constrained by the prohibitive upfront cost of
commercially available LED solid-state lighting products. Lightwave Photonics
has developed a unique material structure that will enable LED manufacturers to
improve LED device performance and efficiency as well as reduce the
manufacturing costs. During Phase II Lightwave Photonics will work to further
improve the performance of their LED technology, develop a commercially viable
manufacturing processes, design advanced LED devices that take advantage of the
benefits of Lightwave?s technology. Lightwave Photonics will also work with
commercial LED manufacturing partners to integrate their advanced LED devices in
a commercial LED fabrication facility and qualify Lightwave?s LED technology for
production manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is the development of commercially viable technology
for improving the performance and efficiency and reducing the cost of solid-
state lighting. According to the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), over the
20-year period spanning 2010?2030, the cumulative energy savings from widespread
adoption of solid-state lighting in the United States is estimated to total
approximately 2,700 terawatt-hours, representing approximately $250 billion at
today?s energy prices. These savings could also reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by 1,800 million metric tons of carbon. Lightwave?s advanced technology will
allow LED researchers to design new and novel advanced LED device structures
that, until the recent development of the Lightwave?s technology, were not
possible in a manufacturable way. By improving the performance of solid-state
lighting and reducing the upfront cost, Lightwave Photonics will accelerate the
widespread installation of solid-state lighting.