* 1256500
* WIDER: EAGER: Documenting Instructional Practices in STEM Lecture Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Diane O'Dowd, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Though there are many critical junctures for improving STEM education, the first
two years of undergraduate education are certainly among them. Undergraduates'
first experience with university STEM courses typically takes place in large
lecture courses. These courses are often criticized for focusing too much on
providing information and too little on fostering scientific discussion,
analysis, and reflection. Many would tie perceived inadequacies of large lecture
courses with the high attrition rate that takes place in STEM majors in the
first two years of undergraduate study, especially among underrepresented
minority students. At UCI and elsewhere, there is a great deal of interest in
improving lecture courses to foster greater scientific understanding and improve
retention in the STEM disciplines. Practices that are considered particularly
promising for accomplishing this include enhanced faculty-student interaction;
enhanced peer interaction; greater attention to problem-solving; more
opportunities for personalized learning; opportunities to receive and
communicate information across diverse channels and modalities; and more data-
based instruction, in which faculty evaluate the effects of their own teaching
by gathering and weighing evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a team
of UCI faculty members in the School of Education and the School of Biological
Sciences will carry out a systematic study of current instructional practice in
large introductory STEM lecture courses at UCI. The goals are to (a) develop a
comprehensive matrix for measuring instructional practices in higher education;
(b) establish baseline data; (c) obtain a synoptic view of current STEM
instruction; (d) promote synergy across departments and schools to conduct and
share systematic evidence-based instructional research; and (e) prepare to apply
for full-scale funding to support further efforts at strengthening evidence-
based STEM education at UCI. The proposed study will take place among five large
UCI schools that teach various disciplines within STEM: Biological Sciences,
Engineering, Information and Computer Sciences, Physical Sciences, and Social
Ecology. In each of these five schools, large introductory lower-division
courses will be identified and six course/sections in each school will be
selected for inclusion in the study. Purposeful sampling will ensure the
broadest range of faculty participation, by professorial level, gender, and
background. Data on current instructional practices in those classes will be
gathered from three sources--live and video-taped observations of lectures,
discussion sections, and lab sections; interviews with course instructors; and
review of course syllabi and other materials--using rubrics that are designed to
capture the relative presence or absence of the evidence-based and promising
practices described above. Data analysis will focus on triangulation among these
three sources to provide a broad and thorough overview of the extent to which
evidence-based instructional practices are deployed in STEM lecture courses at
UCI.