* 1256215
* Sensitivity of Southern Hemispheric Atmospheric Structures to Tropical Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Matthew Hitchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 03/31/2017
* USD 550,021.00

The goal of this project is to improve understanding of how tropical convective
systems influence high latitude Southern Hemisphere (SH) climate anomalies on
seasonal, El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and anthropogenic change time
scales. Sensitivity of SH atmospheric structures to tropical forcing will be
examined through observational analysis and a new modeling strategy. The
following hypothesis will be tested: SH atmospheric structures are sensitive to
the location and timing of outflow from deep convection in the upper troposphere
and lower stratosphere (UTLS), and this modulation depends on season, phase of
ENSO, and longer-term trends. A novel technique that avoids the complexity of
modeling tropical convection by representing tropical convective anomalies with
meridional outflow perturbations in the SH subtropical UTLS will be utilized in
the study. Monthly mean and ENSO mean basic states for the present (from global
analyses) and for 2100 AD (from climate model forecasts) will be used as
boundary conditions for ensembles of simulations with the University of
Wisconsin Nonhydrostatic Modeling System (UWNMS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
important component of this work is to integrate what is known about coupling
between the tropics and Antarctica for dissemination to the public via images
and text on a dedicated website. This outreach activity will help educate the
public regarding how the tropics and Antarctica are coupled on seasonal, ENSO,
and anthropogenic global change time scales. This work will also help reduce
uncertainty in seasonal ENSO forecasts for Antarctica and future climate
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the potential to improve
seasonal forecasting of the influence of ENSO on Antarctica, via a careful
analysis of ENSO and Antarctic surface data and high resolution UWNMS
simulations. This work will also improve our understanding of teleconnections
and provide climatological descriptions of the relationship among subtropical
UTLS anticyclones, synoptic Rossby wave breaking, and extratropical planetary
waves.