* 1256827
* CAREER:   Integrating biochemical, physiological and morphological responses of plants to changes in water availability
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Funk, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2019
* USD 613,169.00

This research addresses how leaf, stem and root traits collectively influence
organismal responses to different precipitation scenarios across multiple
species in a Mediterranean-climate ecosystem. Precipitation in arid and semi-
arid environments can vary strongly within and across years and plant fitness
can depend on rapid or efficient utilization of water during these events. Plant
species adapted to arid systems possess numerous leaf, stem and root traits that
serve to minimize water stress, but it remains unclear whether these water
conservation traits limit a plant's ability to rapidly respond to precipitation
events and how water acquisition and conservation traits correspond to plant
fitness. The proposed research is organized around two questions: (1) is there a
trade-off between the ability to respond to sudden changes in water availability
and a water conservation strategy, and (2) how do traits pertaining to water
acquisition and conservation correlate with plant fitness and how does this
depend on the magnitude and frequency of precipitation? These questions will be
examined in four annual and six perennial species from a southern California
coastal sage scrub community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
biochemical, morphological and physiological processes result in integrated
organismal responses to environmental variation will improve predictive models
of community response to climate change. Mediterranean-climate ecosystems are
among the regions of the world most likely to be affected by climate change and
the proposed work will collect critical information needed to restore these
unique, threatened ecosystems. For example, understanding how species use water
under a variety of precipitation scenarios may improve restoration efforts in
systems invaded by exotic plant species by allowing resource managers to
identify native species that use resources in a similar way, which may increase
community resilience to invasion. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
represents a fully integrated plan of research and education though supervised
and independent research (undergraduate, high school summer internships) and
courses at the undergraduate and high school level. The study will be conducted
at a small, undergraduate institution and will provide four undergraduate
researchers per year with opportunities to enhance research, analytical and
communication skills. Most of these students will continue into graduate
programs or pursue careers in ecology or plant biology. Students from four
upper-division biology courses will be directly involved in collecting and
analyzing data from the proposed field experiment. High school science students
from traditionally underrepresented groups will participate in weekly meetings
at the PIs lab to set up a greenhouse experiment and collect and analyze data.
High school students will also participate in weekend field trips and have the
opportunity to conduct summer internships. The research grant will also help to
establish long-term plots for the young female professor who is serving as the
PI. The PI will engage the scientific community, resource managers and the
general public through public lectures, local restoration activities, and
continued collaborations with resource managers at the Irvine Ranch Conservancy.