* 1256765
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ocean Laboratory: Exploration, Fieldwork, and Science at Sea
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Bruce Hevly, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 12,999.00

Introduction

This doctoral dissertation improvement grant supports research in history of
technology. The project focuses on the changing role of maritime technology as
scientific instruments in oceanographic fieldwork between 1870 and 1930. The
central theme of the work is the changing conception of the research vessel over
this period, as it underwent a change from the ship as instrument, to the ship
as laboratory, and finally, in its most recent incarnation, to the ship as
invisible technician operating within an ocean transformed into credible
scientific space. The plan is to develop a comparative study of marine
expeditions and scientific correspondence of naturalists from the United States,
France, and Britain. The grant supports archival research at various locations
in these three countries.

Intellectual Merit

Most histories of the field sciences treat terrestrial topics, rather than
marine ones. However, the abstract notion of ?the field? has been applied to
marine environments. While the importance of laboratories as a space for
scientific work has been well established by historians, and though there has
been a growing body of recent scholarship on the history of field science, the
link between ships, laboratories, and the development of oceanography as a field
science has yet to be fully explored. Tracing this history will serve to set the
history of oceanography within the larger history of science in the field and
thereby offer to the history of science a contribution that bridges two
subfields, the history of the development of laboratory and field sciences and
the history of the exploration of the marine environment.

Broader Impact

This study will sheds light on the social and cultural processes involved in the
emergence of global sciences framed in terms of large-scale systems, both
physical and political. By tracing the development of oceans as scientific
spaces, this work will demonstrate how the idea of a "Pacific World," with roots
in nineteenth-century expeditionary science, contributed to the self-conscious
geopolitical construction of this concept in the interwar period. Public
proclamations about the Pacific World, along with the development of museum
exhibits focused on marine science and interpreting the results of oceanographic
expeditions, demonstrate the ways in which popular culture and politics
interacted with the cultures of marine science.