* 1256976
* Explosive Radiation, Extreme Phenotypic Diversity and the Evolution of Morphotypes within Ant Nest Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* James Robertson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2018
* USD 532,948.00

Researchers from the University of Arizona will use molecular phylogenetic,
morphological and ecological data within Ant Nest Beetles (genus Paussus) to
explore the evolution of bizarre phenotypic traits and host ant shifts across
geographic landscapes at two taxonomic scales. This project investigates
putative "replicated adaptive radiations" within this group, a rare phenomenon
in which geographically separated lineages are composed of species exhibiting
the same sets of convergently evolved phenotypes and ecological niches. It also
will provide a framework to investigate the drivers, stages, and relative rates
of phyletic and phenotypic change within an adaptive
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes formal and informal
education and training components, including postdoctoral, graduate and
undergraduate training in the areas of evolutionary biology, insect systematics,
taxonomy and identification, and biogeography. It will help to formalize
collaborations between young scientists and students from the United States,
Italy, Sri Lanka and India. Beetle identification workshops, involving up-and-
coming students and faculty, will be offered in these countries covering modern
beetle classification, morphology, collection, and identification resources.
Researchers will generate online tutorials that clearly demonstrate examples of
species radiation and convergent evolution that will be immediately
understandable by the public.