* 1256639
* SBIR Phase II:  Ion-Exchange Fiber Composites for Rapid and Selective Removal of Perchlorate from Water
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,02/28/2019
* James Langer, Serionix Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,039,587.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will result in the
continuing development of novel ultrafast, highly selective, high permeability
ion-exchange fiber composites (IXFCs) for removing perchlorate from drinking
water. The proposed material removes perchlorate 10-100 times faster than the
best available technology and employs a low-cost production method compatible
with widely available manufacturing equipment. Rapid contaminant removal is made
possible by the use of micron-scale mass transfer distances; whereas commonly
used beads and granular media are limited to much larger sizes resulting in
drawbacks such as difficult containment and enormous pressure drops. However,
IXFCs display both high permeability and self-containment due to their
permanently intertwined, self-supporting structure. Serionix demonstrated the
feasibility of this technology in Phase I and will continue in the Phase II with
the following key goals: 1) optimization of ultra-high capacity IXFCs for
perchlorate removal; 2) design/build IXFC purification cartridges for evaluation
by industrial partners; 3) identify and validate chemistries for complimentary
IXFCs that are selective for heavy metals such as lead and mercury; and 4)
produce IXFCs at a pilot scale and develop strategy for commercial
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
research is the development and commercialization of a low-cost technology
enabling regulatory compliance and improved protection of human health. The
first targeted application is perchlorate, which the EPA is set to regulate in
drinking water by 2014. This represents only the first commercial opportunity
for a platform technology with the ultimate potential to transform the
industrial and residential water treatment landscape. Future applications may
include ultrahigh efficiency water deionization, softening, and industrial
wastewater recycling, personal protective equipment and clothing, and high
activity solid acid/base catalysts. Dissemination of data and interpretation
will contribute to improved understanding of mass transfer characteristics in
fibrous sorbent materials used in both water and air treatment.