* 1256552
* Molecular basis of plant parasitism by a galling insect
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Heidi Appel, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2017
* USD 714,118.00

Grapes are the world's most valuable fruit crop, and a small insect called
phylloxera is one of the grapevine's worst enemies. In the past it has almost
wiped out vineyards worldwide. Phylloxera causes the plant to create specialized
structures in which it lives and reproduces, called galls. This way of attacking
plants is widespread and has evolved numerous times, and many important plant
pests are gall-makers. Still, no one has any idea how the insect instructs the
plant to create a new organ that benefits the pest. This project will attempt to
understand this remarkable ability by examining the plant genes that are turned
on or off by the insect in creating a gall. Charles Darwin suggested that galls
resemble fruits and this project will focus on genes the plant normally uses to
create flowers and fruits. The hypothesis is that plant genes normally involved
in fruit production are activated by the insect in roots and leaves. Preliminary
evidence to date supports that view. Since plants normally regulate flower and
fruit production using hormones, a second hypothesis to be tested is that
phylloxera manipulates plant hormones to create galls. These ideas will be
confirmed by producing genetically-modified grapevines with key genes blocked.
It should be impossible for galls to form on these plants. Findings from this
project will not only explain a long-held mystery of nature; they will also
provide the genetic information necessary for developing insect-resistance
grapevines. The project is a unique collaboration among ecologists,
entomologists, plant biologists and biotechnologists. Its results will be
extended to the public via a collaboration with the Missouri School of
Journalism and to grapevine breeders. The PIs are very active supporters of
McNair and EXPRESS program students and a substantial number of undergraduates
and K-12 teachers will also participate.