* 1256696
* LTREB Renewal at Hubbard Brook:  Hydrologic-nutrient cycle interaction in small, undisturbed and human-manipulated ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Emily Bernhardt, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/29/2020
* USD 520,660.00

The records of precipitation and stream water amount and chemistry collected at
the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in the White Mountains of New Hampshire
are now the longest continuous biogeochemical records of this type in the world.
As such, they represent a treasure trove of information relevant to current
environmental problems, such as acid rain, nitrogen deposition, forest growth,
and rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. The first five years of this
decadal project focused primarily on the effect of disturbance and environmental
change, including the continued decline in acid rain and the changing climate
within the Hubbard Brook Valley. A number of surprises have emerged, including
the disappearance of an early climate change effect on stream water temperature,
decreased ice cover duration on Mirror Lake, and the impacts of acid rain on
soil chemical changes that are now affecting forest growth. A major surprise
seen from a synthesis and extrapolation of long-term trends in precipitation and
stream water chemistry was that a relentless dilution of surface waters is
occurring throughout the Hubbard Brook Valley and that surface waters are likely
to approximate demineralized (extremely dilute) water in the near future. This
suggests that future baseline conditions may be more dilute than thought for the
time before the industrial revolution, apparently because of the depletion of
soil nutrients by acid rain and the impacts of federal air pollution regulations
on precipitation chemistry. This has important implications for the structure,
function and management of northern hardwood forests and their associated
aquatic ecosystems in the near future. It is expected that important answers to
many of the questions pursued during the past five years will be obtained or
made clearer during the final five years of this long-term project.

For researchers and decision makers grappling with solutions to major
environmental issues, such carefully documented and synthesized, long-term data
are essential for providing an accurate and quantitative perspective on chemical
changes in our atmosphere and in our forest and aquatic ecosystems, as well as
to advance the theoretical underpinnings of ecology. In addition, numerous
students are engaged in this research and the data are made freely available for
other uses.