* 1256970
* RAPID: Securing the Climate, Limnological and Sediment Data Needed to Understand and Calibrate Multi-millennial Records of ENSO in the Eastern Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Overpeck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2013
* USD 35,255.00

A network of data loggers and sediment traps was deployed by researchers for the
University of Arizona in three lakes on three islands to monitor meteorological,
limnological, and sedimentation variability as a function of climate changes in
the region. The dominant interannual variability is caused by ENSO and during
the period of deployment the region exhibited a minor El Nino (2009-2010)
followed by modest La Nina conditions (2010-2011). The region is now in a
neutral state with predictions of an El Nino beginning again in winter
2012-2013. The data loggers are filled to capacity and need to be retrieved,
downloaded and replaced. In addition sediment traps contain the particle rain
related to the transition from the week/moderate El Nino to the 2010 La Nina.
Replacement with new traps will permit observations of the transition back into
El Nino conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the research
of two early career scientists: Jessica Conroy, an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow now
at Georgia Tech, and Diane Thompson, an advanced graduate student from the
University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This an excellent proposal for RAPID
funding because: 1) the data collection systems are full and should be replaced
this fall before the onset of the next El Nino: 2) the sediment traps will have
a record of the most recent La Nina and immediate research progress will occur
by retrieving and processing these samples; 3) two early career scientists have
studies underway (begun during their Ph.D. thesis research) which will benefit
greatly from this field program; 4) the redeployment of new monitors will be in
place prior to the beginning of the next El Nino.