* 1256641
* SBIR Phase II:  Building K-5 mathematical fluency through curriculum-based puzzle games within a collaborative virtual world
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Jennifer Sun, Numedeon, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/29/2016
* USD 811,332.00

The innovation of this Phase II project lies in the use of graphical,
collaborative games within a virtual world environment to support math learning
for elementary school students. This Phase II project builds upon Phase I
development of prototype puzzle-based math games as an extension of a K-5
mathematics curriculum developed with prior support from the National Science
Foundation and currently in use in K-5 schools. The games leverage puzzle
solving, collaborative play, as well as puzzle creation to build mathematical
fluency. Teachers and students in classroom as well as casual users tested the
Phase I games and provided feedback that will inform the Phase II project. The
Phase II project will involve development of more puzzle-based games with
collaborative and creative components. It will also include an evaluation of the
effectiveness of these games for math learning, as well as their ease of
incorporation into classroom instruction. Phase II will also extend existing
tools for training and supporting teachers in the use of these games for
classroom instruction.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is a new form of interactive
learning that integrates formal classroom-based instruction with informal game-
based learning within a social online environment. This new form of interactive
learning keeps pace with how students interact with technology and engages them
to develop deeper understanding and fluency in the subject matter at hand
through games and puzzles, collaboration and competition, as well as content
creation and sharing. While this Phase II SBIR focuses on the application of
these methods on mathematics, the research results will be useful as a model for
other subject areas as well. As the $8.2 billion textbook market in the US
enters the digital age, this project will set a standard for integrating
existing curriculum with digital medium that goes beyond rote memorization and
drilling to building mental infrastructure and in-depth understanding. In
addition, the visual nature of game-based instruction will reduce barriers to
use for bilingual students and those with special needs. Finally, the market
potential of this project will benefit significantly from the development of new
mechanisms to measure student outcomes articulated with online tools for
teachers that provide professional development and support.