* 1256894
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   INTEGRATING FOSSIL AND MODERN EVIDENCE TO DETERMINE THE ROLE OF DIET IN MAMMALIAN DIVERSIFICATION
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Samantha Price, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2018
* USD 114,341.00

Mammals have evolved diverse diets to fuel their demanding metabolisms. This
study will investigate the role diet played in mammalian diversification by
combining data from the fossil record with data on living mammals. Work will
focus on three groups with good fossil records and variable diets: Primates,
Carnivora (e.g. dogs, cats and bears), and Cetartiodactyla (e.g. deer, cows and
whales). A combination of morphological and DNA data will be used to produce a
time-calibrated phylogeny of each group that includes fossil and living species.
These phylogenetic trees will then be analyzed with dietary data to estimate
speciation and extinction rates in mammals with different diets. The results
will be compared to traditional paleontological methods to quantify the biases
of these different approaches in reconstructing diversification
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of mammalian dietary evolution will
elucidate the evolutionary role diet played in the origin of living mammals,
including humans, and whether the evolutionary trajectory of omnivory in our
ancestors paralleled its origin in other primates. It will also contribute to
consilience between paleontological and phylogenetic approaches to
macroevolutionary biology, facilitating interdisciplinary collaboration. The
project will support training of undergraduate and graduate students along with
the development of K-16 educational materials.