* 1256419
* SBIR Phase II:  Interactive 3-D Technical Illustrations for Science and Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Holroyd, Arqball LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 861,589.00

The innovation in this Phase II Project will develop tools for creating,
displaying, and publishing interactive 3D content. The resulting technology will
empower educators, students, publishers, and businesses to easily produce
interactive 3D illustrations for digital books and online education materials. A
unique approach to this long-standing content creation problem centers around
the use of Image-Based Modeling and Rendering (IBMR), which enables the creation
of highly realistic digital 3D models using commodity smartphones instead of the
complex dedicated hardware systems traditionally required. Building on
technology developed during the associated Phase I Project, this research aims
to: develop new algorithms for creating interactive illustrations that place
fewer assumptions on the hardware used to create them, develop algorithms for
extracting 3D geometry from image sequences, and develop new methods for
capturing unique panoramic image sets that can be used in an educational
context. The resulting technology platform will make interactive 3D content
widely-accessible by significantly reducing the expertise and cost currently
required during its creation.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is to make user-generated 3D
content part of the revolution in digital and online education by simplify the
creation process and making it widely accessible to a non-technical audience.
The core technology developed in this proposal has application areas spanning
from education and cultural heritage to consumer marketing and advertising. This
project also includes specific outreach activities that will benefit the local
community while bringing the resulting technology to the attention of the wide
audience that can benefit from user-generated 3D content.