* 1256768
* 2013 International Conference on Statistics, Science, and Society: New Challenges and Opportunities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Nalini Ravishanker, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

"Statistics, Science, and Society: New Challenges and Opportunities (SSSNCO)" is
a four day international conference which will serve as the official meeting of
the International Indian Statistical Association (IISA). Held January 2-5, 2013
in Chennai, India, this conference provides the international statistical
community a unique opportunity to discuss new areas of research and exchange
ideas. The conference will include a strong mentoring component for students and
young researchers working in areas in Probability and Statistics. The SSSNCO
conference theme is very aptly titled the Impact of Statistical Science on
Society, and the conference will feature a discussion of new challenges and
opportunities for statisticians in a data-centric world. The conference aims to
provide a forum for leading experts and young researchers to discuss recent
progress in statistical theory and applications, thereby providing new
directions for statistical inference in various fields. The conference will have
an excellent slate of plenary, invited and contributed talks, and poster
sessions, covering a wide variety of topics of current statistical relevance and
research activity. These include, but are not limited to, Bayesian Computing,
Bioinformatics, Biomedical applications, Clinical Trials, Data Mining, Multiple
Comparisons, Nonparametric methods, Reliability, Stochastic Modeling, Survival
Analysis, and Time Series. In addition, panel discussions and student paper
competitions will be held, providing an opportunity for junior faculty, graduate
and undergraduate students not only to showcase their research work but also to
benefit from some special sessions devoted to statistics education and funding
opportunities, all of which should lead to acceleration and enhancement of
research for participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the 2013
SSSNCO conference is to bring together both well established and emerging young
researchers from around the world who are actively pursuing theoretical and
methodological research in statistics and their applications in various related
fields. Workshops, focusing on research and education, with a strong focus on
mentoring students and young researchers, have been planned at the conference.
The mentoring component in education and research will be strongly emphasized.
These goals will have a strong impact on researchers and educators in
probability and statistics, especially the next generation of professionals by
interaction with peers and senior professionals from international institutions.
The funds will be used to provide partial travel support for students and junior
researchers from US academic institutions to attend the conference. While
selecting recipients, special consideration will be given to women and minority
students. Participants receiving support will be required to actively take part
in the conference by presenting a poster or a talk, as well as attending the
workshops and the panel discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web
page:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.iisaconference.info/