* 1256742
* ARTS: Phylogeny and systematic revision of the diverse and cryptic Euptychiina (Lepidoptera, Nymphalidae, Satyrinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Jacqueline Miller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2019
* USD 470,604.00

The diverse butterfly subtribe Euptychiina contains more than 400 species in
Central and South American habitats ranging from rainforest to cerrado. Hundreds
of thousands of euptychiine specimens in natural history museum collections hold
untapped data for studies in many fields, but almost half of all specimens are
difficult to confidently identify. At least 20% of species have no scientific
name and 65% of genera are invalid. This project has 5 main goals: (1) to
combine morphological and DNA data to produce a comprehensive evolutionary
hypothesis for the subtribe and define genera; (2) to revise the classification
for 9 genera containing 159 species (35 to be named), and to name an additional
21+ species in other Euptychiina genera; (3) to train butterfly researchers at
the University of Florida and at the University of Campinas, Brazil; (4) to test
hypotheses about Euptychiina evolution; (5) and to develop collection and web-
based electronic resources to facilitate future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a reliable
classification and understanding of species diversity in Euptychiina and use
these to begin to investigate how these organisms diversified and what factors
control their current distribution, helping to predict how changing land use and
climate are likely to impact their diversity.The project will train 1 post-
doctoral researcher, 3 graduate students and other university and high-school
students, with special efforts to include minorities. Museum collections will be
enhanced and an NSF-funded, web-based informatics platform for storage and rapid
sharing of taxonomic data will be adapted for use by the team and for future
butterfly researchers. The project website will provide biological data, images
and publications, and data will also be available to online biodiversity
initiatives such as GBIF, EoL and iDigBio where they will be freely accessible.
Finally, the project will be featured for one year and to more than 200,000
visitors as a component of the Florida Museum of Natural History's "Library of
Life" exhibit, highlighting current research at the museum.