* 1256316
* Collaborative Research - LTREB:  Evolutionary Demography - the Contribution of Adaptation and Environment to Population Dynamics, Range Size, and Niche Width
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Vincent Eckhart, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 37,437.00

This project continues a 7-year study of environmental and demographic variation
across the geographic range of a native California plant in order to understand
the ecological and evolutionary limits on an organism's distribution. Prior work
showed that environmental variables related to climate, soils, and interactions
with insect pollinators and seed-eaters all change across the plant's range.
Population growth rates, a measure of population viability, also decline toward
the range edge. Over the next five years, research will examine the role that
dormant seeds, which remain buried in the soil for 2-5 years, play in allowing
populations to weather adverse environments and persist long-term. The project
will also determine range-wide differences in the longevity of dormant
seeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With impending climate change, parts of the current
geographic range of many organisms are likely to become unsuitable for continued
persistence. Understanding what limits species from colonizing unfavorable
environments now can help forecast species responses to deteriorating conditions
within their current range. In addition to its scientific impacts, the project
will serve an important educational mission by engaging high school students,
undergraduate students from research and primarily undergraduate institutions,
and graduate students in research. Project leaders will work with high school
students from a rural California high school and from a charter school in St
Paul Minnesota through in-class activities and field projects.