* 1256094
* Joint NSF-DST Workshop on Implementation of Sustainable Technologies for Water/Wastewater Treatment and Water Reuse, Bengaluru, India, January 7 -11, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sukalyan Sengupta, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 41,745.00

1256094&lt;br/&gt;Sengupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
research and education collaborations between the US and India on
water/wastewater treatment and water reuse, specifically in the context of
decentralized, non-point sources through a workshop to be held at the campus of
Indian Institute of Science (IISc) in Bengaluru from January 7-11, 2013. It will
identify and analyze decentralized engineered systems that are passive, do not
need trained personnel for operation, need minimal maintenance, are ideally
suited for treating non-point sources, and can be easily installed in
installation in rural areas. Special emphasis will be given to addressing
technical, regulatory, and economic challenges faced in implementing water reuse
projects and in ensuring that these projects have the active support of the
local population that they serve. Through pilot-scale demonstration projects,
several technologies will be evaluated for some contaminants of concern to both
the US and India (arsenic, fluoride, and nitrate in groundwater, and emerging
contaminants such as drugs, antibiotics, hormones and steroids in surface
drinking water supplies). This project will also develop protocols for real-time
monitoring of important surface water sources in the US and India for common
pollutants. Technologies for removal and recovery of macronutrients (Nitrogen
&amp; Phosphorus) from point sources and non-point sources will also be
evaluated. The focus will be on developing protocols for implementation and
evaluation of technologies developed by some of the workshop attendees. This
project will also develop course curricula as a result of mutual knowledge
exchange between Indian and U.S. researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will strengthen a strategic collaborative partnership between NSF and
DST, Government of India. This workshop will provide American and Indian experts
in the area of water quality and sustainability an opportunity to evaluate the
water quality challenges facing both countries and exchange ideas and propose
sustainable and cost-efficient solutions which can be implemented not only in
the US and India but in other parts of the world facing similar challenges.
Water sustainability and reuse is a global environmental challenge. While
progress has been made in innovative treatment technologies that can accomplish
removal of target pollutants, there is a strong need to evaluate a holistic
system that includes applicability, scalability, cost, life cycle assessment,
environmental impact, and ease of use. Moreover, water quality engineers in the
US and India agree that more focus is needed toward decentralized, passive
systems that treat non-point sources. This workshop will provide a framework
that will cover the entire spectrum of adoption of a sustainable, innovative,
and decentralized technology, from selection to obtaining regulatory approval to
evaluation of the technology. The US contingency includes two graduate students
and junior and senior faculty.