* 1256625
* SBIR Phase II:  High-yield Fermentation of Sugars to Levulinic Acid
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Alexandre Zanghellini, ARZEDA Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 613,014.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the
development of a high-yield fermentation route for the production of levulinic
acid (LA). LA is one of the best-suited C5 building blocks for bio-refinery
production due to higher value, broad applications, and likely quick adoption by
the chemical industry. During Phase I, this project has designed and
experimentally validated the concept of a novel fermentation pathway for the
production of LA. The focus of this Phase II work will be to transition from
this technical proof-of-concept to the development of a lab-scale fermentation
process. The limiting enzymatic steps in the designed pathway will first be
optimized to reach levels of activity consistent with the flux/yield required
for economical production. Variants of the designed pathway incorporating the
original and optimized enzymes will subsequently be cloned into suitable
fermentation organism(s). Using computational and experimental metabolic
engineering tools, knock-out and knock-down mutations will be performed to
further optimize flux/yield in the pathway while optimizing for host cell
growth. This work represents the first commercial application of enzyme design
to rationally engineer novel metabolic pathway that do not have any natural
counterpart, bringing us closer to the dream of designer cell factories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
the advancement of a U.S. green chemistry industry and to allow America to take
the lead in the commercial production of a new renewable chemical building
block. The lack of a high-yield alternative to costly thermo-chemical processes
has been preventing widespread adoption of levulinic acid (LA). Because LA can
be converted, chemically or biochemically, to synthetic rubber (through isoprene
and butenes), bio-fuels (such as kerosene and HMF), polymers (for instance,
nylons) and polymer additives (for changing polymer characteristics), the
addressable market is in excess of $20B annually. When considered as the end
product, LA trades at a considerable higher price than ethanol, the current
product of most commercial bio-refineries, and thus can help diversify their
product offering and considerably increase their margins.