* 1256632
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel 10 kW Micro-turbine for Distributed Generation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Ivan Wang, Dynamo Micropower
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,107,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a low-cost 10kW micro-turbine power generator that provides the basis
for portability, fuel flexibility, and reduced maintenance of conventional
turbo-machines at a cost that is competitive with reciprocating engines. Current
micro-turbines have prohibitively high costs due to complicated geometry and
materials, but the proposed research will develop a micro-turbine with
significantly lower manufacturing costs using a novel layered stackable
architecture for the core micro-turbine engine. The primary research objectives
are 1) to optimize micro-turbine components within the framework of the new
proposed geometry using a combination of in-house numerical analysis and
computational fluid dynamics, 2) to design application-specific peripherals and
user interface for power generation at oil and gas wells - the proposed entry
market, and 3) to build and test a field-ready prototype to validate the engine
design and benchmark engine performance. The result of the proposed project is a
compact, and low-maintenance 10kW micro-turbine power generator that will be
produced for lower than $500 per kW.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is greatly increased
commercial viability of micro-turbine power generators. The primary advantages
of micro-turbines are portability, fuel flexibility, and low maintenance. Micro-
turbines do not have significant market share due to prohibitively high upfront
costs, but the proposed technology will bring costs down and enable micro-
turbines to gain significant traction in many markets, including emergency
response, oil and gas well power generation, and other remote/distributed power
generation applications. Due to their portability, micro-turbine generators can
be deployed quickly in emergency situations. Due to their fuel flexibility,
implementing micro-turbines can significantly reduce the costs associated with
the fuel supply chain, for example, associated gases that would otherwise be
flared at oil/gas wells can be used to power equipment onsite. Due to their low
maintenance, microturbines can be adopted where operating costs can be
prohibitive for reciprocating engines. Lastly, the proposed project will lead to
reduced carbon footprint by efficiently using fuel that would be otherwise
wasted (as in the case of flare gas), reduce other toxic emissions via more
efficient combustion.