* 1256001
* IDBR:    Spectroscopic photoacoustic microscopy for advanced histopathology on living cells and tissues
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Zhixing Xie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2017
* USD 555,881.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to the University of Michigan to
develop a novel label-free spectral optical technique and instrument for
advanced histopathologic examination of tissue and cellular samples. This
program will develop a new roadmap technology for wide band and highly sensitive
ultrasound detection. The project will explore an all-optical photoacoustic
microscopy technology for high resolution 3D imaging by using the broadband
detector platform. The high sensitivity of the detector will allow probing of
thick tissues. This research opens the gate for the first time to research the
mechanism of living cells and their activities with virus or ambient
microenvironment based on absorption contrast and will induce new series of
molecular probes based on optical absorption. The new instrument will provide
the unique optical contrast, offering the prospect of comprehensive examination
and diagnosis of live cells and tissues, which could have a transformative
impact to functional microscopy and biomedical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Technologies that can
provide significantly improved contrast and resolution are in high demand for
biomedical imaging applications. Comparing with the conventional histologic
methods, the technology to be developed in this program provides a revolutionary
new tool that allows reproducible and objective diagnosis of unstained tissues
and cells, facilitating improved disease diagnosis and automatic screening, as
well as cutting-edge research that can only be conducted on live tissues or
cells. It will free the researchers and medical staff of laborious sample
preparation involving fixation, sectioning and staining. The impact of such an
instrument will be similar to how the confocal microscopy revolutionized the
conventional optical microscopy by providing the fine resolution sectioning
capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will be enhanced by the
integration of the education and outreach component which includes the creation
of a multidisciplinary (optical science, microfabrication, biomedical imaging)
scientific learning environment for students at a variety of levels (from K12 to
graduate) and from several underrepresented groups (women, African-Americans,
and Latinos); and incorporation of research results into courses on photonic
devices and nanofabrication. The program will help to increase the scientific
literacy of the public by outreach activities.