* 1256719
* Effects of Rapid Consumer Evolution on Community Dynamics:  Predictions and Tests in a (nearly) Natural Food Web
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Brian Lazzaro, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2016
* USD 206,595.00

Populations of organisms have a remarkable capacity to adapt to environmental
change. Adaptive evolution increases the relative abundance of individuals with
genes for particular traits (genotype) that allow them to survive and reproduce
better than those with different traits. An organism?s genotype determines how
it interacts with its environment, including with other species. The variety of
genotypes present in a population, and how much the environment changes, dictate
not only how fast evolution will occur, but also how that population increases
or decreases in abundance as the environment changes. Mathematical theory and
simple laboratory predator-prey experiments demonstrate that the ability of a
population to evolve markedly affects whether, and how quickly, it changes in
abundance. The cycles of predator and prey abundance look very different with
and without evolution. This project tests whether these evolutionary predator-
prey cycles are important in understanding changes in species abundance in more
natural conditions where weather varies daily, seasons come and go, and they are
imbedded in a community of many species. The research will use replicate
experimental ponds to document changes over time of freshwater phytoplankton
abundances driven by the increases and decreases in the abundance of Daphnia, an
animal that feeds on phytoplankton. The experiment will manipulate the amount of
genetic variation in the Daphnia populations in order to change their capacity
to evolve, and to determine how that affects seasonal changes in phytoplankton
abundance and water clarity. Genomic methods will be developed to track
evolutionary changes in the Daphnia populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has practical value in the management of freshwater lakes since the
capacity for Daphnia to evolve may determine when and how Daphnia regulates
water clarity, a major feature of environmental quality in lakes. This project
will provide research training and career mentoring for a postdoctoral scholar,
and for graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, high school students
will participate in conducting the field experiments through summer research
experiences.