* 1256036
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Sequential Recommender Systems in Mobile and Pervasive Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alexander Tuzhilin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 74,734.00

Individuals on the move, e.g., tourists on a sightseeing trip in an unfamiliar
city often find themselves overwhelmed by the challenges of coping with
unfamiliar environments. This presents a need for tools and methods that will
guide them by providing them useful recommendations while they are "on the
move." Recent advances in mobile and sensor-based technologies have made it
possible to collect and process location traces across many different mobile
applications. Such data, when combined with other spatio-temporal, contextual,
and user-specific information can, in principle, be used to generate useful
recommendations for individuals on the move.

This exploratory research project formulates and explores a novel variant of
recommender systems, namely, mobile sequential recommender systems for mobile
users where each recommendation takes into account the trajectory and history of
past recommendations, as one of selecting a sequence of locations to recommend
under a set of spatio-temporal, contextual, and privacy constraints. Given the
combinatorial nature of the problem (where the size of the search space grows is
exponential in the relevant parameters) the project aims to explore heuristics.
It will also develop appropriate measures for assessing the effectiveness of
alternative solutions.

The project, if successful, would establish the feasibility of a line of
investigation that could lead to the development of effective approaches to
sequential recommendation problem with obvious benefits to mobile users. The
project enriches research based advanced training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. All of the data, software, and publications resulting
from the project will be made freely available to the broader research
community.