* 1256003
* WIDER: EAGER: Evidence-Based Instructional Practices in Action:  Enhancing Exemplary Teaching at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* T. Jack Morris, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,703.00

This project assesses the state of instructional practices in courses offered in
the biology, chemistry, and physics & astronomy departments at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). Building on these data, the project will provide a
professional development program on evidence-based instructional practices
targeting faculty in these departments. Additionally, the project seeks to
enhance and broaden of the use of peer instruction and just-in-time teaching in
the biology, chemistry, and physics & astronomy courses, and establish the
effectiveness of the professional development program through an assessment of
the use of these practices by the participants and impact on students.

This project seeks to implement a professional development program on evidence-
based instructional practices for chemistry, biology, and physics & astronomy
faculty at UNL, as well as train current and future faculty in the
implementation of such a program. One of the outcomes of the professional
development program will be the widening of the implementation of evidence-based
instructional practices in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) courses at the institution, which will enhance students' learning
environments. This project has the realistic potential of increasing the
retention of all students in these STEM courses, and subsequently in STEM
majors.