* 1256226
* WIDER: EAGER - Catalyzing Wide Scale Innovation:  Creating the Conditions for Viral Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Linda Vanasupa, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 08/31/2014
* USD 294,241.00

The project has the potential to reveal an alternative model for achieving
systemic change in teaching and learning practices in STEM higher education. It
draws upon systems theory and organizational behavior research to identify high-
leverage catalytic interventions that are designed to cooperatively,
compassionately, and responsibly disrupt the systemic structure and habits of
thought that have left the teaching practices of many instructors mired in
tradition. Despite evidence that suggests greater effectiveness of alternatives,
such as evidence-based teaching practices, many STEM instructors persist in
applying traditional ways of teaching and learning such as lectures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is complementing the traditional approach to
STEM instructional change, which focuses on developing and disseminating new
materials or methods that are expected to create systemic change through
diffusion and adoption. As an alternative to this approach, this project is
seeking to prove that institutions of higher education can intentionally undergo
a benevolent, spontaneous, epidemic change toward cultures of transformational
teaching and learning innovation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Evidence of reaching
the postulated institutional 'tipping point' is expected to be early signs of
wide-spread transformative teaching and learning, which is being collected,
analyzed, and published for public access on YouTube.