* 1256273
* US-Japan Joint Seminar on Responses of Catchment Hydrology and Forest Biogeochemistry to Climatic and Environmental Change
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Stephen Sebestyen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 51,526.00

A US-Japan Joint Seminar in hydrology will be held has to foster exchange of
ideas, bridge gaps in research approaches, and to jointly develop prospective
research directions. Historically, there has been limited interaction among
scientists between the two countries because language, culture, and research
foci separate these scientific communities. These differences highlight a
potential for scientific discovery and are the reasons for this US-Japan Joint
Seminar in hydrology. The purpose of this forthcoming seminar is to expand the
theme of linking hydrology and biogeochemistry to consider effects of climatic
and environmental change, as well as emerging measurement and analytical
techniques used in catchment science research that allow fundamental scientific
advancements. The meeting will host approximately 20 scientists from each
country, including students and early career scientists, to present and discuss
cutting-edge research in catchment sciences in an open forum to foster
collaboration and exchange. The seminar will focus on the following aspects of
hydrological and biogeochemical catchment sciences: (1) the role of hydrologic
connectivity in regulating carbon and nitrogen cycling and export from
catchments in the face of climatic and environmental change; (2) synthesis and
cross-site comparison along climatic gradients to understand mechanisms of
solute yields from catchments; (3) advances in techniques (trace gas fluxes,
isotopic mass balances) for balancing nutrient budgets and better understanding
processes (denitrification, transport, uptake, mineralization, etc.); and (4)
integrating field observations with theory to inform better model predictions
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US-Japan Joint Seminar will 1) foster interaction and
develop new collaborative research between US and Japanese catchment scientists,
2) stimulate and engage the next generation of scientists who will become
leaders in research and support future interaction between the two countries,
and 3) advance understanding of how catchments respond to climatic and
environmental changes. Cross-continental synthesis is a challenge, yet a
necessity for determining how catchments will respond to global environmental
change. To meet that challenge, the proposed multi-perspective seminar in
catchment hydrology and forest biogeochemistry will bring together established
researchers and early career scientists, providing invaluable opportunities for
synthesis in catchment sciences.