* 1256968
* Collaborative research: The Pygmy Borers (Col., Scolytinae: Cryphalini): revision of genera, evolution of the genome, and modernization of insect systematics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Jiri Hulcr, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 489,746.00

Bark beetles are among the most damaging pests, and a diverse group of insects
which are difficult to identify. This project will revise the classification and
evolutionary history of one of the largest and most important bark beetle
groups: Cryphalini, the Pygmy Borers. The project will 1) revise the
classification of Cryphalini genera using a molecular phylogeny, 2) analyze
populations of putatively global cryphaline species (some of the most widespread
insects on Earth) to test whether they are true species or clusters of cryptic
species, and 3) reconstruct the evolution of genome copy number in Pygmy Borers
(in some genera, males have only one copy of each chromosome), and test whether
deviations are associated with manipulative bacterial parasites. The approach
integrates next-generation sequencing, automated matrix-based taxonomy, and a
large global network of collaborators, including citizen
collectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's high-throughput methodology
represents a new cost-efficient approach to diverse but understudied groups of
organisms. Non-academics will benefit from the new identification capacity. A
single cryphaline species (i.e., the Coffee Berry Borer) causes $500,000,000
annual damages, yet quarantine officers have no tools to distinguish it from
other cryphalines. The broader public will benefit from a new Citizen Science
project "Bark beetles in your backyard".