* 1256910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Remaking Toxicity:   Computational Toxicology and Urban Exposure Experiences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Bob Bolin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,663.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation improvement grant
will support an ethnographic study that focuses on toxicologists at the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency who are developing new toxicity testing methods
and on people living with chronic exposures in a low-income minority community
in Phoenix, Arizona. The project will use data collected from participant
observation, ethnographic interviewing, and scientific and community documents
to identify the ways in which current chemical knowledge practices differ from
prior practices and to analyze the socio-political implications of these
changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will serve to enhance the literature on co-production and distributed
knowledge systems, as well as contemporary debates about the distinction between
the environment, the body, the self, and technology. It will provide additional
perspectives on how scale is understood in environmental justice contexts by
investigating temporal and biological scales of toxicity, thereby complementing
the use of spatial scales. It will also improve understandings of exposure
experiences in disadvantaged communities where environmental justice activism is
not prominent and exposures are complex. By engaging expert and lay notions of
toxicity as they evolve, the research findings will be generalizable to broader
questions about the relationship between science and public knowledge in an era
where the growth and dissemination of knowledge proceeds at an increasingly
rapid pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
results will contribute to debates about the desirability of various types of
knowledge about complex chemical risks. They will help to understand how
environmental health and safety should be protected. They will inform
interactions between scientific and lay knowledge practices, site remediation,
and policy making in the United States. They may also serve to orient
toxicologists and regulators to environmental justice issues and to publics who
deal most intimately with chemical substances. Results will be disseminated
through presentations to each study community and to broader scholarly
communities, in a white paper written for the EPA?s National Environmental
Justice Advisory Council, and through activities developed for an environmental
outreach program in the urban field site.