* 1256752
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Ecology, Evolution, and Development: The Conceptual Foundations of Adaptive Phenotypic Plasticity in Evolutionary Ecology
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 16,820.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation improvement grant
supports research in the history of evolutionary ecology. Specifically, it will
investigate attempts to integrate models of adaptive phenotypic plasticity into
ecological models of species distribution. The project will focus on how
specific social, intellectual, and material contexts in which models of
plasticity emerged during the 1960s through 1980s shaped their underlying
assumptions and commitments. The grant will support travel to multiple sites to
retrieve oral histories and to consult specific archival materials that are
essential for reconstructing the influential conceptual and theoretical
approaches to investigating adaptive phenotypic
plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will illuminate an important interface between science and society by
placing developments in evolutionary ecology in the context of shifting societal
visions of environmental connectivity, vulnerability, and anthropogenic change.
It will create new bridges between the history of ecology, environmental
history, and the history of genetics and molecular biology, by showing how
different visions of environmental change are linked to ideas about genetic
mechanisms in ecological and evolutionary processes. It will also contribute to
our understanding of trans-disciplinary knowledge transfer by describing the
consequences of efforts to integrate theoretical and methodological approaches
from ecology and evolutionary biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By analyzing the complex relationships between
theoretical models and empirical research in contextualized investigative
settings, this project can generate insights that are highly transferrable to
studies of the role and status of models in other scientific fields. In
addition, this project has potential to transform the way that scientists think
about the broader social and intellectual contexts of their research; the
researcher plans to engage ecologists and policy-makers via presentations at
scientific meetings, publications in scientific journals, and transdisciplinary
workshops. Finally, the results of this project will be used to create
educational materials that illustrate science as a practice.