* 1256669
* RAPID: Impact of Large Scale Greenland Ice Sheet Melting on Glacier Hydrology and Meltwater Geochemistry
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2014
* USD 199,221.00

In 2012, multiple lines of evidence suggest a record release of freshwater from
the Greenland ice sheet (GrIS), the largest expanse of glacial ice in the
Northern Hemisphere and a major source of meltwater and associated material to
the surrounding North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans. Between July 8 and 12,
satellite-derived estimates of surface melt increased from 40% to 97% of the ice
sheet. This warming received widespread media attention and public interest, yet
the scientific community lacks direct observations of meltwater controls on ice
sheet movement and meltwater geochemistry for such a large-scale melting event.
The overarching goal of this RAPID proposal is to quantify, in short order, the
impact of a large-scale melting event on the ice sheet dynamics and meltwater
biogeochemistry of a large, land-terminating glacier on the western Greenland
margin. RAPID funds will enable the analysis and synthesis of a unique sample
set collected during other fieldwork from the Leverett Glacier catchment, a
large outlet glacier that discharges through a single proglacial river. Though
the focus is on the 2012 episode, the investigators will also analyze samples
and GrIS dynamics data from two field seasons (2011- 12), which will aid in
interpretation of changes driven by the historic melting event owing to the
highly contrasting annual freshwater discharge rates. The investigators will use
time-series radiogenic (beryllium-7 and radon-222) and stable isotopes (oxygen
and hydrogen), each with unique sources and constant production rates, from the
Leverett glacier watershed to differentiate the fractions of meltwater sourced
from recent surface snow, glacial ice and delayed flow meltwater. They will also
investigate the composition and magnitude of nutrient and metal fluxes released
from the subglacial environment and study how these fluxes evolved during July
2012. From 2011-12, parallel ice sheet geophysical data (GPS, satellite imagery)
and meltwater biogeochemistry samples (carbon, macro- and micro-nutrients) have
been collected by the PI and colleagues from universities in the United Kingdom.
The proposed project will fully fund a Ph.D. student, and high school students
and undergraduate interns will be recruited to assist with the laboratory aspect
of the research. In order to increase the visibility of this project among the
general public, the PI and student will co-author an article for the WHOI
magazine Oceanus. This publication reaches a wide audience through both print-
and web-based editions. Finally, the Ph.D. student will continue to report on
the results of this study via an Expedition Blog called ?Following the Ice? on
Scientific American
(http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/expeditions/tag/following-the-ice/).