* 1256416
* Kin Structure, Kin Recognition, and Cooperation in a Model System
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Joan Strassmann, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 06/30/2017
* USD 854,000.00

Kinship is a crucial element in many kinds of cooperation. In order for
individuals to cooperate with their kin they must identify their relatives
somehow. This can happen through the structure of the environment, or through
active recognition processes. Recognition and cooperation can benefit many kinds
of organisms. Some of these organisms include microbes where cooperation can
actually harm the animal hosts, so understanding kin recognition and cooperation
in microbes can have important implications for human welfare.

The investigators will study kin structure and recognition in a social amoeba
that has a solitary stage where it eats bacteria and a social stage where it
aggregates into a multi-cellular collective that moves and produces spores. They
have found that this amoeba can distinguish between related and unrelated
individuals and these amoebae use this ability to avoid unrelated amoebae and to
protect certain kinds of bacteria. The investigators will test different
mechanisms for recognizing relatives in this system. They will document the
growth patterns of the amoebae as they prey upon bacteria. They will examine
genes for recognition and they will consider the role of dispersal distance in
recognition. Furthermore the investigators will explore the mechanisms through
which these amoebae exploit the toxicity of bacteria. Taken together, this
research has great potential to promote our understanding of the interactions
between microbes; which in turn will contribute to our understanding of how
microbes directly affect humans and the environment in which we live. The
project will contribute to the scientific training of undergraduate and graduate
students and will reach out to the public via websites, Wikipedia entries, and
events for K-12 students.