* 1256623
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Biodegradable Biopolymer from Waste Methane Gas
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Molly Morse, Mango Materials
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,427,197.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will use waste methane
gas (biogas) as a feedstock to produce pellets of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), a
valuable polymer that is converted into a variety of high margin or high volume,
eco-friendly plastic products such as childrens toys, electronic casings, water
bottles, and food packaging containers. The current plastics market is dominated
by petroleum-derived, non-biodegradable, energy-intensive plastics, which often
persist in the environment upon disposal. Alternative plastics are derived from
rapidly renewable biological resources (biobased) and consumed by microbes when
no longer needed (biodegradable). Unfortunately, these alternative plastics are
often costly to produce and their manufacturing process requires significant
amounts of energy. Mango Materials has a novel, patented, energy-efficient
method to produce a biodegradable, biobased polymer at a price competitive with
petrochemical-based polymers. Phase II involves scaling the Mango Materials
process to produce samples for customers to test while addressing associated
challenges. Key goals are to optimize the production process and to verify that
customers can process the product on existing manufacturing equipment. Key
results include a more optimized process, customer validation of samples, a
thorough understanding of polymer characteristics, and an updated cost and yield
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will ultimately be the widespread production of low-cost bioplastics
from waste biogas and the eventual displacement of petroleum-based plastics.
Bioplastics have the potential to capture an increasing fraction of the plastics
market, thereby giving consumers the choice to purchase affordable,
environmentally friendly, bioplastic-based products. When products made from
Mango Materials bioplastic are disposed in modern wastewater treatment plants or
landfills, they biodegrade anaerobically (without oxygen) to methane. This
methane can be cycled back and re-enter the process as feedstock to produce more
PHA. Thus, the life cycle may be closed, creating a cradle to cradle system.
This use of biogas will provide a strong economic incentive for facilities to
capture their methane, rather than releasing or flaring it, which will reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions and reduce corresponding impacts on global warming. The
innovation will enhance scientific understanding by studying the production of
bioplastic from waste biogas and by characterizing the microbial species
responsible for this conversion. This project represents one of the first times
that waste biogas will be used commercially as a feedstock for bacteria to
produce a valuable product.