* 1256745
* Collaborative Research: Is hypoxia a critical cue for molting in Drosphila?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 638,855.00

How do animals decide when to stop growing and become adults? Body size
profoundly affects many aspects of animal biology, yet the mechanisms by which
animals determine their adult size remain among the fundamental unsolved
problems of developmental biology. Holometabolous insects - the primary model
for the study of size regulation in animals - do not grow as adults, so the size
at which larvae initiate metamorphosis determines their adult size. A recent
prominent hypothesis is that "the proximate mechanism setting limits to size
during [larval] development is probably the onset of cellular hypoxia",
presumably due to oxygen demand outstripping supply capacity. This research will
test the role of oxygen in determination of adult body size in the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster, by examining the effect of manipulation of atmospheric
oxygen levels on growth, timing of metamorphosis, and neuroendocrine function.
In addition, epigenetic analyses will be conducted to test the role of candidate
signaling pathways by which oxygen sensing might control developmental timing
and body size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how body size is determined is
a fundamental question of biology because body size affects so many aspects of
physiology, ecology and evolution. Body size strongly affects food requirements,
competitive and reproductive capacities, value as a resource, drug clearance
rates, and stress-tolerance of an animal. Yet, the mechanisms involved in
determining when animals switch from the growing juvenile form to the
reproductive adult form are not well-understood for any animal. In addition to
providing new information on this topic that may be general for animals, this
research with Drosophila may have specific applications relevant to insect
control for agriculture and disease-prevention. This research will contribute to
science training by funding research experiences for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral trainees. Finally, this project will support secondary education by
development of an on-line biology laboratory and outreach to a local bioscience-
focused high school. Results from this project will also be disseminated through
peer reviewed publications and presentations at regional or national scientific
meetings. Data associated with each publication will be posted on Dryad
(www.datadryad.org).