* 1256052
* IDBR:   Using a Nanopore to Transfect Cells with Single Molecule Precision to Induce Pluripotency Efficiently in Fibroblasts
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Gregory Timp, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/29/2016
* USD 550,623.00

ABSTRACT An award is made to the University of Notre Dame to develop a new tool
that uses a synthetic nanometer-diameter pore (i.e. a nanopore) to reprogram the
genetic memory of specialized cells, inducing them to become like embryonic stem
cells. Stem cell research promises regenerative therapies for everything from
blindness, to the repair of heart and nerve damage, and even aging. Until
recently, clinical research has focused mainly on two kinds of cells: embryonic
and non-embryonic or adult stem cells. Beyond the ethical dilemma posed by the
use of embryonic stem cells, both cell types are scarce relative to the level
required for efficacious treatment. On the other hand, induced pluriopotent stem
cells (iPSCs) may now represent a viable alternative. iPSCs are derived from
specialized somatic cells by forcing the expression of four key genes; they are
similar to embryonic stem cells. Unfortunately, only about 0.01-0.1% of human
somatic cells can be forced to become iPSCs. The reprogramming efficiency of
somatic cells is crippled by the lack of control over the introduction and level
of expression of the key genes. This research effort at Notre Dame will produce
a tool that uses a nanopore to transfer nucleic acids into a single cell one
molecule at a time, affording stringent control over the expression of the
target genes. The synthetic nanopore uses a tightly confined electric field to
create a pore in the cell membrane that facilitates the delivery of nucleic
acids and even whole genes potentially with single molecule precision, while
allowing for serial or repeated gene delivery into the same cell. As a crucible
for testing the tool, nucleic acids encoding the key genes will be introduced
into somatic cells to produce iPSCs. This research has broader implications
beyond the development of a tool for gene delivery into cells. This project also
presents an opportunity to understand and transform biology through control of
the gene and its environment with single molecule precision. To take advantage
of this opportunity, the research will be translated into educational curricula
and disseminated into the biological, health and medical communities. There are
several components to this outreach program: i. teaching one-another through a
monthly seminar series and a web-site; ii. inspiring students through novel
curricula promulgated through a new lab course, Introduction to Systems Biology,
taught under the Engineering and Biological Sciences rubrics; and finally, iii
enlightening the public and high school students, in particular, about the
impact of this novel nanotechnology on biology and medicine through partnerships
with a local New Tech High School.