* 1256700
* 43rd Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages: Special Session on Romance Parsed Corpora-New York City - April, 2013
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Christina Tortora, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2014
* USD 13,796.00

The principal object of study for a core area of Linguistics is the individual
speaker's knowledge of his/her native language, or "grammar." Given that a
speaker's knowledge of grammar is unconscious, a challenge for the discipline is
to develop reliable methodologies that uncover the right data and enhance
replicability. "Parsed corpora" projects are an important component in an
emerging methodology being used to uncover the syntactic patterns underlying
speakers' use of language. These are texts, both written and spoken, which are
annotated with detailed grammatical information, and then used as tools to test
hypotheses about statistical tendencies in syntactic patterning. While there is
a rapidly growing body of Germanic parsed corpora in the discipline, there have
been equally important developments in parsed corpora in Romance.

With support from the National Science Foundation, a "Special Session on Parsed
Corpora of Romance languages" will be held at the 43rd Linguistic Symposium on
Romance Languages (LSRL43), April 17-19, 2013, at The Graduate Center of The
City University of New York. As the largest annual gathering of linguists
working on Romance languages, the LSRL affords the perfect occasion to make the
Romance linguistics community aware of some of the most exciting recent advances
in syntax, which are based on these innovative tools. The objective is to
provide a focused discussion of how these parsed corpora can be used as tools by
anyone in the discipline, and to thereby foster scientific activity. The Session
will include three one-hour talks on both historical and synchronic parsed
corpora in Romance languages: (1) the "Modelling Change: The Paths of French"
corpus, presented by Anthony Kroch and Beatrice Santorini (University of
Pennsylvania), (2) the "Syntax-oriented corpus of Portuguese dialects,"
presented by Ana Maria Martins (University of Lisbon), and (3) the "Tycho Brahe
Parsed Corpus of Historical Portuguese," presented by Charlotte Galves
(University of Campinas).