* 1256678
* Evolution and diversification of red flowers: Testing the macroevolutionary causes of rarity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Stacey Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 12/31/2013
* USD 359,999.00

Evolutionary biologists have long sought to explain the distribution of traits
across the tree of life and, in particular, why some traits are common while
others remain rare. The number of taxa with a given trait is shaped largely by
the transition rates toward and away from that state as well as the
diversification rates for taxa with the trait. This project will test the role
of these macroevolutionary forces in shaping the distribution of red flowers in
the potato family, Solanaceae. Although red-flowered taxa are spread across 13
genera, they are extremely rare, accounting for only 1% of the roughly 2850
species in the family. Using phylogenetic, anatomical, and biochemical methods,
this project will (1) identify the origins and mechanistic basis for red
coloration in Solanaceae, (2) test the hypothesis that red flowers remain rare
due to reduced rates of diversification, and (3) examine whether this effect is
contingent on the developmental pathway involved.

This research will bring new insight into the range of developmental pathways
employed during convergent evolution and the extent to which those mechanisms
affect the evolutionary success of lineages. Moreover, the plant pigments
targeted by this project have important health benefits for humans, and
understanding their evolution in flowers may lead to increased potential for
improving pigment content in related crop plants (e.g., potato and tomato). High
school students, graduate and undergraduate researchers, and postdoctoral
associates will be trained as part of this interdisciplinary project, which
spans plant biochemistry to statistical comparative methods. These trainees will
also participate in local outreach events to promote interest in plant biology
among K-12 students.