* 1256350
* Transforming Undergraduate Education in Engineering-- Phase 1: Mobilizing the Community for Change
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Norman Fortenberry, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 198,634.00

The "Transforming Undergraduate Education in Engineering-- Phase 1:
&lt;br/&gt;Mobilizing the Community for Change" project run by the American
Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) is initiating a process to identify the
critical components of engineering curricula, pedagogy, and educational culture
to support the education of engineers over the next several decades. The
explosion of technology over the 20th century, epitomized by advancing from the
first flight in 1903, to landing a man on the moon in 1969 has radically changed
the world we live in. Engineers, scientists, mathematicians and technologists
have been central to the development. Technology has transformed the typical
engineering workplace and practice; where drafting boards were commonplace, now
laptop computers have increased the precision and work volume of engineers.
Pencil and paper calculation performed with a pocket calculator has given way to
sophisticated computer simulations. Practicing engineers working today have
little need for many of the facts and methodologies that were essential just a
decade ago and now have skills and knowledge that was difficult to anticipate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately engineering education, if measured by the
amount of sustained change over the past several decades, has not kept pace. In
fact, some would say engineering education is not even in the race. If it is
natural for education to follow a changing society then this project is
perfectly timely. If education should lead society, then this project is even
more critical. Content, pedagogy, and university culture has remained relatively
static for 50 years and although there have been minor changes; the most common
engineering classroom is still passive lecture. Content, although modernized in
many ways, still clings to the time honored traditional prerequisite materials
of science and highly sophisticated mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
have also changed. Today traditional students are so accustomed to technology
that they have radically different ways to interact with the world and society.
Students find more information via the Internet than the library. They stay in
touch with each other more than previous generations even when distantly
separated, or in the car. Use of technology feels natural and comfortable,
unlike most engineering educators and practitioners who have had much of the
technology thrust upon them and adapted. Because of these radically different
behaviors, it seems obvious to expect that future students will have an equally
radical view of what is important and makes sense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is studying many questions. Is there value in dropping some time honored
content? Are such areas all critically important to engineering practice today
or were they critically important to the way engineering was performed in 1980?
Is it critical for students to solve equations by hand with pencil, paper and a
calculator or can they understand them even when a computer solves the
equations? Is it possible to understand a square root without being able to
compute it to six decimal points? Or can students grasp the big picture of
problem formulation and solution while delegating the tedious work to
technology? Are future students likely to understand material in radically
different ways from existing engineering practitioners? How can these different
ways of thinking be harnessed to create the ideal engineering graduate? If the
engineering education culture feeds the strengths of students, can engineering
be transformed into an exciting program of study that will draw students in
rather than requiring massive recruitment and retention
programs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is bringing together a key group of
engineering education experts in designing a large-scale change effort to
address important questions on the future of engineering education in the United
States. American Society for Engineering Education staff are collecting and
synthesizing ideas from the attendees in advance of the workshop, ensuring that
face-to-face meeting time is optimized. The results of this initial planning
process are being used to develop a full-scale plan for effecting change across
all engineering disciplines in cooperation with a wide range of stakeholders
from industry, education and government.