* 1256690
* Standard Research Grant: Socio-Technical Aspects of Nuclear Waste and its Long Term Storage
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Peter Galison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 386,738.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will analyze and
communicate important societal issues having to do with the disposal of nuclear
waste. Unlike the vast majority of scholarly inquiries, which culminate in
journal articles or a book, this inquiry will result in a feature length
documentary about the scientific, political, and ethical issues adjacent to the
problem of the socially responsible disposal of nuclear waste. Though the reach
of the film will extend beyond any particular site, the focal point of the study
is the only fully-licensed, operating geological repository for nuclear waste in
the world: the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant twenty-six miles east of Carlsbad,
New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will track the contentious history of current and planned clean-up
operations involving the Pilot Plant. It will depict a disputed, sometimes
successful and sometimes failed, trading zone for very different (often
antagonistic) stakeholders from experts, to townspeople, politicians, miners,
activists, industrial engineers, and futurists. Trading-zone studies, a
methodological approach within the research area known as Science and Technology
Studies (STS), interrogate subcultures confronting one another and developing
coordinated local action where global agreement is often absent. In this
trading-zone study, the investigator is ethically, visually, and
methodologically committed to depicting that collision as all sides struggle to
shape an contested nuclear future. The use of film as a medium for presenting
the results of the trading-zone study is innovative and potentially
transformative; it could open a way for STS to investigate in a visual way the
making of science and technology policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reach a broad audience by
partnering with outreach organizations, Film Sprout and Working Films, to bring
the film to its core audience: policy makers, environmentalists, along with
groups and citizens traditionally not positioned to participate in science
policy. Target locales and groups include science museums such as the Bradbury
Science Museum (Los Alamos), the Atomic Testing Museum (Las Vegas), The Museum
of Science and Industry (Albuquerque), nuclear facilities, towns surrounding
them, and environmental groups.