* 1256585
* WIDER:EAGER:CALIPER: Catalyst to Assess Learning and Instructional Practices for Evidence-based Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Sharon McGuire, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The CALIPER Project (Catalyst to Assess Learning and Instructional Practices for
Evidence-based Reform) is leveraging Boise State University's recently reformed
general education curriculum to transform undergraduate STEM instructional
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the CALIPER project is 1)
documenting the use of evidence-based instructional practices in STEM
foundational courses; 2) assessing the learning outcomes achieved by students in
these courses; and 3) associating these observed instructional practices with
the learning outcomes achieved. The Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol
(RTOP) is being used to document evidence-based instructional practices. Student
work (e.g. written assignments and exams) is being collected and assessed to
evaluate the degree to which students achieve intended learning outcomes, such
as "apply quantitative reasoning to draw appropriate conclusions" and
"understand the process of inquiry and analysis in response to evidence." This
process is building a sustainable assessment system for collecting and analyzing
data to understand the relationship between instructional practices and student
learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating assessment of evidence-
based instructional practices and student learning outcomes, the CALIPER project
is informing the national dialogue on effective education of future STEM
professionals and a more scientifically literate citizenry. Successful
implementation and dissemination of this model will provide both an incentive
and a roadmap for other educational institutions that wish to take effective
action to improve STEM learning for their students.