* 1256186
* RUI: Mechanistic Causes and Consequences of Micro-scale Spatial Variation within Intertidal Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* William Dowd, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 458,474.00

Temperature plays a key role in setting species ranges and driving evolutionary
patterns on broad spatial and temporal scales. However, interpretation of the
role of temperature in ecology and evolution may be confounded by complex
spatial patterns of temperature variation. Within very small coastal intertidal
areas, the investigators have documented micro-scale variation in body
temperature among individuals that can exceed the average range of body
temperature along an entire coastline. Essentially, different organisms
experience the same environment in different ways. This micro-scale variation
among individuals represents a critical caveat to the conclusion that a number
of species currently live close to their temperature tolerance limits; instead,
only some individuals do so. It is important to understand the causes and
consequences of such micro-scale variation, particularly when attempting to
forecast the large-scale outcomes of climatic changes. This project uses the sea
mussel as a model system for a combination of field and laboratory studies
designed first to answer two mechanistic questions: (1) How does micro-scale
variation in body temperature arise, and do individuals use behavioral responses
to modify their body temperature based on their recent experience? (2) Is
variation in thermal history, the amount of recent heating, correlated with
physiological abilities of individuals to combat stress associated with extreme
temperatures? The investigators will first quantify the magnitude and the
temporal persistence of micro-scale variation in body temperature (a necessity
before scaling up to address broad ecological and evolutionary questions) and
then link specific biochemical markers of thermal stress in individuals with
their unique thermal histories. Finally, the investigators will address the
potential sources of micro-scale variation in thermal physiology. Is inter-
individual variation a function of variation in recent thermal history, or
derived from fixed physiological differences between individuals in warm vs.
cool microhabitats, or is individual physiological variation masked in the field
by variation in other environmental factors such as food availability or by
behavior? Inter-individual variation is an important, understudied aspect of
organismal biology. This research will link inter-individual variation in
physiology with parallel environmental variation to deepen understanding of
evolutionary potential of species to cope with global change. To accomplish this
goal, the team will integrate biochemical, behavioral, and biophysical
approaches in field and laboratory studies. Importantly, a new understanding
will be gained of the oxidative stress mechanisms that may set thermal tolerance
costs and limits among species and among populations of a single species.

Broader impacts are focused on integration of undergraduate teaching and
research by forming a collaboration between Loyola Marymount University [LMU, a
Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI) with 21% Latino/Hispanic population]
and Stanford University. LMU undergraduates will be immersed in summer research
at Stanford's Hopkins Marine Station, greatly enhancing their professional
development and future career perspectives. A postdoctoral researcher based at
LMU will receive PUI-specific professional development in research, classroom
teaching, and student mentoring while enjoying access to world-class resources,
expertise, and an excellent field site at Stanford. Finally, methods and
findings of the research will be incorporated into several undergraduate courses
at LMU.