* 1256898
* Neural Mechanisms Underlying an Aggressive Syndrome in Stalk-eyed Flies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* John Swallow, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 490,072.00

Abstract

Aggressive syndromes, in which some individuals are consistently more aggressive
than others over a range of contexts, have been documented in multiple species.
Although the expression of aggressiveness should be favored in male competition,
such behaviors may be disadvantageous in interactions with predators, offspring
or mates, creating evolutionary trade-offs. Understanding the physiological
mechanisms that influence aggressive interactions may help us understand why
some individuals express aggression in inappropriate contexts in ways that are
detrimental to survival and reproduction. Stalk-eyed flies provide an ideal
model system to investigate both the physiological mechanisms and the
reproductive and survival fitness consequences of aggressive syndromes because
males in many species use their exaggerated head morphology in dramatic,
ritualized aggressive displays in different contexts, including male
competition, reproductive display, and predator-prey interactions. The proposed
research uses behavioral and pharmacological approaches to test whether the
maintenance of aggression levels displayed by male stalk-eyed flies across these
contexts is mediated through changes in the function of two key
neurotransmitters, serotonin and octopamine. Students ranging from pre-college
to graduate levels in Colorado and South Dakota will participate in these
studies, providing them with meaningful and valuable research experiences. These
experiences are important to encourage students to pursue careers in science.
Because children are often first exposed to the formal process of science and
discovery in public schools, an effective scientific educational program must
include outreach to both children and teachers. The investigators will help
train the next generation of Colorado science teachers by exposing them to the
process of scientific discovery through immersion in project-based internships.
Exposure to project-based laboratory experiences will better prepare these
teachers to inspire the next generation, affecting potentially thousands of
children. The investigators will also develop and deliver hands-on laboratory
exercises for students attending science camps in South Dakota.

Data will be made available for free access following publication of results.
Data will be available via ResearchGate (ResearchGate.net) and linked with
published articles.