* 1256090
* Collaborative Research:  Baseline Survey of the Lower Xingu River Rapids, Brazil:  a Highly Diverse, Globally Unique, and Immediately Imperiled Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 126,585.00

The Amazon Basin is Earth?s most biodiverse watershed, yet much remains unknown
about species diversity, population structures, biogeographic ranges, and
ecological and evolutionary processes. This project will document and analyze
the aquatic biodiversity of a 130 km-long anastomosing maze of high-energy
rapids in Brazil: the Lower Xingu River Rapids (LXRR) and adjacent stretches of
the Xingu. The LXRR faces imminent change from its wild state to both dewatered
and lentic, impounded habitats following completion of the Belo Monte
hydroelectric dam. New comprehensive specimen collections of fishes, crustaceans
and mollusks and associated data will be used to address key questions in
taxonomy, evolution and ecology, and will provide a permanent record (placed at
US and Brazilian museums) and environmental baseline of life within the LXRR to
assess future anthropogenic impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance understanding of the contribution that large river rapids make to
tropical biodiversity and productivity, and will train a wide range aquatic
scientists needed for the future study, protection and restoration of these
habitats. An on-line, publicly accessible illustrated guide to the
identification of LXRR fishes and invertebrates will be created. Two
postdoctoral scientists will be supported. Training and learning opportunities
will be offered for high school, undergraduate and graduate students.