* 1256626
* SBIR Phase II:  In situ PFC Monitoring Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Chunze Lai, United Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2016
* USD 643,866.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
analysis needs for monitoring perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) in water. PFOA and PFOS are ubiquitous
environmental contaminants that have been found at low concentrations in waste
water, drinking water, human blood, and in food. Because PFOA, PFOS and other
perfluorochemicals are bio-accumulative, extremely persistent, and toxic,
several states have established analytical methods and emission limits.
Furthermore, there is a large effort surrounding remediation of PFOA and PFOS
contaminated areas. Considering the impacts on both the environment and public
health, there is a market need for rapid, selective, low cost, and field
portable PFOA and PFOS sensing. This research aims at the development of a field
deployable ion-selective electrode that permits selective and fast measurement
of PFOA and PFOS with a low detection limit at low
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is to improve
public health by rapid identification and screening of polluted areas. Moreover,
the research will enable an economical PFOS/PFOA detection method for
environmental monitoring, continued research, compliance and remediation
efforts. Currently, research efforts are hampered by costly and time consuming
liquid extractions coupled with liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.
This research aims to produce a device that will significantly lower the
barriers to testing. Additional broader impacts include expanded application of
the sensor to measure the contaminant in blood, soil and food. Most importantly,
these efforts are important and instructive to direct and monitor remediation
and enable in-field research. We view this effort as an integral part of a wider
effort to understand and reduce sources and pathways by which the persistent
substance has become widespread in the environment.