* 1256087
* CAREER: Model-based Reconstruction of Ancient Biological Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Carleton Kingsford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 358,518.00

CAREER: Model-based Reconstruction of Ancient Biological
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New experiments are revealing interactions between
many molecules, such as proteins, in present-day bacterial and animal cells.
These interactions have evolved over time, resulting in the networks of
interactions we see today. Often, however, we are interested in what such a
network looked like in the past in a now-extinct ancestral species. This project
will develop new algorithms for recovering lost, ancient biological networks
from present-day networks. To do this, we view the reconstruction problem as a
network design task where the designed network is subjected to random
modifications according to a model of network evolution. We then seek to design
an ancestral network that is likely to have evolved into the observed, present-
day networks. The developed techniques will be applied to find precursor
networks of a single network at various points in time and to find the common
ancestor network of several extant organisms. In concert with the reconstruction
task, we will create more realistic computational models of network evolution by
efficiently searching a large space of possible evolutionary models. Our
examination of recovered ancient networks will advance our understanding of how
biological interactions evolve and how that evolution has shaped the function of
the cell. The application of the algorithms to retrieve the history of social
networks will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project further aims to
excite undergraduate and high school students about a career in science by
expanding a successful summer internship program in bioinformatics. The program
will host additional interns to conduct research on systems biology, genomics,
and other topics at the interface of computer science and molecular biology. We
will also create improved online resources to connect undergraduates interested
in bioinformatics research with faculty mentors. The research on ancestral
network reconstruction will be incorporated into several undergraduate and
graduate bioinformatics and algorithms courses.