* 1256769
* Collaborative Research: Herbivore interactions and plant responses: from foliar chemistry to communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Evan Preisser, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 297,500.00

This project seeks to understand how two invasive insect pests, the woolly
adelgid and the hemlock scale, affect eastern hemlock trees. The woolly adelgid
has devastated entire forests of hemlock along the east coast of North America,
but the hemlock scale -- which is just as common -- has had minimal impact.
Although common sense indicates that two pests are worse than one, research
suggests the opposite. Intriguingly, trees infested with elongate scale seem
somehow protected from the adelgid. Understanding why this happens and whether
'inoculation' with one pest might protect the tree from another type of pest
requires understanding how trees defend themselves and respond to attack.
Researchers have teamed up on a project that uses a combination of experiments
and mathematical models to develop a 'road map' of plant responses to forest
pests. Specifically, they will assess how each pest affects plant defenses and
nutrient storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the economic and ecological losses
caused by many species of insect pests, it is tremendously important to develop
a detailed understanding of how forests are impacted by (and might be protected
from) multiple pests. By identifying the response pathway, the results of this
study can be applied to other systems to predict the likely impact of multiple
herbivores on forest health. This project also provides an opportunity for urban
schoolchildren to learn more about nearby forests. The researchers have
developed a partnership with SMILE (Science and Math Investigative Learning
Experiences), a locally-based group that offers enrichment activities to
children from poorly-performing school districts. Graduate students and SMILE
staff will work with teachers to develop and implement a year-long educational
module on forests and food webs. Funding provided by this award will be used to
pay for field trips to local forests to help students learn about these systems
and survey hemlocks for the presence of invasive pests.