* 1256638
* SBIR Phase II:  Early and Specific Dementia Diagnosis Using Imaging and Pattern Classification Software
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Ana Lukic, ADM Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 934,730.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses a
critical need for accurate patient diagnosis in the development of effective
therapeutics for Alzheimer's Disease and other dementias, and in patient
treatment. The high variability of patients selected for dementia clinical
trials, including misdiagnosis, has been a significant contributor to the high
failure rates of these trials. The diagnostic under development in this grant
would provide an important way to reduce misdiagnosis and patient variability. A
main objective of Phase II is to expand the glucose metabolism dementia
diagnostic developed in Phase I to be capable of analyzing amyloid PET images
and structural magnetic resonance images (MRI), and to combine data from one or
more of these imaging modalities into an optimal diagnostic and prognostic
assessment. The research will include the development, refinement and testing
of: single-modality analysis methods that identify the type of dementia that a
patient has, single-modality analysis methods that place the patient along a
scale of disease severity, methods that combine and optimize information from
multiple imaging modalities, and automated software to conduct these analyses.
In addition, reports will be further developed and refined with feedback from
physicians and pharmaceutical partners to clearly communicate results.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the ability to
address a major barrier of patient variability in achieving successful clinical
trials, thus increasing the opportunity to find effective therapeutics for
Alzheimer's Disease and other dementias. More than 6 million persons in the U.S.
alone are affected by these dementias, with a societal cost estimated at more
than $400 billion. This population is rapidly growing as the population ages,
and the need to effectively identify and treat patients is urgent. The use of
the technology to screen patients for clinical trials and stratify them for
analysis is expected to be of immense value to pharmaceutical companies and is
an initial commercial opportunity. Already, the developments of Phase I are in
use for projects with two such companies. The ability to accurately diagnose
patients will help to address the need to correctly treat these patients. The
project will result in job creation as the initial service model and subsequent
product model are implemented. Finally, by allowing characterization of the
subjects in clinical trials, this project will aid in the scientific
understanding of the progression of disease and its relationship to symptoms and
response to therapy.