* 1256839
* RCN: The Genetics and Genomics of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Walter Wilczynski, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,209.00

The Sociogenomics Initiative RCN aims to identify the fundamental mechanisms of
social behavior common across all organisms by bringing together faculty
researchers, students, and science educators to advance understanding of the
genomic mechanisms of social behavior. It integrates molecular genetic knowledge
with biological higher levels to understand how gene expression modulates brain
areas, how those areas regulate behavior within and between individuals, and how
social systems evolve to yield the diversity of behavioral, brain, and gene
expression patterns seen in the biological world. It facilitates interaction
among researchers and enhances student training through a program including an
annual Sociogenomics International Meeting (SGIM) to review and solidify ongoing
research and develop new multidisciplinary projects, combined with technical
workshops and other scientific activities to advance the skills and training of
researchers and students in genomic approaches to social behavior. These
activities are supplemented by exchanges between Network laboratories to foster
new research collaborations, with a special goal of placing organism-oriented
students or postdocs into systems biology, informatics, or molecular labs to
facilitate integration across multiple levels of analysis. An SGI web site will
facilitate on-going interactions among the Network members and the scientific
community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Initiative will
have a transformational impact by stimulating new genomic approaches to the
study of social behavior and integrating them across levels from molecular to
organismal to evolutionary. It will also contribute to training the next
generation of scientists with programs for students from undergraduate to
postdoctoral. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data Management: Collection of new data will
not be supported by this grant. However, summaries of symposium talks and
technical presentations will be posted on the open-access SGI website, and
network members will be encouraged to post relevant, published research articles
on the SGI website (as consistent with applicable copyright and intellectual
property considerations).