* 1256184
* SMASIS Student Activities Grant
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This effort provides support for student attendance, student networking and
student mentoring activities for the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
(ASME) conference on Smart Materials, Adaptive Structures and Intelligent
Systems (SMASIS). Adaptive structures and materials systems by definition are
intelligent, flexible systems that have sentience and responsiveness to ever
changing environments. The field has rapidly matured due to synergistic
interdisciplinary efforts across sectors of universities, government and
industry. The purpose of the SMASIS conference is to assemble world experts
across engineering and scientific disciplines (mechanical, aerospace,
electrical, materials, and civil engineering, biology, physics chemistry, etc)
to actively discuss the latest breakthroughs in smart materials, the cutting
edge in adaptive structure applications and the recent advances in both new
device technologies and basic engineering research exploration. Support from the
NSF will promote student participation at the conference to activities that
foster technical and intellectual exchange include a student hardware design
competition and a student paper competition as well as activities to develop a
network of peers and mentors for students that include a student mentoring
luncheon and a student outing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach program is
designed to engage students who might not otherwise be familiar with smart
materials or adaptive structures from local high schools, HBCU's and/or
community colleges. The specific goals are to 1) foster technical and
intellectual exchange among students who are excited about prospects for
research on smart materials and adaptive systems, 2) instill in its participants
the sense of a technical community of student peers with a common enthusiasm for
research and this technical field and of possible mentors for contact as they
develop their own career paths in this field, 3) increase participation of
underrepresented students in this professional development activity, and 4)
increase participant awareness of the broad range of ideas and topics being
studied within this field.