* 1256620
* Mixing Across the Pacific Equatorial Cold Tongue
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* James Moum, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,995,362.00

The cold tongue in the Equatorial Pacific is an expansive region of net ocean
heat uptake. Maintaining these cool sea surface temperatures requires a
combination of subsurface mixing or lateral/vertical advection to transport
surface heat downward. Whether mixing plays the dominant role is not yet clear,
but it has been established that a rich set of fluid dynamical processes in the
upper equatorial ocean drives intense turbulence. Evidence from limited
observations on the Equator at 140W during the passage a Tropical Instability
Wave (TIW) revealed a ten-fold increase in subsurface turbulent heat flux,
sufficient to cool surface waters by 2 degree Celsius per month. This suggests
the possibility that mixing alone could maintain the equatorial cold tongue, a
conjecture supported by climatological evidence that sea surface cooling is
enhanced by Tropical Instability Waves.

Intellectual Merit: Since 2005, moored mixing measurements on the Equator at
140W using a novel self-contained instrument (chi-pod) provide a more complete
temporal assessment of the mixing. These moored records indicate not only
considerable variability on short time scales but also significant seasonal
variations in turbulence levels that are roughly 90-180Â° out-of-phase with the
annual cycle in Sea Surface Temperature. However, the time-varying part of the
spatial structure is completely unknown. Strong cross-equatorial gradients in
currents, temperature and salinity imply that gradients in mixing are likely to
be strong as well. At present, it is impossible to distinguish temporal cycles
from spatial gradients.

This project will expand the measurements of mixing on the Tropical Atmosphere-
Ocean mooring array along the equator between 140W and 95W. Each of these 4
moorings will be outfitted with 5 chi-pods and the analysis of the data obtained
from these moorings will be supplemented by existing data from past process
experiments at 140W and a detailed, complementary process experiment at 102.5W.
The main goals of he project are to quantify (1) the time- and spatially-varying
structure of mixing along and across the cold tongue; (2) the role of mixing in
maintaining the cold tongue; (3) the role of TIWs in equatorial mixing; and (4)
the role of turbulence in consuming TIW energy.

Broader Impacts: A post-doctoral associate will participate in a broad analysis
of the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean Array and mixing measurements and be trained in
equatorial dynamics. College graduate students will participate in the process
experiment. Undergraduate engineering students will be employed in the summer
months to help with both electronics and mechanical construction and testing of
instrumentation. An undergraduate atmospheric science student will be employed
in the summer of 2013 to review and document archived data from the Mary's Peak
webcam (http://marycam.coas.oregonstate.edu/index.html) for public
dissemination.

This project complements ongoing theoretical analyses of Tropical Instability
Waves conducted by the lead investigators and several colleagues. Data obtained
in the project will be shared with the Climate Process Team on ocean mixing and
become part of the archived data sets of the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean Array
Program managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. This
project is a contribution to the U.S. CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and
predictability) Porgram.