* 1256664
* Collaborative Research: understanding and utilizing a unique association between rhizobia and rice
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Jean-Michel Ane, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,615.00

Cereals such as rice (Oryza sativa) are staple food for human and animal
nutrition. Because cereal growth is limited by nitrogen, the high yields of
these crops are currently dependent on fertilizers that are a major on-farm
expense and cause significant environmental damages. In view of the increasing
demand for higher production of these crops, the development of alternative
strategies to enhance crop production while reducing fertilizer use is of high
priority. One such strategy is to use rhizobia that form intimate endophytic
association with these crops and increase their growth. Rhizobia are soil
bacteria that form a very efficient nitrogen-fixing association with legumes.
Recent studies have shown that rhizobia hijacked the genetic machinery of
legumes involved in symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi. Similar to legumes, rice
forms symbiosis with mycorrhizal fungi and contain the homologues of legume
genes necessary for interactions with rhizobia. Preliminary results from the
investigators' laboratories indicate that a rhizobial strain utilizes the
mycorrhizal symbiotic pathway to colonize rice tissues. The goal of this project
is to determine the molecular and cellular mechanisms of both rhizobia and rice
that result in this beneficial association as well as to evaluate the potential
of rhizobial nitrogen fixation with rice. This rhizobial-cereal interaction
provides a unique opportunity to study the initial relationships and mutual
benefits that probably allowed legume nodulation to appear but also, in the long
term, to use this system to engineer nitrogen fixation in cereals by following
the path of legume evolution.

The broader impacts of this project for the education and professional
development include the interdisciplinary training for students and postdoctoral
fellow that include experience in microbial and plant genetics, molecular
biology, microscopy and plant-microbe interactions. Numerous outreach and
educational opportunities will be provided for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students. The benefits of microbial symbioses will also be
emphasized in directed research programs targeting minority undergraduate and
K-12 students in both laboratories as well as using the public outreach programs
in both campuses of the University of Wisconsin.