* 1256578
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Cost, Energy-Efficient Electronic Paper
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Mateusz Bryning, Zikon Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase II project advances
a new electronic paper technology that offers paper-like viewability and high
energy-efficiency at very low production costs. Central to the innovation is a
reverse-emulsion electrophoretic display (REED) ink, combined with a paper-like
nano-porous matrix that was developed in Phase I research. The research
objectives for Phase II are: (1) to develop a controlled method for depositing
the matrix layer, (2) to finalize critical product design parameters, (3) to
develop scalable and high-yield fabrication methods, and (4) to conduct
performance evaluation of advanced prototypes. Necessary tasks to achieve these
objectives include developing matrix deposition hardware and characterizing
layer quality, optimizing the combined formulation of porous matrix and ink,
defining specific product geometry and functional specifications, performing
process integration and assembly, interfacing with electronics and optimizing
driving signals, conducting failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA), and
identifying robust operating conditions. The anticipated results of this work is
an advanced prototype display that meets performance requirements for electronic
shelf label (ESL) applications, as well as a commercially-viable sequence of
manufacturing processes for scalable production.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are to develop a core
display technology that satisfies the readability, power, and cost requirements
desired for electronic shelf labels (ESLs), opening new opportunities within the
multi-billion dollar global electronic paper market. This project has important
implications on society because it can mitigate some of the environmental impact
associated with current thin-film display technologies, improve the energy
efficiency of electronic displays, and can also lead to reduced paper
consumption in a commercially viable way. Technology areas impacted by this
innovation include electronic displays, printable electronics, and
nanotechnology. Market sectors impacted include display manufacturing and
retail. The innovation will further enhance scientific and technological
understanding of the behavior of electrophoretic nano-droplets in thin nano-
porous media. The enhanced scientific understanding that will be gained from the
study of porous matrix and nano-droplet interactions has potential for synergies
beyond the realm of electronic displays, with parallels encountered in other
areas such as bioseparation and energy conversion processes. Another important
aspect of this research is its impact on education, by engaging a university
faculty member and a graduate student at one of the nation's minority serving
institutions.