* 1256633
* SBIR Phase II:  Through-Building Device-free Localization for Emergency and Tactical Operations
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Dustin Maas, Xandem Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 486,912.00

The innovation of this SBIR Phase II project is the development and
commercialization of a low-cost through-building surveillance product for police
and SWAT teams that locates and tracks people across an entire building using a
network of wireless sensors deployed around the outside of the building. Unlike
other through-single-wall imaging technologies, a device does not need to be
held against a wall. This project will develop new technologies that make the
system useful for police team end-users to quickly deploy and use without
extensive training. Specifically, the produce should investigate methods to
achieve robust connectivity across larger buildings; develop capabilities for
2.5-dimensional (x,y + floor) imaging and tracking; develop adaptive estimation
algorithms that automatically adjust to the environment; develop devices suited
for rapid deployment, and develop a real-time commercial prototype including
user interface. At the end of the project, the combination of these developments
should allow delivery of a prototype to a SWAT team for them to deploy and use
on their own in a training exercise.

The broader/commercial impact is the commercialization of a technology for
police and SWAT (special weapons and tactics) teams to quickly obtain
situational intelligence that will save lives. Lives are lost every year because
law enforcement officers do not know what is happening inside a building prior
to entering. In addition, other life-saving applications will benefit from
technologies developed, for example: military urban operations; building
security and homeland security systems; finding people alive in collapsed
buildings or during fire rescue; and worker safety systems. The firms technology
is also useful in systems that allow elderly to live longer in their own home by
monitoring their activities to ensure their safety and health. The proposed
solution to these challenges is uniquely useful because it does not require a
person to wear or carry any device, and cannot image a person's face or
features, thus preserving privacy. The technology is capable of "seeing" through
walls, even in the dark or through smoke. These features make it compelling for
indoor and outdoor security systems, in-home monitoring systems, "smart
building" energy-conservation systems, and other context-aware computing
systems. This project develops technologies for a new sensing modality with many
compelling applications.