* 1256634
* SBIR Phase II:  A Microbially-Based Process to Produce a High-Quality Soy Protein Concentrate for Complete Fish-Meal Replacement in Aquaculture Diets
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Michael Grey, DAST, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
process to produce high quality soy protein concentrate (HQSPC) as a fish meal
replacer in aquaculture feeds, while providing a binding agent for extrusion and
an immunoprophylactic for disease control. Increased demand for fish protein and
reduced wild captured fish has facilitated rapid growth of aquaculture (9% per
year). This has dramatically increased demand for fish meal (the primary
component in aquaculture feeds), causing overexploitation of this resource and
rapidly escalating prices. There is considerable market opportunity for a high
quality, economical plant protein concentrate to completely replace fish meal in
aquaculture feeds, thus providing broad impact. The proposed innovation is a
microbially-based process to economically produce HQSPC by converting soybean
carbohydrates into protein, yield an exopolysaccharide for pellet binding, and
provide an immunoprophylactic. Phase II objectives include generating sufficient
quantities of HQSPC for feeding trials with yellow perch to assess technical and
economic feasibility. The HQSPC is anticipated to have >70% protein to replace
fish meal, while providing desirable growth rates and conversion efficiencies.
Bench-scale production costs should be less than current SPC ($0.30/lb), but
with an intrinsic value closer to that of soy protein isolate ($1.50/lb).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to improve the
nation?s second largest trade deficit for natural resources, fish protein, by
providing a complete fish meal replacement. Soybean meal or soy protein
concentrates (SPC) have been used to partially replace fish meal, however the
solvent extraction process used to produce SPC is expensive, the separated
oligosaccharides do not have a valuable use, and the quality of SPC (65%
protein) is insufficient to permit complete replacement of fish meal. Soy
protein isolate (90% protein) requires a more costly protein extraction method.
The proposed microbial process converts soybean carbohydrates into additional
protein, along with sufficient gum to serve as a binding agent, and a probiotic
to induce an immunostimulant effect. Preliminary data shows the proposed microbe
will metabolize the individual carbohydrates in soybeans, which will enhance
scientific and technological understanding of this mechanism. To demonstrate
technical and commercial feasibility, extrusion and enzymatic saccharification
will be used to solubilize carbohydrates in soybean white flake, followed by
incubation with the gum producing microbe, and recovery of solids for use in
yellow perch feeding trials. International aquaculture feed manufacturers would
be prospective customers for the HQSPC or the conversion process itself.