* 1256174
* Society for Economic Anthropology Conference Proposal
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Lisa Cliggett, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,120.00

This award to the Society for Economic Anthropology will support a conference in
which cutting-edge research on the theme of 'Inequality' will be presented,
discussed, and disseminated. The award will support ten students to attend the
conference, providing an opportunity for them to present their research,
interact with senior scholars, and attend a roundtable session on field research
methods in economic anthropology. The conference will contribute original,
empirical research to further understanding of the origins and perpetuation of
inequality across societies globally. Themes to be explored include the cultural
manifestations of inequality in diverse societies, processes through which
relatively egalitarian societies become more hierarchical over time, ways in
which inequality is measured and studied, and the impact of current economic
crises on inequality globally. The conference provides a forum for scholars,
students, and others in attendance to engage with recent research on the issue
of inequality which is a growing social concern in the United States and
elsewhere. In particular, the active participation of students, both
undergraduate and graduate, in the conference will contribute to their academic
training and professional development. A special roundtable session on
anthropological research methods and student research presentations contribute
to this goal. Finally, products from the conference, including an edited volume
or journal issue as well as online posting of conference abstracts and posters,
will further disseminate research findings to the scholarly community as well as
the general public.