* 1256137
* An Afranaph Project Development Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Kenneth Safir, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2014
* USD 33,913.00

The NSF-supported Afranaph Project has for nearly a decade developed a research
model and infrastructure for theoretical and empirical inquiry designed to
uncover and record the rich empirical patterns to be found in African languages
and to share these results though an internet interface and freely-accessible
database. The empirical inquiry is largely conducted through internet
communications with native speakers of African languages who are themselves
linguists. Most of them live in Africa, and many are Ph.D. candidates who learn
through their collaboration with Afranaph researchers. In recent years, Afranaph
has undergone dramatic expansion, and so its internet-based community of
scholars is ever larger, including more than fifty researchers, consultants, and
researcher-consultants, in addition to participating graduate and undergraduate
students and post-docs. This award will support a workshop at Rutgers, the PI's
home institution, to bring together researchers and consultants, many who have
worked together without ever meeting face-to-face, to report on empirical and
theoretical results achieved so far and to plan future work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is expected to be a galvanizing experience
for the project, lead to new collaborations, and expand the professional
networks of many scholars who are otherwise somewhat isolated (particularly
those from Africa), while providing an excellent audience for the presentation
of research results on theoretically informed language comparison. Researchers
and consultants will report on the progress and goals of their research,
theoretical results achieved and what sorts of further questions can now be
explored, based on the comparison of rich data-sets produced by Afranaph for
languages that have long been under-reported. The intellectual impact of the
Afranaph Project will be cumulative, but the workshop will provide a snapshot of
what it has achieved, and showcase a model for research that we expect to have
broadening impact within our discipline.