* 1256106
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: From Pricing to Cap-and-Trade: Analysis and Design of Quantity-based Approach to Congestion Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Yafeng Yin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) collaborative research
project will explore a new and promising travel demand management strategy,
inspired by various cap-and-trade schemes aiming to reduce greenhouse gas and
air pollutant emissions. Traffic congestion continues to threaten the economic
prosperity and quality of life around the world. It is widely acknowledged that
demand management strategies could help alleviate traffic congestion, and if
properly implemented, they could be effective and cost-efficient. The cap-and-
trade schemes considered in this research seek to couple direct travel demand
restrictions with a trading mechanism. Because such a scheme typically involves
creating mobility credits and trading them in a market, it is also known as a
tradable credit scheme. As an early exploration of this idea, the project will
directly involve economists that will provide input to each research task and as
part of the research analytical tools to answer critical design and
implementation issues will be sought. Agent-based simulation will be used as the
main evaluation tool for the proposed analytical framework and design concepts.
Based on this simulation platform, the research will compare tradable credit
schemes with traditional travel demand management strategies such as congestion
pricing, and validate the effectiveness and practicability of the proposed
schemes with varying behavioral travel assumptions.

If successful, the project could provide a meaningful bridge between
transportation and economics on the issue of cap-and-trade and research findings
would be shared to advance both fields. The work could shift the current
paradigm associated with traffic congestion management policies. The findings
from this research could also enhance choices among these policies and help
provide for their prioritization. Accordingly, the research will be incorporated
in education activities at both universities by offering new materials and case
studies within the transportation curricula. Finally, research results will be
broadly disseminated through a variety of media.