* 1256955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technological Wonder: The Theatrical Fashioning of Scientific Knowledge, 1838-1905
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Tracy Davis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 17,628.00

This dissertation project is a historical study of popular scientific
communication, focusing on the dissemination of scientific theories and
technological innovations through lectures, mechanical magic shows, and
theatrical performances in nineteenth-century Britain. Performances of science
and technologies were often put on display within exhibition halls,
universities, museums, and theatres, utilizing theatrical techniques of
spectacle to attract the wider public. Carried out under the supervision of Dr.
Tracy Davis and Dr. Kenneth Alder, Ms. Aileen Robinson will explore how these
performances fashioned orientations towards scientific theories and
technological innovations for non-specialist audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide historical grounding for
contemporary Anglo-American popular science communication. Examining nineteenth-
century public performance will assist researchers in uniting science and
theatrical practice for public benefit. Understanding the importance of science
in the midst of media, such as theatre, can pave the way towards communicating
and developing refined methods of non-specialist communication, such as in
theatrical presentations of the history of science or university science
programming for all majors.