* 1256193
* IDBR: Encoded Combinatorial Microdisc Array for Ultrahigh-Throughput Biomolecule Screening
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Kit Lam, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 03/31/2017
* USD 390,107.00

An award is made to the University of California, Davis to develop an innovative
instrumental platform for ultrahigh-throughput biomolecular synthesis and
screening. By employing emerging microfabrication, microfluidics, self-assembly,
and encoding techniques, the program is aimed at addressing integrated
functionality, chemical identification, synthetic throughput and efficiency of
combinatorial chemistry, by introducing encoded microdisc array fabricated on
solid support and a modified split-mix synthetic approach with barcode scanning
and decoding steps. Following the high-efficiency digital combinatorial
synthesis, microdisc carriers, each displaying a unique molecular sequence and a
distinct binary barcode, can be self-assembled into a closely packed array for
quantitative characterization of massive cell-ligand interactions in parallel.
To demonstrate the broad utility and applicability of the transformative
biomolecular platform, both random and cyclic peptide libraries will be
synthesized, screened and optimized against multiple cancer cell lines, from
which cancer-targeting ligands with high specificity and high affinity are
expected to be efficiently discovered.

Combinatorial chemistry has enabled molecular discovery and biomarker
identification in many areas of cancer biology and drug discovery. The encoded
microdisc array will significantly reduce the complexity of operations,
facilitate chemical synthesis, and allow direct sequence identification of the
combinatorial chemistry. This versatile platform can be adapted in the future to
an even broader range of combinatorial biochemical and biomedical discoveries.
The proposed collaborative research program will provide an excellent
opportunity to engage and train young scientists and engineers in the cutting-
edge interdisciplinary research field, and more importantly, to recruit and
promote women and underrepresented minorities via various educational and
outreach activities. Detailed information about the development of the molecular
discovery instrument will reach the broader biology and biochemistry communities
through conference presentations (e.g., annual microTAS conferences), open-
access journals (e.g., Journal of Visualized Experiments), and online video
resources (e.g., YouTube).

This award is co-funded by the IDBR program (Instrument Development for
Biological Research) in the BIO Directorate, and Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Biomass Engineering (BBBE)program in the Engineering Directorate.