* 1256701
* Proposal for Conference/Workshop Support for CECAM workshop: Self-assembly: from fundamental Principles to Design Rules for Experiment; Lausanne, Switzerland; March 1 - 3, 2013
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Michael Hagan, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 7,980.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1256701 PI: Hagan, Michael ORG: Brandeis
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Proposal for Conference/Workshop Support
for CECAM workshop: Self-assembly: from fundamental principles to design rules
for experiment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The proposal asks for
funds to support the travel and subsistence costs for seven early-career US
scientists to attend a workshop to be held at the Centre Europeen de Calcul
Atomique et Moleculaire (CECAM) in Lausanne, Switzerland. This workshop aims to
bring together computer simulators and experimentalists whose work bears upon
the fundamental rules that govern soft matter self-assembly. Participants will
be united not by their study of a particular physical system, but by their focus
on the forces that control assembly. The proposed speaker list is highly
multidisciplinary, and includes theoretical physicists, virologists, synthetic
biologists, and materials scientists. Despite their common interests,
researchers who study biological assemblages and those who study crystallization
rarely overlap. The format of a CECAM workshop provides an ideal environment to
bring members of these fields together to benefit from commonalities in subject
and complementary techniques used in each of these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: It is anticipated that the
workshop will have a much broader impact than that realized from a typical
conference. Speakers and attendees from a wide range of disciplines,
geographical locations, and career stages will engage in intensive small-group
discussions. Thus, participants with different areas of expertise, experience
levels, genders, and ethnic backgrounds will interact closely. NSF funding
support will be given to both emerging scientists (students, postdocs, and
junior faculty) and under-represented groups in order to increase their
participation. Such support will help fulfill the urgent, national need to train
the future scientific community in the areas of nanotechnology and biological
research. Furthermore, by encouraging US scientists to attend through NSF
support, the workshop will serve to increase the engagement of the US with the
European soft matter community.