* 1256758
* Mediation of plant-herbivore interactions by foliar bacterial endophytes: A test using a native Pseudomonas-mustard-insect interaction system
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Noah Whiteman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Parasites are among the strongest negative factors in the health and performance
of both plants and animals. Plant and animal hosts have in turn evolved robust
immune systems that are organized into distinct branches that respond to
different types of parasites. However, evidence suggests that when attack by one
type of parasite activates one branch of the immune system, other branches can
be de-activated. This could mean that co-infection by more than one type of
parasite could partly defeat an immune response and have more serious combined
effects than expected from just adding the effects of separate attacks by each
parasite. The project will test this using a native plant species and its
natural, pathogenic bacteria and herbivores in an alpine ecosystem in the Rocky
Mountains. The researchers will conduct field and laboratory experiments to show
if prior infection with leaf-dwelling bacteria renders the plants more
susceptible to attack by leaf-chewing herbivores, and vice versa. Use of
molecular techniques will further show if this is accompanied by de-activation
of the branches of the immune system of the plant that are respectively
responsible for resistance to bacteria and herbivores. This project will help
fill an important gap in our understanding of the importance of co-infection in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral scientists, and a high school teacher in ecology,
molecular biology, and microbiology. The award will also further the career of a
young investigator by providing his first major federal funding. The study
species are relatives of major agricultural pathogens, pests, and crop plants,
so results should help understand how to reduce agricultural losses. The
research should also have applications to medicine, because co-infection is also
a health problem in humans. For example, prior infection of people with
intestinal worms can lead to increased susceptibility to microbial infections.