* 1256688
* Collaborative Research:  GENETICS OF LIFE CYCLE EVOLUTION AND THE EFFECTS ON TEMPORAL ISOLATION AND GENE FLOW
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Richard Harrison, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 347,578.00

The long-term goal of the research is to understand the process of speciation,
in which one species splits into two, often through the evolution of multiple
forms of reproductive isolation. The project focuses on reproductive isolation
that occurs because of differences in the timing of major life cycle events, a
widespread and potentially major impetus for speciation when differences in time
of reproduction restrict gene flow. In a multi-pronged approach that applies
high-throughput DNA sequencing, genetic mapping, population genomic analysis,
metabolic profiling and field experiments the research will examine the genetic
basis of life cycle variation and temporal reproductive isolation in the
European corn borer moth (Ostrinia nubilalis), and evaluate the consequence of
these differences in preventing gene flow between populations in nature. These
experiments will provide a rare glimpse into the role of temporal isolation in
origin of new species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a superb model for
speciation, the European corn borer is also a major pest of corn and other
crops, costing the United States ~$1B each year. By leveraging the moth as an
organism of both scientific and economic interest, the research builds community
partnerships to simultaneously promote basic scientific discovery, public
understanding of the relevance of evolution in daily life, and sustainable
agriculture.