* 1256985
* RUI:   Post-fire Nitrogen Cycling in Boreal Bogs - Critical Unknowns Explored
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Melanie Vile, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,170,000.00

This research is structured around a novel conceptual framework for how nitrogen
(N) cycling in boreal bogs changes as a function of both time-since-fire and
experimentally augmented N. Bog sites of different ages (time since the most
recent fire) will receive elevated N inputs in simulated rainfall. New insights
will be gained into: the importance of biological N2-fixation as a newly
recognized major input of N into these bogs; the role of Sphagnum mosses, which
cover the bog surface and are the major contributors to ongoing peat
accumulation, as the gatekeepers of newly acquired N from either N2-fixation or
rain and snow; and the linkages between N inputs and the ability of bogs to
sequester both N and carbon (C) in the accumulating peat.

Boreal peatlands cover only 3-4% of the Earth's land surface, yet store 25-30%
of the world's soil C and 9-16% of the world's soil N in peat. Peatlands
represent an ongoing net sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide. Bogs of western
Canada persist at the dry end of the climatic gradient across which peatlands
exist, and hence are especially sensitive to ongoing climate changes that
include increasing temperature, as well as increasing wildfire frequency and
severity. Further, in western Canada, atmospheric N deposition historically has
been low, but is increasing because of N emissions from oil sands development in
northern Alberta. Clarifying the linkages between N and C cycling in western
Canadian bogs will enhance the ability to predict how N and C storage in peat
may be influenced by ongoing climate change. The research will support graduate
and undergraduate thesis students; the PIs will teach a Peatland Ecology course
at the Meanook Biological Research Station, Alberta, Canada, in years 2 and 4 of
the project.