* 1256277
* SBIR Phase II:  Nutrient Analyzer with Integrated Optics and Glass-Diaphragm Pump for Field Studies
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Philippe Bado, Translume
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2015
* USD 453,829.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
entail the development of a microfluidic colorimetric analyzer to yield
quantitative field measurements out of essential inorganic nutrients (initially
nitrite and nitrate, thereafter ammonium and orthophosphate). This analyzer will
primarily be used in industrial farms where algae are grown to produce biofuel.
Inorganic nutrients affect not only the amount of algae biomass generated, but
also its lipid content. Maximizing algae biofuel production requires a series of
steps, each associated with an optimal nutrient concentration. The amount of
nutrient must be measured on a frequent basis as the timescales associated with
algae growth are short. Currently, nutrient concentration data is obtained at
rates that are too slow to permit maximization of algae production. This problem
is being addressed through the development of a small inexpensive colorimetric
analyzer that will perform real-time measurement. The design of this instrument
is optimized for prolonged unattended field operations, and minimal maintenance
and consumption of supplies. It uses EPA-approved analytical chemistries. These
have been selected because they are the least susceptible to interference from
other compounds present in the algae bioreactors and/or
ponds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project effects US energy policy. The world is gradually running out of fossil
oil. Renewable biofuels are increasingly seen as a key element of the US energy
future. Algae, a source of oily biomass, are a leading candidate to meet biofuel
needs. They can yield more fuel per acre than any other crops, they have the
capability to grow in freshwater, as well as saltwater, and they are able to
flourish in poor agricultural soil, which will reduce pressure on food prices.
Furthermore, algae can grow using wastewater as nutrient feedstock. This reduces
the ecological impact of wastewater discharges. Presently, the production of
biofuel from algae is cost prohibitive due to high culturing and processing
costs. Improving the management of inorganic nutrient levels in ponds and
reactors where algae are grown will play a significant role in lowering biofuel
production costs, ultimately making biofuels competitive with fossil fuels.