* 1256838
* EAGER: Molecular and hybrid simulations of nanobubble stability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 99,470.00

1256838 PI: Shell

Surface nanobubbles remain among the most significant puzzles in interfacial
science. These small, very flat bubbles form in water on hydrophobic surfaces,
with widths 50-600 nm and heights 10-100 nm, and contain gases that were
originally dissolved in the liquid. Classic predictions of bubble lifetimes
suggest that they should last only for microseconds, owing largely to the
significant predicted internal (Young-Laplace) pressure. Remarkably, however,
nanobubbles are observed to persist for at least days, some nine orders of
magnitude longer than expected. There have been intense efforts to understand
this glaring discrepancy, and experiments have recently succeeded in producing
detailed characterizations of nanobubble geometries and size distributions, and
in delineating the response of the bubbles to changing conditions (dissolved gas
concentration, temperature, salt, pH, etc.) Despite these impressive
achievements, a definitive theory that explains the unusual stability of
nanobubbles remains lacking. The main goal of this project is to develop
foundational simulation methodologies and models that can address fundamental,
molecular aspects of nanobubble stability where experiments currently cannot.
This work lies at the intersection of thermodynamics and continuum mechanics,
and has two integrated aims. (1) The first is to quantify the relevance of
thermodynamic contributions to stability that relate to the physics and unique
properties of liquid water at hydrophobic interfaces. Advanced molecular
simulation methods will be used to compute free energies of nanobubble
formation, with a particular focus on the impact of dissolved gases. These
calculations will be compared with bulk macroscopic arguments (e.g., based on
bulk surface tensions and solubilities) to assess if they break down at the
nanoscale. (2) The second aim is to understand how a dynamic, active-transport
mechanism may underlie bubble stability. A recently-proposed mechanism suggests
that there may be a recirculating flow of dissolved gases leaving the bubble
apex and returning to it in the vicinity of contact line, and AFM experiments
have now detected signatures of a jet of fluid above a nanobubble that strongly
supports this picture. The ultimate goal of this work is to develop a detailed
simulation picture of this recirculating gas transport mechanism consistent with
experiments, critically assessing its viability as an explanation for stability.
This part of the study will develop and adapt hybrid (molecular-continuum)
simulation methods to the nanobubble problem that can span the large range of
length scales expected for this mechanism.

This study aims to addresses the important issue of nanobubble stability for the
first time using detailed simulations and state-of-the-art molecular and hybrid
techniques. It will provide new perspectives on fundamental interactions in
water at hydrophobic interfaces. In turn, this will impact the understanding of
longstanding issues in interfacial science such as flow slip at hydrophobic
boundaries, attractive interactions between hydrophobic surfaces, and colloidal
coagulation. Ultimately such knowledge will impact a range of exciting new and
emerging technologies that rely on the ability of nanobubbles to radically
modify the properties of solid surfaces, including anti-fouling and surface
cleaning techniques, transport in microfluidic devices, delivery of medical
therapeutics, and chemical processes involving biological or gas-liquid
reactions, surface-induced crystallization, and catalysis. This study
simultaneously aims to provide outstanding educational opportunities for
students at multiple levels, including involvement of those from
underrepresented groups. In particular, undergraduates will be actively
incorporated in this work by involvement in outstanding professional development
and research training programs at UCSB?s California Nanosystems Institute and
Materials Research Lab (notably the RISE, SIMS, GRIP, and SABRE programs).