* 1256227
* EAGER: Cyberlearning at the Los Angeles State Historic Park
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Noel Enyedy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,072.00

The long-term goal of this project team is to advance understanding of how
technology can be used to leverage the potential of public spaces to promote
civic engagement, public interaction, and ultimately, life-long learning. In
this EAGER project, they are carrying out a set of first steps in coming to
understand how public spaces might be augmented with technology to promote and
develop community interest and practice in civic engagement. The venue for the
work is the Los Angeles State Historic Park, a 32-acre site in downtown LA that
attracts families from several nearby ethnically-diverse neighborhoods. They are
creating a prototype interpretive module for the park, an interactive mural that
will act as an invitation to civic engagement and evolving social memory for the
park and its surrounding communities. Evaluation centers on measuring and
characterizing the engagement of park visitors, their participation with the
media, and the interactions between media authorship, organizational structure,
and youth civic engagement. Research is around issues in designing installations
in ways that increase civic engagement, learning how and under what
circumstances new types of embodied interaction technologies increase civic
engagement, especially by neighborhood youth. Foundations for the design of the
installation and experiences around it come from three theoretical perspectives:
communities of practice, play and performativity, and the idea of an evolving
social memory and the knowledge-building discourse that promotes such evolving
memory. The challenge is to achieve the civic engagement and learning goals in
the context of a space people visit primarily for recreation and
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential broader impacts of this work lie in the
possibilities of learning better how to use neighborhood and other public spaces
to promote civic engagement and learning, especially among youth who frequent
those places. Participation in activities in public spaces could complement
formal education and be designed to support voluntary, self-directed learning,
with particular potential for promoting positive affective responses and
attitudes towards subject matter and ways of doing things. As a first step, this
team is designing an interactive mural that community members will engage with
as authors and collaborators. The goals here, as they iteratively revise the
mural so that it encourages youth engagement with others in civic issues, is to
move towards developing guidelines for designing other installations that could
also promote such engagement. This project represents work in its early states
on an untested but potentially transformative idea and is likely to catalyze
rapid and innovative advances in the use of public spaces for promoting learning
and civic engagement goals.