* 1256093
* Student Travel Support for the 2012 Internet Measurement Conference, November, 14-16, 2012, Boston, MA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The 12th ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC) is sponsored by ACM
SIGCOMM and ACM SIGMETRICS, in cooperation with USENIX and held in Boston, MA,
November 14?16, 2012. Funding from this award assists approximately 9 graduate
students from US institutions to attend this conference. IMC is the primary
venue for presenting new research results on collecting and analyzing
measurements of the Internet. Attending conferences such as IMC is of paramount
importance for graduate students pursuing research in the field. Authors have
the opportunity to present their work and all attendees have a chance to
interact with many others performing leading-edge research in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This award serves to widen the
audience attending the Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), raising the level
of interaction and the potential for new collaboration, new investigations, and
higher quality research. The grant enables students (who otherwise do not have
sufficient funds) to attend the conference in Boston.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This award, by enabling students to attend
who might not otherwise be able, will increase the dissemination of the
conference?s research results to a larger and more diverse audience. It also
integrates research and education of graduate students by allowing students to
observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior researchers in the
field. By giving preference in grant awards to women and minority students, we
hope to widen the participation among these underrepresented groups.
Furthermore, by advertising to a wide range of colleges and universities,
participants from a more diverse set of institutions should be able to attend
and benefit from the conference.