* 1256472
* WIDER: EAGER: SEEDing Evidence-Based Educational Practices?  What Does It Take?
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Karlin, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 282,898.00

This WIDER EAGER project is seeking to better understand how instructors think
about evidence-based instructional practices and how introducing such practices
across an organization influences their thinking. Despite significant investment
and knowledge-building, many evidence-based instructional practices are not in
wide use by a majority of STEM faculty members. This is at least in part due to
the ways that faculty members think about evidence-based practices, including
teaching, learning, and their responsibilities as instructors.

This project is implementing a high-profile, institution-level evidence-based
instructional practice change effort. A study of STEM faculty models of
evidence-based instructional practices is collecting data before and after the
change effort to gage differences over time as a result of the change effort.
Data are being collected using surveys and a new interview method based on Model
Eliciting Activities. These methods are helping to discover the variables and
leverage points, as well as the potential interactions between these points,
that effect wide-scale change.

This project employs engineering management and organizational change literature
to designing the intervention and associated research study. It is developing a
new interview method which may become useful in future studies of STEM faculty
change. This project includes university-level administrators and will
demonstrate organizational change at three institutions, which may serve as a
new model for other institutions seeking to change STEM faculty instructional
practices.