* 1256840
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Study of the Structure, Function, and Diversity of Detoxification Enzymes (CYP2B) in Mammalian Herbivores (Neotoma)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,10/31/2014
* James Halpert, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 10/31/2014
* USD 373,246.00

At every meal, thousands of species of plant-eating mammals confront the
possibility of being poisoned by the natural toxins produced by their food. The
generalized foraging habit of mammalian herbivores, eating many different plant
species on a daily basis, is thought to result from limitations of their liver
enzymes. Generalists are hypothesized to have a "jack of all trades" style of
detoxification system that consists of liver enzymes able to metabolize a wide
array of plant toxins but with low catalytic efficiency. In contrast,
specialists are thought to have detoxification enzymes with enhanced efficiency
towards a restricted number of toxins. This concept of biochemical tradeoffs
with respect to dietary specialization has essentially become dogma without any
experimental support. This research will capitalize on the extensive knowledge
of mammalian detoxification enzymes gained from studies of drug metabolism in
model species and humans, as well as on the availability of a superlative wild
rodent model of mammalian herbivory. The long-term objective is to determine how
dietary exposure to plant toxins has shaped the mammalian detoxification system
through a focused study of liver enzymes in the cytochrome P450 subfamily 2B
(CYP2B) in herbivorous woodrats (Neotoma). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
goals of this collaborative research are: &lt;br/&gt;1.) Characterize the CYP2B
enzymes in woodrats at the amino acid level. &lt;br/&gt;2.) Use new metabolomic
approaches to identify key P450 substrates in diets of woodrats and compare
metabolism of plant toxins by woodrat CYP2B enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;3.) Conduct
structure-function analyses using site-directed mutagenesis and X-ray
crystallography of woodrat CYP2B enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
address a longstanding hypothesis by drawing upon cutting-edge biochemical and
structural biology approaches to generate the first detailed examination of
CYP2B enzymes of wild herbivores, identify substrates, and compare enzyme
function. The ultimate goal is to solve the crystal structures of woodrat
enzymes in complex with plant toxins. Currently, knowledge of detoxification
enzymes of mammals is rudimentary. The work has the potential to contribute to
the understanding of drug metabolism in humans given preliminary data of these
investigators on woodrat enzymes. In addition, woodrats are nature's historians;
their behavior of storing food has facilitated an understanding of the natural
changes that have taken place in the desert southwest over the last 35,000
years. An interactive display about the ecology of woodrats and their importance
to society will be developed at the Utah Museum of Natural History. The PIs will
mentor a new generation of trainees (high school students through postdoctoral
fellows) in interdisciplinary research. This award is co-funded by the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry.