* 1256326
* Herbivores in Disguise--the Wolf In Sheep's Clothing
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Gary Felton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2017
* USD 628,000.00

Plants face an onslaught of potential invaders. In order to mount successful
defenses, plants specifically recognize the threat (microbe vs. herbivore) and
mount the proper defense. As effective counterploys, herbivores may detoxify the
chemical defenses of plants or even avoid these plants. The central hypothesis
is that as a counterploy, some herbivores present themselves in "disguise" and
thus avoid detection by plants. The investigators will study herbivores that
exploit their gut bacteria by releasing them in their oral secretions on plants,
and thus be "mistakenly" recognized as microbes. Consequently, plants turn on
the incorrect defenses that are largely ineffective against these intruders. The
hypothesis will be tested using biochemical and molecular approaches to identify
specific oral bacteria responsible for suppressing plant defenses. The
experimental system will include leaf-feeding beetles and caterpillars and
several crop species (corn, soybeans, tomato) and wild plant species (wild
Solanum, poplar, and Arabidopsis). The bacterial community of the oral
secretions of the herbivores will be altered by dietary antibiotics and then
tested for activity in suppressing plant defenses. Specific bacteria responsible
for suppression will be identified and fully characterized at the molecular
level. Thus the research work is transformative in expanding the understanding
of how herbivores exploit their host plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the
study system involves key agricultural crops/pests, the knowledge gained from
these studies may have far-reaching impact on informing sustainable pest
management. The role of the gut microflora of pest insects has largely been
ignored, but could offer new targets that for pest management. The PIs will
incorporate this research in an undergraduate course and interactive educational
modules will be presented at various outreach opportunities for K-12 students.
The investigators will also build upon previous outreach/educational programs to
underserved audiences including children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and
African-Americans.