* 1256464
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Life of a Vision: Power and Energy Justice in the Mediterranean Region
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Edward Hackett, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 17,999.00

This project will study the Desertec Industrial Initiative (Dii), a unique
German corporation with 56 shareholder and partner companies, which envisions
building 40 large-scale solar and wind power plants in North Africa that will be
connected to an integrated transmission network in the Mediterranean region to
provide sustainable and affordable electricity for Europe and North Africa.
Desertec is immense in scale and ambition, demanding attention both in its own
right and as a model for similar enterprises in other regions. This research
will analyze how stakeholders envision and design a regional sustainable energy
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs mixed field methods to analyze
discursive and social changes within time and context and their underlying power
dynamics. The research will trace the vision?s evolution from its inception,
couched in terms of a broader discourse on Mediterranean energy integration;
through its institutionalization with Dii's founding; to its present proof-of-
concept as construction begins in Morocco. Methods include fieldwork in Germany
and Morocco, interviews, and document analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Desertec Foundation?s broader vision seeks to provide 90% of the world's
population with renewable energy from deserts. This vision, which is being
mobilized in the Mediterranean by powerful companies and decision-makers,
demands systematic study. This project will offer cross-cultural perspectives on
energy justice and articulate energy discourses in North Africa, an understudied
and dynamic region. Second, it will enable Dii to anticipate injustices arising
from its design and design process while they are still malleable. Third, it
will offer lessons for best practices from European clean energy development to
contribute to U.S. plans for renewable energy innovation. Results will be
disseminated through meetings with U.S. and Mediterranean policymakers and Dii
members, analysis written for the Desertec Knowledge Platform, and an energy
justice memo to the U.N. Sustainable Energy for All Initiative.