* 1256598
* SBIR Phase II:  Selenium Biopolymer Spacers to Prevent Biofouling of Reverse Osmosis Modules
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Robert Hanes, Selenium, Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2015
* USD 615,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will build upon the
data compiled during Phase I in which Selenium Ltd. worked with university and
commercial partners to develop a novel anti-biofouling technology to be deployed
in water filtration membranes and membrane spacers. The technology explores the
use of organo?]selenium compounds and their ability to generate reactive oxygen
species (ROS) while being covalently bound to a substrate. As biofouling remains
one of the largest problems to be solved in water filtration, the integration of
the proposed technology into numerous filtration components at the point of
manufacture emphasizes the technology?fs flexibility and capability to mitigate
this problem in a commercially viable and economic way. The objectives in this
Phase II project will be to optimize integration strategy specific to the
manufacturing parameters of each filtration component (i.e. feed spacers,
polyamide reverse osmosis and polysulfone ultrafiltration membranes, etc.).
Further objectives will be to integrate organo-selenium compounds into pilot
scale modules, developing a data set measuring antifouling capabilities in real
world scenarios with the help of commercial partners. Selenium anticipates the
results of this project will concretely identify the technical integration
strategy and added value for delivering produced water at reduced costs.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is based on the notion
that mitigating the industry problem of biofouling will reduce energy and
maintenance demand, thus decreasing the costs associated with water filtration
and produced water. Furthermore, the technology has broad applicability to a
number of other filtration markets such as pharmaceutical and oil and gas, which
could benefit equally from the reduction in biofouling. As the necessity to
produce drinkable water from a growing number of sources emerges as a leading
societal need, the ability to reduce costs positions the technology to be
deployed worldwide allowing for populations across the world to benefit. By
increasing the efficiency to produce drinkable water from sources such seawater
and wastewater, water producers may produce drinkable water at reduced costs
with less cleaning. The ability to combat biofouling continues to be an ongoing
area of development. While a broad spectrum of technologies have been employed
to explore antifouling properties, few have had much success. Should the
technology substantially reduced the problem of biofouling while proving viable
in the commercial manufacturing of filtration equipment, it could be considered
one of the most influential innovations the filtration market has seen in the
past decade.