* 1256781
* Collaborative Research: A millennial-scale chronicle of organism-environment interactions resulting in microevolutionary physiological and genomic shifts in Daphnia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mark Edlund, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 118,000.00

A central challenge facing contemporary biology is to understand how organisms
adapt to changing environments. This research focuses on whether predictions of
microevolutionary shifts in the physiology of animal populations can be based on
ecosystem-level information. Answers to such questions should foster better
forecasting models of global environmental change and inform effective
management. Using a unique model organism, Daphnia, a small crustacean that
lives in lakes and produces resting eggs that can lay dormant in sediments for
centuries, the Principal Investigators (PIs) have been able to directly observe
the evolutionary consequences of man-made change in a natural population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs will elucidate the precise
mechanisms that underlie observed evolutionary shifts coinciding with changes in
key environmental parameters such as phosphorus (P) loading history (i.e.,
nutrient enrichment that affects water quality). Specifically, they will use
cutting-edge paleolimnological tools to examine lake-bottom sediments to
precisely reconstruct erstwhile environments reflective of pre- and post-
European settlement, and use that information to test the performance of ancient
and extant Daphnia genotypes to assess anthropogenic impacts. Furthermore, they
will couple experimental evolution, and high throughput genomics methods to
identify the genes that underlie such evolutionary shifts. The performance of
these genes in predicting responses to nutrient enrichment (i.e.,
eutrophication) in a different lake will also be assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will continue to recruit students from
underrepresented groups at various levels (high-school, undergraduate, and
graduate). This project will train a postdoctoral fellow, three graduate
research students, a museum intern, three undergraduate research assistants, and
a high school intern. The genomic information generated from the proposed
experiments will be made available to the scientific community via
www.wFleabase.org as soon as possible, while the Daphnia clone bank generated
during this project will be shared after the duration of the grant. Moreover,
results from this study are relevant to issues of water quality and
environmental change (particularly from paleolimnological assays), and the PIs
will continue to share data with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
for outreach to lake managers and the general public. In partnership with the
Science Museum of Minnesota, the project will be part of the NSF-sponsored
award-winning www.sciencebuzz.org online exhibits that blend up-to-the-minute
science news (via RSS technology) with traditional museum interactive
experiences, reaching potentially 500,000-800,000 individuals per year. The PIs
will provide content on global environmental change, particularly related to
lakes, and the ability of aquatic organisms to adapt to changing conditions.
Finally, this work contributes to and benefits from federally-funded resources
such as the Daphnia Genomics Consortium and the National Lacustrine Core
Facility.