* 1256034
* LTREB RENEWAL:   COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Scaling up and scaling out at the Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment (KLEE)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2019
* USD 322,652.00

The Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment (KLEE) was established in 1995 to
examine the separate and combined effects of livestock and wildlife on each
other and on the land they share. This controlled exclusion of cattle, wildlife,
and large herbivores provides a unique experimental setting in which to answer
basic and applied questions about the ecology, conservation, and management of
semi-arid ecosystems. Data collected over the next five years will enhance
understanding of soil, plant, and herbivore responses to multi-year weather
cycles, with an emphasis on variation in rainfall. Additional experiments will
determine the causes and consequences of variation in tree densities and include
both eco-hydrological and eco-physiological studies. Continuation of this long-
term experiment is necessary to capture the slowly-developing processes and
interannual variation that are critical to ecosystem function in savanna
landscapes.

Globally, the goals of rangeland management and biodiversity conservation
collide with increasing frequency, as wildlife become more dependent on
rangeland for survival. By examining the conditions under which wildlife and
livestock co-exist, results from this project directly inform a reconciliation
of these conflicting goals. The study attracts collaborating scientists from
multiple institutions and trains both Kenyan and US students in research. The
study plots host undergraduate research projects and class visits from Kenya,
the United States, and other international collaborating countries.