* 1256352
* Collaborative Research: WIDER: EAGER: Increasing Faculty Use of Formative and Summative Assessment through Online Resources and Faculty Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2015
* USD 261,459.00

The goal of this project is to build a bridge between those professionals who
provide physics instruction and researchers who develop assessment tools for
physics. This is being accomplished by providing tools (online assessment
resources and synthesis research) to arm faculty to do better assessment and
professional development (a workshop and online support for physics department
chairs) to teach chairs, as agents of change, how to use those tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have three major outcomes:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Department chairs will learn to assess learning in their departments in a way
that is consistent with their goals and language and connected to results in
PER, thus meeting their need for assessment tools and transforming the way
assessment is done in physics departments throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Physics education researchers will increase their understanding of the
assessment needs related to program review, resulting in improved tools to meet
these needs and potential new areas of research.&lt;br/&gt;3. Assessment will
become a comfortable tool that will lead to increased adoption of evidence-based
teaching. By arming chairs with good assessment practices tied to their needs
and goals, this project will give them the tools to engage their departments in
a systematic process of examination and improvement of teaching and student
learning. The project will facilitate the connection between assessment and
evidence-based teaching by connecting online assessment resources to existing
resources for PER-based teaching methods in the PER User's Guide
(http://perusersguide.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve these
outcomes by:&lt;br/&gt;-- Developing online assessment resources including (1) a
guide to the research behind and the use of many different types of formative
and summative assessments, (2) a comprehensive collection of overviews of PER-
based assessment instruments, and (3) a database system to collect and analyze
results of research-based assessments. &lt;br/&gt;-- Surveying chairs to
identify the questions about assessment that are most important to
them.&lt;br/&gt;-- Developing an in-person workshop and online follow-up for
department chairs on incorporating PER-based assessments.&lt;br/&gt;--
Developing online modules and guides to address the questions identified by the
survey.&lt;br/&gt;-- Conducting synthesis research to analyze data collected
through the new assessment results database and the existing rapid analysis and
web reports (RAWR) system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential
to transform how both assessment and teaching are done throughout the country by
increasing the use of decades of physics education research. The impact will be
maximized by targeting physics department chairs, who are already deeply
motivated to do assessment for departmental and accreditation purposes, and are
in positions of authority and able to affect departmental change. Assessment
will start the transformation in an area where chairs are already eager for new
tools and will lead naturally towards evidence-based teaching.&lt;br/&gt;