* 1256775
* International Conference:  Frontiers in Systems and Synthetic Biology in Atlanta, Georgia March 20-24, 2013
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Eberhard Voit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2013
* USD 25,500.00

Intellectual Merit The hallmark of systems biology is often presented as the
pursuit of understanding how biological systems function. Once such
understanding is gained, it can be utilized to the manipulation and optimization
of existing systems toward worthwhile goals or toward the creation of entirely
new systems within the nascent field of synthetic biology. Interestingly, the
meaning of "understanding biological systems" varies quite widely among the
practitioners of systems biology. For some, it is the confirmation that
mathematical representations of components and processes, when merged into a
larger model, fit together and collectively yield responses similar to those
observed in actuality. If so, one assumes that further predictions with the
model are reasonably reliable as well. In interesting cases, the merging of
processes has the potential of leading to new, emerging properties. Others
define as the desirable goal a collection of very accurate simulation systems,
including complete cell simulators. Like a flight simulator that is used for
pilot training, a biological systems simulator could mimic simple, frequently
encountered situations, as well as very rare and complex emergencies or
outliers, and thereby hone skill and intuition of students and researchers
alike. Yet others define "understanding" as the discovery and elucidation of
general organizing principles in the form of network motifs or design and
operating principles. This interpretation of understanding aims to explain and
rationalize why nature uses certain structures and strategies to solve specific
tasks, but not alternatives that seem equally reasonable. As one easily
imagines, the different goals have been addressed with genuinely different
computational methods.

The conference will focus on the interplay between these apparently disparate
goals, which clearly address different aspects of the same phenomena. It will
facilitate discussions of the different variants, their purposes, and methods,
and help the field characterize the role of one in the pursuit of the others.
The conference will also encourage presentations on the education of biologists,
computational scientists and engineers in the emerging fields of systems and
synthetic biology.

Broader Impacts The conference will be kept relatively small, with an expected
enrollment of about 100 participants. This size will be particularly appealing
to students and junior faculty, who will have the opportunity to meet leaders in
the field face to face. Senior researchers will be invited to present
introductory talks, but every effort will be made to assure that junior
colleagues and students have a stake in the design of the program and the
execution of the conference. To this end, the organizing committee will consist
of two senior and three junior faculty, including two members from underserved
groups, as well as two students. Students and postdoctoral fellows will be
encouraged to participate and present talks and posters and be given, on a
competitive basis, conference fee waivers and travel stipends, as far as the
budget allows.