* 1256989
* The first analysis of the role of serotonin in regulating behavioral quiescence and locomotion of the nematode C. elegans in a state-dependent manner.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Biron, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 575,000.00

Understanding how neural circuits regulate behavior is a major goal of
neuroscience. One of the most mysterious behaviors, sleep, is particularly
intriguing. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans offers unique advantages as a
model system, including a compact nervous system and an extensive battery of
genetic tools. The goal of the PI is to understand the mechanisms by which
serotonin, a major bioamine, regulates C. elegans sleep. Although serotonin was
generally shown to antagonize sleep in various animals, understanding how this
is done remains a challenge. Thus, the PI will combine novel computational
tools, a detailed genetic analysis and state of the art recordings of neuronal
activity in freely behaving animals to test the hypothesis that serotonin
signaling antagonizes C. elegans sleep through specific pathways. The
combination of a simple model system and novel methods is expected to result in
identifying specific cells and molecules through which serotonin exerts its
functions. A growing body of work shows that the mechanisms that regulate sleep
in C. elegans are, at least in part, similar to those in other animals. Thus,
sleep may be ancient and simple model animals may be crucial for understanding
this complex phenomenon. The proposed research will offer substantial, novel and
important insights into the mechanisms that regulate sleep. Elements of the
proposed work will be used to involve undergraduate students in research
experiences. Emphasis will be given to increasing the participation of women and
other underrepresented minority groups and the PI will engage in a spectrum of
activities specifically aimed at providing mentorship and opportunities for
students from diverse backgrounds. In addition, novel software tools for
analyzing behavior on high power computation resources will be made publically
available on the public software repository, GitHub (https://github.com).