* 1256138
* Journey to the Center of the Earth: REVEALing a Subterranean Landscape of Fear in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Kevin Smith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2013
* USD 19,696.00

This proposal seeks EAGER funding to test REVEAL, a new 3-dimensional mapping
and site documentation product developed by Brown University's School of
Engineering, in the challenging subterranean environment of Surtshellir,
(Surtur's cave), a unique archaeological site in the North. Surtshellir was
named by medieval Icelanders for the fire-giant that Viking Age Norse colonists
believed would bring about the destruction of the world. Medieval texts describe
Viking Age chieftains traveling to propitiate this fire-giant in Surtshellir
and, later, to defeat outlaws said to have taken refuge in the cave. Thirteenth
century sources describe brutal political acts of mutilation and revenge carried
out by chieftains inside this cave during the 1240s. These and other references
suggest that Surtshellir may have beenthe most feared place in Iceland, but also
a location linked to acts of social restoration by medieval Iceland?s
chieftains. Understanding this unique site therefore has the potential to
provide new insights into the sacred and social roles of leaders within
Iceland?s complex indigenous society. Preliminary work inside Surtshellir in
2001 documented that it contains (1) one of the best-preserved Viking Age
structures in the world, (2) a massive dry-stone wall, and (3) a pile of
domestic animal bones, crushed, chopped, burned and thrown from the structure
deeper into the cave. All are located deep within this, Iceland's longest lava
cave. Now, we intend to use REVEAL to gain new information on the unique
deposits inside Surtshellir and to use this opportunity to test REVEAL's ability
to document archaeological features within the logistically challenging
environments of subterranean and interior spaces, where it may be able to make
its greatest contributions. Further, as the archaeological remains in
Surtshellir cave are actively endangered through unregulated tourism and are
threatened by the inevitable collapse of the cave in which they are located,
this project will provide critical documentation and tools for the site's
protection and long-term management by the Icelandic Archaeological Heritage
Agency (Fornleifavernd Ríkisins) and the National Museum of Iceland
(Þjóðminjasafn Íslands), both of which are partners in this research.