* 1256525
* SBIR Phase II:  Selective Catalytic Oxidation of Ammonia to Nitrogen for Hot Exhaust Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Richard Long, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 615,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project investigates a new
series of low-cost non- precious metal catalysts for selective catalytic
reduction (SCO) of NH3 to N2. Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO with
urea is widely applied for abating NOx emissions in diesel engine vehicles. A
common problem of using the SCR technology is ammonia slip. Under conditions of
incomplete NO conversion or exhaust temperature upswings, NH3 will be released
from the exhaust, resulting in a number of environmental problems. This SCO
technology can convert the toxic ammonia to nitrogen and water on NexTech¡¯s
proposed catalysts at low temperatures. The proposed non-precious metal
catalysts have proven to be highly active and tolerant to SO2 and H2O in Phase
I. 100% NH3 conversion and above 90% N2 selectivity were achieved at ¡Ý 225 ¡ãC.
The catalysts exhibited comparable NH3 conversion but higher N2 selectivity
(i.e., less NO and N2O formation) as compared to a conventional Pt-based
catalyst. In Phase II, catalyst formulation will further be refined to improve
SCO performance, and long term stability testing will be conducted. After that,
the focus will be shifted to catalyst scale-up, washcoating on monoliths and
evaluation under real diesel engine exhaust conditions.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to solve the NH3 slip
problem existing in the SCR system, allowing its application in the diesel
engine exhaust treatment. This SCO technology can also help reduce NOX emissions
by greater than 90% when stoichiometric or excess amount of urea is used in the
SCR process, providing an excellent approach for reaching aggressive NOX
abatement goals. As compared to conventional Platinum containing catalysts, the
substitution of the proposed non-precious metal catalysts could drastically
reduce the cost of diesel engine after-treatment system. The generated
information can provide new insights in understanding activation process of
small molecules, such as NH3, NO, NO2 and O2, on the oxide surface with acid and
redox sites, enabling development of better catalysts for further emission
reduction in the future.