* 1256860
* Linking ontogenetic niche shifts and functional diversity: Consequences for community dynamics and biodiversity loss
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Volker Rudolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 606,172.00

As individuals grow and develop, they often experience substantial changes in
their morphology and behavior. These changes, in turn, frequently alter the
interactions of individuals with other members of the community. As a
consequence, developmental stages within species can differ substantially in
their ecological role and these differences can even exceed differences among
species. Although recent research demonstrates that such ontogenetic shifts in
the ecology are ubiquitous in natural communities in both plants and animal
taxa, they are often ignored in general theory relating biodiversity to the
functioning of ecosystems. Yet, our ability to predict how natural and
anthropogenic disturbances alter natural ecosystems depends critically on a
understanding of the mechanisms that link ecological variation within species to
the structure and dynamics of communities and ecosystem processes. This project
will address that gap by developing a general framework to predict developmental
changes in the ecology of individuals across species and communities, and when
and how these developmental changes influence the response of natural ecosystems
to environmental disturbances such as selective harvesting. Field experiments
will independently manipulate developmental stage and species diversity in a
complex community of predatory invertebrates in pond ecosystems. This will
provide novel insights into how ontogenetic functional diversity influences the
consequences of species loss for community structure and ecosystem processes
such as primary productivity. The long-term consequences of ontogenetic shifts
for the dynamics and stability of communities will be tested by integrating
theory with a set of experiments that manipulate the degree of ontogenetic shift
in a plankton community along environmental gradients. Together, these studies
will permit a new detailed understanding of how developmental changes within
species scale up to affect entire communities and their functioning, and will
advance our conceptual understanding of whether and what details need to be
included in a general predictive framework for ecosystem functioning.

The results of this project will also have important practical applications.
Given that human impacts on natural populations are typically highly selective
and affect specific developmental stages within species (e.g. size selective
harvesting in fisheries) results from this project can be used to guide the
development of conservation and harvest strategies to assure that vital
ecosystem functions are not lost in the future. This project will also provide
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including
members of groups underrepresented in the sciences, and will support the
advanced training and mentoring of a postdoctoral scholar.