* 1256780
* EAGER: Collaborative Mathematics Learning with Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This PI team asks (i) how to use the affordances of modular robotics for
distributing work among individuals in a student groups to promote both better
engagement and better learning among those learning algebra and (ii) what can be
learned more generally from this effort about orchestrating and supporting
learning when learners have available to them technology that supports
distributed group work. One PI, a mechanical engineer, brings a novel modular
robotics platform to this collaboration, one that has many affordances for
supporting algebra learning, is quite engaging and has been found to draw in
students who otherwise might not become excited about math learning, and that
has affordances for supporting distributed cognition and hence suggests some new
ways of promoting and supporting collaborative learning. The second PI, a
learning scientist and mathematics education researcher, brings expertise in
math learning and a nuanced understanding of the ways distributed cognition can
be leveraged to promote collaborative math learning. It is possible that there
are aspects of collaborative learning that are uniquely afforded by the robotics
materials of the first PI and the kinds of project-solving challenges that can
be built up around them. And there may be new kinds of collaborative behaviors
that arise from use of such manipulatives that suggests new avenues for
promoting learning. This EAGER project supports first steps in creating synergy
between these two approaches and in making these intriguing ideas about
promoting collaboration and math learning concrete. The technological innovation
in this project is in learning how to use manipulatives with affordances for
supporting distributed cognition to promote collaboration and how to effectively
integrate use of such manipulates with use of software designed for
collaborative math problem solving. The research is directed at shedding light
on how to take advantage of manipulatives that can support distributed cognition
and hence collaborative learning, and discovering some of the new kinds of
collaborative behaviors that might arise from activities with such manipulatives
and how to take advantage of those (or alleviate them) in promoting
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals being addressed
are both broader participation goals and learning goals, the idea being that
"play" with engaging robots in the context of learning algebra and other
disciplines will draw students in to the subject area at the same time it better
promotes their learning. Algebra, in particular, is a gateway to more advanced
STEM, and drawing more of the population into STEM careers requires drawing more
of them into algebra learning and helping more of the population learn algebra
well. The potential broader impacts are particularly strong with respect to
gender and diversity. This project represents work in its early states on an
untested but potentially transformative idea and is likely to catalyze rapid and
innovative advances in the use of modular robotics and other computational
manipulatives to broaden participation in STEM disciplines and promote deeper
learning in those same disciplines.