* 1256203
* EAGER:Scaling On-Chip Interconnects for Exascale Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Reetuparna Das, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 89,948.00

This research aims to overcome the extreme challenges that need to be solved to
realize a 1000-core (kilocore) processor. Processors with tens of cores are
already in commercial products today. A kilocore processor could take us into
the era of Server-on-Chip and Supercomputer-on-Chip. On-chip network is the
medium through which two nodes in a processor can communicate, and therefore
constitutes the backbone of a kilocore processor. Unfortunately, current on-chip
network solutions are inadequate as they do not scale in terms of both power and
performance beyond a few tens of cores. To reach the ambitious design goal of
1000+ cores with realistic power budgets, the interconnect technology needs to
be at least 15 times more power efficient while providing at least the same
level of throughput-per-core as today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates three interrelated solutions to meet the above challenge in an
evolutionary manner: (1) Developing a low-power and energy-proportional
interconnect architecture that employs a larger number of narrower networks, (2)
Using high-radix Swizzle-Switches as the building blocks for interconnecting the
multiple networks, and (3) Re-designing network architecture with multiple
networks and Swizzle-Switches using 3D integration with Through-Silicon-Vias to
achieve scalability beyond 1000 cores. This project will demonstrate the
feasibility of kilocore processors. If such processors can be built, they could
have a tremendous impact on future exascale systems such as cloud computing
servers and HPC systems that have many applications including drug discovery,
defense, information analysis, and social networking.