* 1256819
* Collaborative Research:   Disturbance and productivity as drivers of plant-pollinator diversity and function across scales
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Laura Burkle, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 622,060.00

Despite the importance of wildfires in natural ecosystems, neither ecologists
nor land managers fully understand how wildfire shapes biodiversity and
ecosystem services across natural landscapes that vary in productivity. In this
collaborative project, three early-career investigators will integrate field
sampling, experiments, and modeling to understand how wildfires influence plant-
pollinator networks in the Northern Rocky Mountains. The study will extend local
plant-pollinator dynamics to regional scales across a productivity gradient, and
will leverage a 30-year record of wildfires to investigate dynamics over longer
periods than are possible using short-term experiments. The combination of broad
spatial analyses with longer temporal records will provide unique insights into
how wildfire shapes biodiversity and important ecosystem services across complex
landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Billions of dollars are spent annually to
suppress wildfires to protect the livelihoods of human societies within fire-
prone landscapes. Simultaneously, huge investments are devoted to restoring fire
without clear understanding of how it influences ecological interactions and the
essential ecosystem services they provide. Results from this project will
directly inform land management policy. The researchers will work closely with
managers to develop and implement feasible forest management programs to
optimize biodiversity and ecosystem function across complex environmental
gradients. Courses in fire ecology and null models, a special session of the
Montana Forest Restoration Committee, and mentorship of Hopa Mountain Native
Science Fellows are planned in order to bring together diverse perspectives in
ecology, management, policy, and native cultures. Students and a post-doctoral
researcher will be involved in both research and outreach with government
agencies, land managers, and the public. Together, this interdisciplinary team
is poised to build relationships critical for solving some of the most pressing
environmental issues at the interface of ecology and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Population
and Community Ecology Program and the Office of the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).