* 1256394
* LTREB RENEWAL:   Phenology and masting in California oaks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* Walter Koenig, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 465,182.00

This project investigates the factors leading to highly variable and spatially
synchronized seed production, a phenomenon known as masting. Researchers are
testing the novel idea that small, local differences in climate synchronize the
timing of reproduction among trees, which in turn influences in the amount of
pollen available each year. When trees in an area reproduce in synchrony, pollen
production will be high and masting occurs. Long-term data on acorn production
across California will be combined with detailed information on the timing of
individual reproduction, microclimate, pollen abundance, and the fate of female
flowers to test this hypothesis. Once the roles of reproductive synchrony and
microclimate have been identified, the researcher will investigate the
ecological consequences of masting in California oaks and the effects of climate
change on this important behavior.

The project will collect statewide data on acorn production, a highly variable
food resource important to both game and non-game wildlife, as well as to the
communities dependent on wildlife, including ticks and tick-borne disease
vectors. It targets a tree species, the valley oak, of considerable conservation
interest because of development, habitat conversion, apparent lack of
regeneration, and susceptibility to future climate change. Citizen scientists
are engaged in the project, and an annual newsletter is used to publicize
results the project broadly.