* 1256646
* Workshop:  Summer School in the History of the Life Sciences, Naples, Italy, July 2013
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Janet Browne, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 24,850.00

Introduction

This award supports travel and accommodation for five student-participants and
five faculty speaker-participants from US academic institutions to participate
in an international collaborative workshop in the history and social studies of
the Life Sciences to be held at the Stazione Zoologica, Naples, Italy, 29 June -
6 July 2013. The aim of the Workshop is to develop advanced understanding of the
ethical, cultural, and scientific practices associated with the topic of life
and the artificial creation of life. The workshop will connect an international
roster of specialized faculty with chosen graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars from Europe, North America, the Near East, Russia, South America, and
Asia.

Intellectual Merit

Workshop participants will engage with fundamental ethical and social questions
in STS and in the history of the life sciences that are closely associated with
the Workshop theme, creating life. The workshop will serve to produce highly
educated science historians who can engage with the cultural issues emerging
from the laboratory fabrication of life. Participants will discuss in depth six
aspects of the core workshop theme moving from early notions about the
generation of life in Antiquity to the latest research programs around the world
attempting to create life artificially, either bottom-up by designing and
constructing molecular building blocks, or top-down by starting with the
creation of whole genomes. Sessions are arranged in highly focused seminar
format, with intensive discussion of selected topics aided by keynote lectures
that are followed by faculty-led discussion. The workshop will also serve to
promote the development of a professional network in this important area of
history of biology research.

Broader Impacts

This research agenda will probe the limits of contemporary science and
technology, investigate the capacity to standardize, control, and manipulate
life at the molecular level, and discuss the challenges for moral and ethical
perceptions of the dignity and sanctity of life. Participants will be able
seriously to engage with issues of concern to the public. The Workshop directly
engages with topics of great public interest where the interaction of science
and society come into high relief. The international dimension is also important
in aiding the exchange of views and information about different national
ethical, legal, and scientific practices on the topic of life and the artificial
creation of life.