* 1256551
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Climate and Glacier change in Bhutan: the last millennia, present and future
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Summer Rupper, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 04/30/2014
* USD 33,944.00

Environmental Change in the Himalayas impacts societies in the most densely
populated area on Earth. Rapid glacier retreat in the monsoonal Himalayas
affects river discharge, energy production, and agriculture. A serious threat is
posed by outburst floods from glacial lakes in the Himalayan country of Bhutan.
Bhutan's welfare is directly linked to glacier dynamics because the country's
primary source of income, exported hydropower, as well as the national
agricultural irrigation infrastructure, are fueled by glacier melt. Melting
glaciers and the steep relief have made outburst floods a prime hazard for
Bhutan and their Himalayan neighbors, and the hazard potential depends on
current and future glacier melt. Determining the rate of glacier retreat in
response to climate change is fundamental for predicting future flood
probabilities and for designing adaption and mitigation strategies for Bhutanese
society. Currently the rate of glacier retreat is very poorly constrained. This
EAGER proposal seeks funds to take the first step towards providing robust
information about past, present and future glacier and climate change in Bhutan,
and in turn contribute to a more robust scientific data for decision makers and
mitigation strategists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identified target area for
this EAGER project is Rhapstreng Glacier, in the Lunana area of Bhutan. Over the
last decade the PIs have established connections to the scientific and political
leadership in Bhutan, in particular with the Department of Energy/Ministry of
Economical Affairs and the Ugyen Wangchuck Institute for Conservation and
Environment (UWICE), and have also identified excellent climate and
environmental records: (i) Outstanding past glacier records, consisting of well-
preserved moraine sequences; (ii) Conifer tree species which will allow the PIs
to reconstruct climate, especially summer temperature, back through the Little
Ice Age and into late-Medieval times; (iii) Bhutanese glaciers that are,
according to preliminary mass balance modeling in the Himalaya, particularly
sensitive to changes in temperature as compared to precipitation, making them
excellent targets for more refined glaciological modeling, and making the tree-
ring reconstructions particularly useful to the glacier reconstructions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant supports a concerted field campaign, including
geomorphology, geochronology, paleothermometry, and glaciology in order to lay
the foundation for reconstructing glacier histories and climate change over the
last millennia, and to better predict Himalayan glacier change over the next
centuries. The PIs have assembled a multidisciplinary team of experts with broad
experience in Himalayan glacier and climate problems, including a female junior
faculty at a primarily undergraduate university. This EAGER proposal is the
first step towards a bilateral educational program, including bilateral student
exchange between CU and UWICE and integration of Bhutanese students in annual
field campaigns.