* 1256568
* Ozone Reaction Rates Critical to Mesospheric Data Interpretation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Gregory Smith, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 04/30/2017
* USD 371,166.00

Measurements of mesospheric emissions rely on kinetic interpretations to
determine the key photochemical reactants of the upper atmosphere. The largest
uncertainty in deriving hydrogen (H) concentrations is the ~50% error in the
important heat release reaction H + O3 that produces the Meinel band emissions
and removes O3 (ozone). Reducing this uncertainty will also increase confidence
in modeling comparisons and interpreting responses to atmospheric variations and
dynamics. Because the recommended rate constant for this reaction relies on just
two older temperature-dependent studies, this research makes use of laser
photolysis/laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) measurements over a wide temperature
range (140-400 K). Photolysis of O3/H2 or HCl mixtures will be coupled with
time-dependent LIF diagnostics for H reactant disappearance and OH (v=9) product
appearance. The new measurements should remove the unacceptably large error
term. Modeling of key species such as H, O, and O3 is also affected by such rate
constant uncertainties and by issues raised about specific rate constants in
examining model disagreements with data. A second issue related to the H + O3
reaction above concerns the O3 concentration and the longstanding O3 model
deficit problem. Thus, in the light of new theoretical information, the
investigators will examine a second critical O3 reaction rate constant, its
formation by O + O2 recombination. Recent quantum trajectory calculations show
the presence of long-lived resonant collisions, which should be capable of
producing unexpected, increased rate constants at the very low pressures
pertaining to the atmosphere but not accessed in the laboratory. This work will
consistently incorporate the quantum results into kinetic rate theory using
master equation calculations to map this pressure dependence and its uncertainty
and implications. The importance of a new concept to basic rate theory will be
introduced for small molecule recombinations, namely the role of rare long-lived
collisional resonances in very low-pressure reactions. These conditions are very
difficult to probe experimentally. Two important aspects of atmospheric models,
and conclusions drawn as a result, will be improved. The project will also
contribute to the training and research experiences of a postdoctoral fellow and
summer undergraduate students. Improving two key rate constants controlling the
ozone chemistry of the upper atmosphere will have broader impacts as a result of
the improved modeling of this region that results. Two specific problems will be
addressed at atmospheric conditions. The results will benefit atmospheric
modelers, kineticists, and those analyzing aeronomy data, including data from
current satellite missions. Concentrations of H atoms derived from emissions
data will be much more precise.