* 1256926
* Meeting: 2nd International Symposium on Ranaviruses, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, July 27 - 29, 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Victor Chinchar, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Ranaviruses (family Iridoviridae) are increasingly recognized as global threats
to ecologically and commercially important fish, reptiles, and amphibians. For
example, one ranavirus, Singapore grouper iridovirus, has triggered substantial
losses among mariculture facilities in Asia, whereas Frog virus 3 (FV3)-like
viruses have contributed to die-offs among both wild and cultured frogs and
turtles throughout the world. To understand the impacts of these emerging
infections among cold-blooded vertebrates, the 2nd International Symposium on
Ranaviruses (ISR) will focus on ranavirus-mediated disease at the ecological,
molecular, immunological, and pathological levels. The meeting will bring
together senior and junior investigators, as well as post-doctoral fellows and
graduate students, with complementary skill sets in an effort to understand how
viral, host, and environmental factors interact to produce the observed
ecological, pathological, and population phenotypes and to develop novel
diagnostic protocols and control measures. In addition to platform and poster
presentations, the 2nd ISR will host two field trips to provide professionals
with the tools needed to sample and identify ranavirus-infected animals.
Moreover, by coupling the 2nd ISR with the annual International Conference of
the Wildlife Disease Association (WDA), information related to ranaviral disease
and its impact on cold-blooded vertebrates can be communicated to a larger
audience through participation in both meetings and a plenary presentation at
the WDA Conference summarizing key findings from the 2nd ISR. Collectively, by
bringing together virologists, immunologists, ecologists, and veterinarians, the
2nd ISR will provide a forum for better understanding ranaviruses and provide an
extremely effective way to bring together individuals with diverse skills in an
effort to understand and control an emerging threat to cold-blooded vertebrates
within both the natural environment and commercial aquaculture-based
enterprises.