* 1256393
* Collaborative Research:  The Role of Suppressor of Sessile Spikelet1 (sos1) in Meristem Maintenance and Determinacy
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Elizabeth Kellogg, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2014
* USD 260,000.00

All grasses produce spikelets, short branches bearing the florets, which produce
the kernels or grain, and therefore much of the calories that feed the world.
Maize, and closely related grasses, produce spikelets in pairs, doubling the
number of kernels produced in contrast to other, more distantly related cereals,
such as rice, wheat and barley, which produce spikelets singly. Understanding
the molecular and developmental basis for paired spikelet formation is of great
practical significance as this information could be used to double yield in
cereals that produce single spikelets. Collaborative comparative genomic studies
also provide an unprecedented opportunity to understand the molecular basis for
the evolution of this derived trait.

The identification of the suppressor of sessile spikelet (sos) loci in maize
provides a breakthrough into the understanding of the formation of the paired
spikelet. Molecular, cellular and developmental approaches will be used to
dissect the function of Sos1. Additional molecular and developmental studies of
Sos2 and Sos3 will enable the identification of additional genes regulating
paired spikelet formation. The paired spikelet is produced by a meristem called
the spikelet pair meristem. Meristems continually produce organs through
balancing the functions of maintenance and determinacy. The Sos loci will enable
the dissection of the interaction between these two fundamental developmental
processes, as well as providing insight into the evolution of grass
inflorescence architecture.

This research involves collaboration between a maize developmental geneticist
and an expert in the evolution of grasses, and hence is interdisciplinary in
nature. One graduate student and at least six undergraduate students will be
trained in the McSteen laboratory. A summer seminar series will be developed to
provide training for undergraduates in understanding the broader implications of
evolutionary studies in science, education, and society. The PI will also speak
to the public on the domestication of corn.