* 1256235
* Community Engagement to Inform EarthCube Governance
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Genevieve Pearthree, Arizona Geological Survey
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 252,506.00

EarthCube is a joint venture between the Directorate of Geosciences and the
Office of Cyberinfrastructure at the National Science Foundation. It is a
community-driven effort to design and implement an effective data and knowledge
management system for the geosciences that will integrates disparate data sets
and web services and serves all members of the geoscience community. This
planning and assesment project collects and synthesizes the prodigious amount of
geoscience and cyberinfrastrucutre community input on possible governance
structures for EarthCube that were generated in the run up to the June 2012
EarthCube meeting and actities that have happened during the post meeting
timeframe. The project focuses on broadening grass roots geoscience engagement
in the process, deepening the input and collecting science-drivers from
geoscience communities, and organizing and summarinzing all information so it
can be used effectively by the initial EarthCube governance body that will be
selected in early 2013. The PI and his outreach team will hold face-to-face and
virtual meetings as well as attend and run Town Hall meeings at professional
society meetings to engage stakeholders. An important aspect of the project will
be to identify community needs and incorporate their suggestions into the final
summaries. Project goals also include building stakeholder alignment around
shared goals in terms of producing ways to establish standardization of data
practices and aspects of its management as well as create a community consensus
structure for the evaluation of new tools and utilities. Broader impacts of the
work are focused primarily on building infrastructure for science in terms of
informing the development of an effective and well received community governance
structure.