* 1256905
* Genetic and cytogenetic bases of Cardinium-caused cytoplasmic incompatibility in arthropods
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Martha Hunter, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 07/31/2018
* USD 520,000.00

The bacterium Wolbachia is known to infect a large number of the world's insect
species (among other terrestrial invertebrates), with important effects on the
biology of its animal hosts. In many insects, Wolbachia causes a kind of
bacteria-induced reproductive failure called "cytoplasmic incompatibility" (CI),
a phenomenon that favors the survival of Wolbachia-infected insects by a
mechanism that, despite intense study, is still poorly understood. Having made a
recent, surprising discovery of CI in a second bacterium, Cardinium, that is
unrelated to Wolbachia, the investigators in this study will probe the CI
mechanisms of Cardinium in parasitic wasps. This project represents the first
study of CI mechanisms in a bacterium other than Wolbachia; through the
tractability of this experimental system and the comparative insights it can
provide, this investigation will ultimately enhance understanding of CI in
Wolbachia as well as Cardinium. To address these questions, the investigators
will analyze the expression of genes in male and female Cardinium-infected
wasps. They will also conduct a microscopic analysis of the mortality of embryos
due to CI-causing Cardinium. The insights into CI will contribute to the
effective manipulation of CI-causing bacterial symbionts for management of
important insect pests and disease vectors. The project will also contribute to
middle school science education and training with a curriculum supplement on
insects and microbe interactions. Lastly, the project will result in research
training (including international training) of a graduate student, two
undergraduates, as well as training of two graduate students in K-12 science
outreach.