* 1256118
* Planning and Development of an International Collaborative Teacher Training Program in Inquiry-based Learning:  A U.S. - Colombian Collaboration
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Robert Panoff, Shodor Education Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 35,000.00

The Shodor Education Foundation, Inc (Dr. Robert Panoff, Director) teams with
the Latin American and Caribbean Consortium of Engineering Institutions
(LACCEI), and Engineering for the Americas (EftA) (of the Organization of
American States) to conduct a planning and development effort in Colombia
leading to an expanded international collaboration between the US and Colombia
to support teacher training programs promoting inquiry-based learning enhanced
by computational thinking tools, techniques, and technologies. Key US and
Colombian LACCEI members, and pedagogical experts in the US and Colombia will
meet to develop a regional/ national teacher training program targeting STEM
teachers and university professors teaching 6th grade through the first two
years of undergraduate. The Program Development Workshop consists of two parts.
The first is to conduct a Train the Trainers workshop for the participants to
acquire knowledge of the technology and pedagogy being implemented through
Shodor in conjunction with techniques and technologies being developed by the
ONDAS program at COLCIENCIAS (NSF counterpart); pedagogical experts in Colombia
from the National Pedagogical University; and the research group EDUCING from
ACOFI (the Colombian Engineering Faculty Association- Dr. Eduardo Selva,
Executive Director). The second part is on the development of a teacher training
program in Colombia in the identified approaches and technologies that can scale
regionally or nationally. By conducting this workshop in a Hispanic environment,
it is anticipated that Noyce scholars and U.S. researchers will learn about
multicultural issues that affect motivation of minorities to participate in
STEM; new materials would be available in Spanish and English. The exposure of
interaction in situation of multiple languages and multiple cultures sensitizes
participants and further globalizes them. The interaction provides collaboration
among the U.S. and Colombian teachers trained in the program, providing
international collaboration activities within their classroom and affecting the
globalization of the students. The materials will also be available and
disseminated through Shodor's National Computational Science Institute and its
Computational Science Education Reference Desk, a Pathway portal of the National
Science Digital Library to all schools implementing the NSF Noyce Teacher
Scholarship and Fellowship program. This international project is jointly funded
through the Office of International Science and Engineering and the EHR/DUE
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship and Fellowship Program.