* 1256374
* SBIR Phase II:  High-speed Low-cost Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography System for Intravascular Imaging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,05/31/2015
* William Brown, Wasatch Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2015
* USD 597,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop an 840 nm spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) system for
intravascular imaging applications. The system will be designed to provide
images equal to or better than what is currently clinically available, and will
have higher imaging speeds with lower cost. Intravascular OCT is poised for
clinical acceptance and commercial growth, but is still limited by availability
and cost. Increasing system speed and reducing cost will accelerate clinical use
of intravascular-OCT. The Phase II research will move the system toward
commercial readiness by including in vivo imaging in a porcine animal
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be the availability of a new imaging tool for the
identification and treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD). CAD affects an
estimated 16 million Americans and is the primary cause of heart attacks and
strokes, which killed over 631,000 and 137,000 people, respectively, in the
United States in 2006. Intravascular OCT provides detailed imaging information
on plaque assessment, stent implantation, and stent monitoring over time.
Identification and treatment of unstable plaques and other intravascular
conditions will reduce the morbidity and mortality rate from CAD. Billions of
dollars are spent on imaging and treatment of CAD. An OCT system with increased
imaging capability and competitive cost will provide a significant improvement
over the current state-of-the-art.