* 1256154
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineered Solid Electrolyte Interphase Films for Silicon-Based Lithium Insertion Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Wanli Xu, ELECTROCHEMICAL MATERIALS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 533,273.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes to develop and
commercialize surface-engineered silicon anodes for use in lithium-ion
batteries. Silicon has a ten fold greater charge capacity than graphite but its
practical use as an anode material is hindered due to the mechanical problems
associated with lithiation cycles (cracking, pulverization) and unwanted
chemical reactions at silicon surfaces. Electrochemical Materials (EM) has
developed wet surface functionalization methods enabling silicon nanoparticles
to be reversibly cycled without mechanical failure or deleterious side
reactions. In this work, EM will develop the surface chemistry and integration
methods to create anodes for tablet-size (4000mA?h) lithium- ion batteries. EM
will develop a scalable manufacturing process and demonstrate batteries with
surface-engineered silicon nanoparticles. The new anodes will allow batteries to
reach capacities 30 to 40% higher than conventional lithium-ion batteries for
more than 1000 cycles.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project is that higher capacity
lithium-ion batteries will be quickly realized in portable electronics and
electric vehicles. Lithium-ion batteries have revolutionized portable
communications and electric vehicle power sources, yet their materials of
construction have remained essentially unchanged since the mid 1980?s. If
successful, the commercialization of surface-engineered silicon nanoparticles in
lithium-ion anodes would result in 30 to 40% capacity gains along with an
approximately 20% drop in cost per watt. Cell phones, tablets, and laptop users
could use portable devices for longer periods between charging intervals.
Electric vehicles with lithium- ion batteries could increase driving ranges by
40% and improve their cost competitiveness with gasoline-powered vehicles.
Electrochemical Materials has strong relationships with major specialty chemical
manufacturers, battery materials providers and battery manufacturers and intends
to use NSF research and development funds to commercialize their innovative
capacity-enhancing anode material.