* 1256142
* RUI:  Testing metacommunity models in forested vernal wetlands using a multi-taxa, multi-year approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Amanda Little, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2018
* USD 549,998.00

Many natural areas persist as habitat patches within a larger developed
landscape. Species communities in these patches fluctuate over time as a
consequence of local extinction, dispersal between patches, and interactions
between species. Metacommunity theory is an organizing framework for
understanding how networks of communities assemble and change, and can help
resource managers make decisions about habitat and species conservation. There
is a strong need to test metacommunity theory, though, at field scales relevant
to conservation questions. This project examines forested vernal wetlands, which
provide ideal systems for testing metacommunity theory. Vernal wetlands may
flood in the spring and dry completely each year and frequently contain species
adapted to these unique environmental conditions. They tend to be small and
difficult to detect on the landscape, but they provide critical breeding habitat
for amphibians and aquatic insects. Insects, amphibians, plants, and water
chemistry will be studied in sixty wetlands within Wisconsin's Chippewa Moraine
region over five years in order to capture the effects of environmental
variability on community structure. The role of more permanent wetlands as
sources of organisms for vernal wetland communities will also be evaluated.
Finally, field experiments will provide insight into how community history
affects species presence and abundance. These studies will help determine the
relative contributions of environmental variation, species interactions,
community history, and landscape position on community composition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conserving forested vernal wetlands is a priority in
efforts to protect aquatic biodiversity, and understanding how metacommunities
function in these unique systems is critical to protecting them. Research
findings from this project will be incorporated into ecological landscape
management plans for use by forest managers. The project will involve numerous
undergraduates in research experiences and will increase the number of under-
represented groups and first-generation college students pursuing STEM fields.