* 1256315
* SBIR Phase II:  Improved Cold Thermal Energy Storage for Refrigeration Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2015
* Sorin Grama, Promethean Power Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2015
* USD 590,533.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes the
commercialization of a&lt;br/&gt;new type of industrial refrigeration system for
cooling raw milk in Indian villages, without the&lt;br/&gt;use of backup diesel
generators. The innovation lies in a novel thermal battery pack
concept&lt;br/&gt;developed by Promethean Power Systems with a Phase I grant
from the National Science&lt;br/&gt;Foundation. The battery solves a chronic
unreliable electricity problem by converting and&lt;br/&gt;storing electrical
energy in the form of thermal energy through a process of freezing and
melting&lt;br/&gt;a material. The battery needs just five hours of grid
electricity to charge and, once charged,&lt;br/&gt;provides constant cooling
power on demand when the grid is off.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the introduction of clean
energy&lt;br/&gt;technologies in refrigeration applications, eliminating costly
spoilage of foods and providing&lt;br/&gt;clean energy alternatives to
developing economies that currently rely on fossil-based fuels
for&lt;br/&gt;their continued growth. In developing countries, billions of
dollars of perishable foods are&lt;br/&gt;wasted annually because of inadequate
cold-chain supply networks. A major obstacle in setting&lt;br/&gt;up a cold-
chain network is the lack of reliable grid electricity to run refrigeration
systems in&lt;br/&gt;villages and farming areas. In such conditions, diesel
generators are often used as backup, a nonideal&lt;br/&gt;solution with high
cost and environmental impact. Promethean?s thermal battery
eliminates&lt;br/&gt;diesel generators and makes village refrigeration systems
economically viable. This could&lt;br/&gt;revolutionize dairy industries around
the world, especially in India, the largest producer and&lt;br/&gt;consumer of
milk in the world, where nearly 400 million people depend on milk for their
daily&lt;br/&gt;protein. Although Promethean?s first commercialization efforts
are in India where thermal&lt;br/&gt;batteries are needed the most, these
efforts will benefit US economy by providing a large and&lt;br/&gt;growing
market to US products and affirming America?s leading role in spreading
innovative&lt;br/&gt;ideas throughout the world.