* 1256747
* LTREB Renewal: Woody seedling dynamics in a wet tropical forest & species coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Corine Vriesendorp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2015
* USD 89,999.00

One of the major goals of ecology is to understand the factors that determine
the relative abundance and number of species in particular habitats or
communities. Wet tropical forests contain a great diversity of tree species and
provide unique habitats in which to identify the factors that influence which
tree species compose a forest. Survival and growth through the tree seedling
stage are critical bottlenecks. The seedling phase of a plant's life cycle is
especially sensitive to pathogens and to the availability of light, nutrients,
and water. This project extends a twelve-year study of seedling dynamics in five
forest stands in Costa Rica. Over the next five years, data collected will be
used to construct models of seedling production, dispersion, growth and survival
in response to light, soil nutrients, pathogens, and rainfall. The resulting
models will distinguish among three major mechanisms responsible for species
coexistence, and thus help to account for the unusually high species diversity
in tropical forests.

An ability to predict forest responses to environmental change is critical to
timber production, wildlife habitat, and forest carbon storage. Results from
this long-term study will improve understanding of how tropical forests
regenerate in response to changes in temperature, rainfall, and nutrient
pollution. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will participate in
the research, receiving valuable field experience. The project will continue to
contribute to research infrastructure available at La Selva Station, granting
wide access to study plots, data, and taxonomic expertise. Data from the project
will be available to the research community.