* 1256637
* SBIR Phase II:  A Robust Caller-ID Alternative for Securing Telephony Based Transactions
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Vijay Balasubramaniyan, Telineage, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The innovation in this project comes from the novel call audio analysis
techniques that can be used to create a fingerprint of the source of a telephone
call. Such fingerprints can reveal valuable information about the call source,
including the type of the calling device (landline, Voice-over IP or mobile),
its geographical location and the networks over which the call audio may have
been transported prior to it reaching the called party. To detect potentially
fraudulent calls in real-time with such fingerprints, this proposal plans to
extend the identification of the geography of a call source and the creation of
an active call analyzer that performs audio analysis in real-time. The focus of
this Phase II project is on exploring design options for an active call
analyzer; including accuracy, scalability and timeliness tradeoffs and its
integration in call center infrastructures. The call analyzer will also be used
to build a phone fraud intelligence service that proactively detects phone
numbers used for committing fraud. Such a service, including mechanisms for
sharing of intelligence with partners and customers, can help secure the
telephony channel from a variety of attacks.

The broader impact and commercialization potential of this project can be seen
readily from the observation that phone fraud is already a serious problem for
multiple sectors, including banking, healthcare and even law enforcement. Also,
because fraudulent calls are already responsible for considerable financial
loss, customer agents in call centers are asking multiple knowledge-based
questions to authenticate a caller. This leads to higher costs for call handling
and also degrades customer experience. A successful active call analyzer
solution that can automatically generate a risk score for caller authentication
will have broad impact because the entire service sector relies on call centers
for customer contact and it could reduce costs and improve customer experience.
The project will also enable Pindrop to play a leadership role in organizing the
broader community to launch a phone anti-fraud alliance similar to the anti-
phishing working group. The thought leadership provided by such a group will be
necessary to define the telephony security challenges and approaches for
addressing them. Again, this will ensure broad impact of the project across
several industries.