* 1256042
* RAPID: Online Single-particle Measurements of the Chemical Composition, Mixing State, and Ice Nuclei Residues During the FLAME IV Biomass Burning Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 24,934.00

This RAPID project involves performing online single-particle mass spectrometry
(SP-MS) measurements of the chemical composition and mixing state of biomass
particles during the fourth Fire Lab At Missoula Experiment (FLAME IV). FLAME IV
affords a unique and important opportunity to better understand the evolution of
biomass smoke more completely than is possible in the Carnegie-Mellon University
(CMU) laboratory, by taking advantage of the collaborative simultaneous
measurements conducted by a wide range of scientists. The SP-MS will determine
how the aerosol mixing state evolves as the biomass smoke is photochemically
aged in a novel twin environmental chamber system. The chambers will be filled
with combustion smoke generated from a variety of globally relevant biomass
fuels, and diluted to atmospheric concentrations. Atmospheric photochemistry
will be simulated in the chambers for several hours using photo-simulator lights
and the optional addition of oxidants such as hydroxyl radical and nitrogen
oxides. The twin chamber design will provide an unperturbed control aerosol
system to which aerosols in the perturbed chamber can be compared at any time
during the multi-hour long experiments. Through tandem experiments with FLAME IV
participants from Colorado State University, the SP-MS will also determine the
chemical composition of ice nuclei present in fresh and aged biomass burning
smoke. A novel suite of gas and aerosol instruments will be used to thoroughly
characterize the biomass aerosol prior to, during, and after simulated
photochemistry. The instrument package includes a High-Resolution Time-Of-Flight
Aerosol Mass Spectrometer, Proton-Transfer-Reaction Mass Spectrometer, and a new
single-particle mass spectrometer. This will be the first deployment of this new
Laser Ablation Aerosol Particle Time-Of-Flight (LAAP-TOF) mass spectrometer in
any collaborative experimental or field campaign. The LAAP-TOF will allow better
understanding to be gained of the variations in individual particle composition
and mixing state for the different fuels tested, how this mixing state evolves
during photo-oxidation, and what role this mixing state might play in the
partitioning of organic carbon between the gas and particle
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research cuts across multiple disciplines
including chemistry, combustion, air quality engineering, atmospheric science,
and climate change. Thus, this research will have immediate impacts on a wide
range of interdisciplinary fields including forest management, atmospheric
chemistry, cloud microphysics, and biogeochemistry. The project will compose a
significant portion of at least two graduate student Ph.D. dissertations, and
the research of one post-doctoral associate. The collaborative and multi-
disciplinary nature of the FLAME IV experiment will provide our participants
with the unique opportunity to work alongside a wider range of scientists than
otherwise possible during their research at CMU.