* 1256799
* Voltammetric Analysis of Female Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2013,04/30/2018
* Robert Meisel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2018
* USD 696,862.00

A critical component of successful reproduction in female mammals involves
integration with the male's reproductive state. How the female performs this
integration is understood at the behavioral level, but is still poorly
understood at the neurobiological level. A neural model will be developed to
precisely measure chemical signaling of dopamine in a particular brain region
(the nucleus accumbens) where dopaminergic activity is temporally synchronized
with behavioral interactions with the male for successful reproduction. A
technically sophisticated and innovative approach know as fast-scan cyclic
voltammetry, combined with electrophysiological recording, will be used to
measure dopamine release in the female's nucleus accumbens during reproduction
and determine how nerve cells respond to dopamine-mediated signals. The fast
scan cyclic voltammetry has the capability of measuring dynamic changes in
dopamine signaling by taking measurements every 100 milliseconds, thus
temporally coupling dopamine signaling and behavioral responses. This project
will not only identify how the nervous system solves a complex problem of
reproductive integration of brain and behavioral activities, but will also open
up new avenues for detailed analyses of the neural regulation of reproduction
and other social behaviors. The transfer of technology from Dr. Paul Garris's
lab (Dr. Garris is a world leader in the development of fast-scan cyclic
voltammetry) at Illinois State University to the University of Minnesota is a
significant impact of the research goals. The project will also provide a
platform for making this technology available to a range of investigators
throughout the country. The development of this technology and subsequent
dissemination will include making the raw data available online as well as
creating online simulations that can be used as instructional tools through
OmniScience (www.omnisci.org). The project will provide an important research
base for the inclusion of undergraduate students, particularly underrepresented
minority students, as a component of their science education and literacy.