* 1256643
* SBIR Phase II:  Personal Service Robotics with Tiered Human-in-the-Loop Assistance
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Matei Ciocarlie, Willow Garage, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2015
* USD 124,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase-II project will create the
technological components, operator interfaces, and integration necessary to
achieve practical Personal Service Robots. Personal service challenges robots
with unstructured, cluttered, and ever-changing environments, and requires
execution of complex tasks. Our novel approach allows autonomous algorithms to
request human assistance as needed. Across multiple tiers, assistance can range
from simply identifying a partially occluded object, to selecting an appropriate
grasp configuration, or even to unsticking a wedged object by direct
teleoperation; however, sustained operator involvement should only occur
infrequently. This approach enables imperfect autonomy to complete full tasks
while minimizing manual labor needs as compared to classical teleoperation.
Efforts during Phase I established the feasibility of this combined approach
while demonstrating the execution of typical household tasks. Developments under
Phase II will focus on reducing the human workload. Major innovations will occur
from three elements: (a) creating and optimizing distinct operator interfaces
for different assistance needs, (b) refining autonomy to reduce the need for
assistance, and (c) narrowing applications and support algorithms to relevant
and desired service tasks. These developments will allow individual operators to
support multiple robots in parallel, with the multiplicative effect amplifying
manual labor savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project addresses the fact that the U.S., like many
industrialized nations, is seeing its demographics shift to an older population.
This implies a shrinking workforce as well as rising labor needs to support the
older adult community, which will require greater assistance with tasks of daily
living as they age. Robotics is often considered a solution to stretch a limited
labor supply. The company specifically target personal service robotics to
support older adults via either home care providers or assisted living
facilities. By reducing operator workload and allowing a single operator to
assist multiple robots performing personal service tasks, this R&amp;D effort
can increase the productivity of service labor and provide a higher quality of
personal service than traditionally possible. This robotic approach can also
more easily distribute the labor across physical distances. This will allow
older adults to age in familiar housing, retain greater independence, and reduce
their expenses at home or in assisted living facilities.