* 1256286
* G8 Initiative: Catalysing the growth in metal recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Thomas Graedel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2015
* USD 254,000.00

1256286 (Graedel). This NSF award funds U.S. researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by a G8 Research Council Initiative. The
Initiative is a collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the
Canadian National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR), and the United Kingdom
Research Councils (RCUK), supporting collaborative research projects selected on
a competitive basis that are comprised of researchers from at least three of the
partner countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change and peak oil issues have
been making headlines with increasing frequency and solutions are being sought
to lessen dependence on oil. As new technologies tackle one challenge, other
challenges are created through resource deficit. Many low carbon technologies
including wind turbines, electric cars and catalytic converters require precious
metals in unprecedented quantities threatening their continued availability.
These elements are being dispersed throughout our environment, making them
costly and difficult to recover. This emphasizes the necessity for a new
approach to metal capture and use, thus increasing the lifetime of our reserves.
This project will investigate a new direction for turning this vision into
reality. Initial studies indicate that plants are capable of phytomining
platinum group metals (PGM) to form stable metal nanoparticles that are active
in a variety of industrially important reactions. We intend to utilize mine
wastes to pass through plant beds for metal adsorption. The resulting plants
will be subjected to controlled pyrolysis to yield a material with stabilized
nanoparticles of PGM for use as supported catalysts. This offers an effective
solution to an international problem of metal depletion and will lead to the
development of a new range of naturally derived catalysts. Project collaborators
consist of a multidisciplinary team that incorporate the following essential
expertise: The Centre for Environmental Research in Minerals, Metals and
Materials at University of British Columbia, who will gather information on
worldwide distributions of PGM ore bodies, provide mine tailing and
compositional analysis. The Green Chemistry Centre of Excellence and Centre for
Novel Agricultural Products at the University of York will carry out the
research into the plant growth, characterization and application of the
catalysts. Finally, the Yale University School of Forestry and Environmental
Studies will carry out life cycle, economical and societal assessment to
determine what impact the project will have on the wider world.