* 1256505
* WIDER: EAGER: Evidence-based Instructional Practices at WMU:  An Examination of Instructor Practices, Institutional Climate, and Social Networks
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Timothy Greene, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,536.00

This catalyst self-assessment project will document the current use of evidence-
based instructional practices in undergraduate STEM courses at Western Michigan
University (WMU). WMU is a Carnegie classification Research Extensive University
with a student population of 25,000. This project will involve all STEM
instructors in the College of Arts and Sciences and the College of Engineering
and Applied Sciences at WMU (N=634). This includes full-time faculty (N=268
tenured or tenure track and N=18 not tenure track), part-time instructors
(N=65), and graduate student teaching assistants (N=283). During Phase 1,
instructors will be surveyed regarding: i) their most commonly used teaching and
learning approaches, ii) their perceptions of the teaching environment (i.e.,
climate) within their departments and the university, and iii) the networks of
colleagues with whom they discuss issues related to teaching and learning. Self-
reported use of teaching approaches will be supplemented by observations of a
subset of faculty by trained raters (using the RTOP instrument). A research
collaboration social network will also be constructed for these instructors.
During Phase 2, a subset of departments (N=3) will engage in collaborative self-
and case-studies with the research team to address those barriers and challenges
to instructional change most noted in the literature. Data collection will
include observations of teaching as well as interviews with instructors and
students. Particular emphasis will be placed on the foundational courses offered
by the department that have high attrition rates and are required for further
study in the discipline or are prerequisites for other programs of study. These
data will set a foundation for WMU to plan and implement institution-wide, but
contextually targeted, change strategies to support instructor use of evidence-
based instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit This project
combines several previously separate methods related to teaching practices in
higher education: self-report of practices, survey of teaching climate, social
network related to teaching, and teaching observations. As recommended by the
research literature, the project team is multi-level and multi-disciplinary,
representing three communities of scholars concerned with STEM change: two
active disciplinary-based science education researchers, the WMU director of
faculty development, the WMU Provost and the WMU Dean of the Graduate College.
All members of the project team have significant prior experience with STEM
education reforms. The proposed study includes not only full-time faculty, but
also part-time instructors and graduate students. These last two groups are
often not involved in projects like this, but they provide significant and
important instructional roles at WMU (and many other institutions), particularly
in foundational courses. These groups must be included for institutional change
efforts to be truly comprehensive. Finally, this project will measure the
influences on instructors, including both the organizational influence and
personal influences through networks of relationships. These influences have not
been examined to the extent necessary to support the development of evidence-
based change strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts This project is
designed to build the foundation for increased use of evidence-based instruction
at WMU. This will improve instructional quality in STEM subjects and reduce
student attrition from STEM fields, and is also expected to improve student
engagement, thus improving degree completion rates overall. The project
therefore will impact students beyond STEM majors, and departments and programs
throughout the institution. In addition to serving the needs of WMU, this
project will provide a model for other institutions beginning similar processes.
The types of data collection methods proposed are not difficult to use, but have
been used not at all (social network analysis) or very little (teaching climate)
in higher education institutions. The leaders at all higher education
institutions want to improve STEM instruction. Increased institutional use of
the data collection tools used in this study will help other institutions to
better understand the foundation from which they have to work.