* 1256731
* Distance, Consensus, and Query Algorithms for Recombinant Genealogies
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Mary Kuhner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 01/31/2017
* USD 213,481.00

Due to recombination of DNA, the genes passed to an offspring will be a unique
combination of DNA from the two grandparents. Because an organism?s DNA, or
genome, is organized into chromosomes, a result of recombination is that
different parts of a chromosome can have different histories going back in time.
Several computer programs claim to be able to reconstruct these tangled
histories of the organization of DNA, but these claims are not well validated.
This project will develop a mathematical measure of similarity between
reconstructions of a chromosome's history, so that researchers can test whether
existing reconstruction algorithms actually work. It will also develop software
to assess and display areas of agreement or disagreement among multiple
reconstructions. These software tools will be incorporated into computer-based
lab exercises to improve understanding of genome structure among undergraduate
and graduate college biology students.

This work aims to improve computational tools used in gene mapping, important in
understanding traits encoded in an organism?s DNA including disease inheritance,
and improving agricultural breeds of plants and animals. The tools will
contribute to inferring relationships and patterns of evolution among closely
related organisms, including crop species, pathogens and pests. Finally, this
research will contribute to identification of genetic traits that have increased
or decreased over time, such as traits involved in domestication or disease
resistance. The educational materials will help prepare students to work in
evolutionary biology, population genetics, and conservation science.