* 1257833
* RUI:   Interactive effects of invasive plants and deer on the herb layer of suburban forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Janet Morrison, The College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Human activity profoundly transforms the natural landscape, with dramatic
consequences for biological communities. Across the eastern United States many
species are relegated to forest fragments embedded within cities and sprawling
suburbs. These forests typically exhibit a striking lack of native plants
(including tree seedlings), but have thriving populations of non-native plant
species and dense populations of white-tailed deer. This project will examine
how these phenomena are related, by investigating the joint effects of two
important co-invading plant species and deer on the invasion process and the
native plant community. The plants are garlic mustard and Japanese stilt-grass,
two co-occurring species that pose serious threats to the native community. The
study will address key questions concerning plant invasions in the suburban
landscape: do invasive plants facilitate each other's invasions, and is
invasiveness promoted by intensive deer impact on the native plant community, by
their strong competition with natives, or by both acting together? The study
will be a multi-year field experiment in 240 plots spread across six forests of
central New Jersey. Half of the plots will be unfenced, and half will be fenced
to exclude deer. Experimental treatments will include addition of seeds of
garlic mustard, stilt-grass, both species, or neither species added. All
invasive plants in the plots will be removed at the end of the study. The
response of the plant community will be studied in each plot for five years, by
measuring garlic mustard and stilt-grass population growth and changes in the
herb layer plant community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most people live in or near
cities and towns, so this study of suburban forests will be of interest to many
citizens, including the many conservation groups and local agencies that need to
manage suburban forests to conserve native biodiversity. It also will enhance
plant science and ecology education at a primarily undergraduate public college.
Eighteen students will each engage in mentored research teams for two years and
one summer, which will encourage them to pursue ecology and conservation-related
graduate school and professions.