* 1257469
* Evolution Of Behavioral Immune Responses In Fruit Flies: Tradeoffs, Mechanisms, And Genetics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Jacobus de Roode, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 01/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Because immune defenses against parasites are costly, hosts are expected to
balance the use of different defense mechanisms and to forego immunity when they
do not need it. However, experimental evidence for trade-offs between
alternative defense mechanisms is scarce. The ideal system to test for immune
response tradeoffs would be a group of closely related host species that face
similar parasites in the wild, and that employ multiple kinds of defenses. The
investigators will use fruit flies of the melanogaster species group of the
genus Drosophila, along with their shared endoparasitoid wasps from the family
Figitidae, to test the hypothesis that cellular and behavioral immune defenses
trade off with each other on a macro-evolutionary scale. The investigators will
take advantage of the fact that D. melanogaster is a genetic model system to
test the suspected roles of sight and brain neuropeptide F signaling in fly
self-medication responses against wasp parasites. The investigators will also
take a combined RNA-seq and association mapping approach to uncover further
brain genes required for initiating behavioral defenses. This project will
result in the identification of evolutionary trade-offs between different immune
mechanisms as well as the mechanistic and genetic underpinnings of behavioral
immune responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include
the maintenance and distribution of parasitic wasp strains for the scientific
community and the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
in aspects of behavior, cellular biology, and genetics. The investigators will
also collaborate with public high school teachers to develop classroom projects
focused on hands-on, student-centered, and inquiry-based learning approaches
using the fly-wasp immunological interactions.