* 1257656
* IOS Proposal: Collaborative Research: RUI: The role of RNA-binding proteins in C. elegans dendrite morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Eugenia Olesnicky Killian, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 10/31/2017
* USD 302,366.00

Nerve cells, or neurons, are specialized cells of the nervous system that
receive and send signals to coordinate animal behavior. Dendrites are the highly
branched structures of neurons that are used to gather sensory information from
other cells or the environment. These dendritic branches are critical for the
function of the nervous system because a loss of dendrites is associated with
deficits in learning, motor control, and sensory perception. The goal of this
project is to identify the molecular mechanisms that regulate dendrite
development. Dendrite development will be investigated in the simple genetic
model organism Caenorhabditis elegans, a microscopic round worm because it is
completely transparent, enabling the observation of dendrite development in
living animals, and because it is high amenable to genetic manipulation. The
research will focus on a genetic analysis of a class of proteins called RNA-
binding proteins, which are hypothesized to be important in dendrite development
because they regulate genetic messages known as messenger RNAs. This research
project is expected to identify several specific RNA-binding proteins, present
in worms and other species including humans, which are important for regulating
dendrite development. Furthermore, the research is expected to determine the
molecular mechanisms for how these RNA-binding proteins regulate dendrites. This
research will impact the field of developmental neuroscience because it will
provide a better understanding of how the individual neurons make the
connections that allow for a functional nervous system that responds to the
environment and controls behavior. This project will also have an impact on
student training and public awareness; Colorado College and the University of
Colorado at Colorado Springs will collaborate on this research project and train
several undergraduates and master students, incorporate this research into
undergraduate courses, and participate in community outreach programs to
illustrate the importance of developmental neuroscience research.