* 1257340
* LTREB renewal:  Long term population and community responses to landscape dynamics by birds in Amazonian old growth, fragmented, and secondary forest
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Goncalo Ferraz, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2019
* USD 449,083.00

Since the 1970s, the Biological Dynamics of Forest Fragments Project, near
Manaus in Amazonian Brazil, has provided a research setting that includes small
patches of rainforest, active and abandoned agricultural areas, and a large
expanse of undisturbed rainforest. This project builds on a 20-year study of
avian population dynamics in forest fragments that has focused on how changes to
the landscape have affected bird abundance, distribution, and social
organization. Over the next five years, US and Brazilian researchers will
examine whether or not forest birds can survive and reproduce as well in
fragments and abandoned deforested areas as they do in undisturbed forest. Using
passive capture, mark, and release of birds, the investigators will quantify
survival, breeding activity, transience, and age-specific abundance. These data
will permit the most detailed assessment to date of the value of secondary
growth and fragments to a large number of understory birds. Whole-community
techniques will also be used to assess species richness, biomass, and social
interactions across plots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical rainforests support a
disproportionately high number of species. Increasing human populations and
agricultural expansion in the tropics fuel deforestation, although many
deforested areas are subsequently abandoned. Because of this cycle of cutting
and abandonment, the long-term persistence of many tropical species will depend
on their capacity to use forest fragments and regrowth forest. Results from this
study will help to determine the ability of fragments and secondary growth to
maintain biodiversity. The project will continue to build capacity of both
Brazilian and US students through their direct involvement in the research and
through the development of new field and educational materials.