* 1257555
* Collaborative Research: Diversification in the Deep-Sea and the Evolution of Fangs, Bioluminescence, Hermaphroditism, and Marine Habitat Transitions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* John Sparks, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,001.00

All animals that have evolved in the deep sea are under similar selective
pressures as a result of the environmental extremes (e.g., little to no
penetrable sunlight, high atmospheric pressure). This extreme habitat has led to
massive convergence in animal morphology and behavior across deep-sea organisms
ranging from the production and emission of light (bioluminescence) to the
evolution of enlarged fangs and gaping mouths. This multidisciplinary project
will investigate the processes that have impacted the evolution of deep-sea
fishes and their success in this fascinating aquatic realm. This study
integrates phylogenetic relationships based on genetic and morphological data,
comparative morphology, ecology, and evolutionary biology in an effort to
broaden our understanding of fishes that have evolved, thrived, and diversified
in the deep sea. This research will increase our understanding of a diverse
array of deep-sea evolutionary adaptations, including bioluminescent structures
that are used for predation, defense, species recognition, and sexual selection.
These novel morphologies and behaviors have never before been studied within the
context of a robust evolutionary framework based on molecular and morphological
data. The resulting hypotheses will include a temporal component based on the
fossil record that will allow us to explore, for the first time, whether these
specializations are having potential effects on speciation in the deep sea. This
project will support the training of postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students in marine biology, systematics, and evolutionary biology at
the University of Kansas and American Museum of Natural History. Findings from
this work will continue to augment a new bioluminescence exhibit created and
curated by PI Sparks and co-PI Smith (Creatures of Light).