* 1257535
* The ABCs of Dispersal:  Developing an Approximate Bayesian Computation Approach for Estimating Migration Rates from the Distribution of Related Individuals
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Per Palsboll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Estimating rates of movements of individual animals among populations and
habitats is a critical issue in conservation biology, necessary for identifying
high quality habitats and determining if declining populations can be rescued by
immigration from other populations. The goal of this project is to develop a
novel statistical and genetic framework that would improve estimation of
dispersal rates for organisms among populations or habitats. The proposed
approach involves translating the spatial distribution of related individuals
identified with genetic methods into estimates of migration rates. If, for
example, a parent and its offspring occur in two different populations or
habitats, a movement event must have occurred. This new methodology will be
tested through a study of the movements and demographics of Hoffmann's two-toed
sloths and brown-throated three-toed sloths living in a shade-grown agricultural
ecosystem in Costa Rica. Several hundred individuals of both species will be
captured in shade-grown cacao, intact forest, and cattle pastures; males will be
radio-tagged and females will be color-marked in order to estimate birth and
death rates in the three habitat types. Small tissue samples will be collected
for genetic analyses that will provide information about relatively distantly
related individuals and precise estimates of movement rates. Patterns of
relatedness among the three habitat types will be used to determine the
magnitude and direction of movements, and ultimately determine the value of
shade-grown agriculture to these sensitive and charismatic tropical mammals.

Shade-grown agriculture is increasingly pointed to as a means for protecting
tropical biodiversity, but detailed ecological studies of the benefits of such
agricultural practices to sensitive species have not been conducted. Because of
their sedentary and obligate arboreal life style, sloths are a useful umbrella
species for conservation efforts; if shade-grown agriculture can maintain viable
sloth populations within fragmented landscapes then agricultural practices could
benefit a range of additional tropical species. The statistical and genetic
approach developed in this project will be applicable to a range of species and
will be made publically accessible via a freely downloadable software package.
This project will strengthen research and training collaborations with Costa
Rican researchers and will provide research training and mentoring for two
postdoctoral scholars.