* 1257363
* Functional Analysis of Synaptotagmin Domain Structure
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2019
* Noreen Reist, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 11/30/2019
* USD 688,055.00

Communication between neurons in the brain occurs via synaptic transmission at
chemical synapses, and tightly regulated release of neurotransmitter from
activated to target neurons is required. Since the fundamental molecular
mechanisms of transmitter release are conserved throughout evolution, molecular-
genetic studies in fruit flies can be used to discover the mechanisms regulating
release without the expense or ethical considerations of mammalian studies.
Using molecular techniques to generate mutant transgenic Drosophila, Dr. Reist
and colleagues will determine how the neuronal calcium-binding protein,
synaptotagmin, regulates multiple types of neurotransmitter release: calcium-
triggered synchronous and asynchronous release as well as spontaneous release.
Actively adjusting the amount of transmitter released and the interplay between
synchronous and asynchronous release are thought to be a key mechanisms
mediating learning and memory. Thus, this work will provide critical mechanistic
insights required for understanding how synaptic transmission is regulated in
animals.

These studies will contribute to a foundational and mechanistic basis for future
translational studies aimed at improving neuronal communication in diseases of
neural dysfunction, such as Alzheimer?s disease. All transgenic fly lines
generated in this work will be made freely available to the scientific
community; when accepted, lines will be sent to the Bloomington Stock Center
(http://flystocks.bio.indiana.edu/). Other lines will be available via e-mail
request. Dr. Reist has trained numerous female (and male) undergraduate and
graduate students in molecular neuroscience, and the implementation of this
project will provide continued training opportunities for U.S. students. In
addition, Dr. Reist regularly participates in the International Brain Research
Organization's visiting lecture team program (http://ibro.info/professional-
development/vltp-courses/). She has taught students in China, Nigeria, and Sri
Lanka about the molecular mechanisms of transmitter release. As such, these
studies will directly contribute to educational outreach in developing nations.