* 1257526
* Multitrophic Consequences of  Novel Plant Assemblages in Urban Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,11/30/2017
* Douglas Tallamy, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2017
* USD 479,750.00

Plants and animals from other continents have been intentionally or accidentally
brought to the U.S. for centuries. Many of them have become established,
creating ecosystems made of species that have never before interacted with each
other. Horticultural preferences have transformed the native plant communities
that once supported life in residential landscapes into a collection of
introduced plants that have no history with native organisms. If introduced
plants are the ecological equivalents of the native plants they replace,
ecosystem function in managed landscapes will remain as high as in natural
areas. But if introduced plants do not support life as well as native plants,
the diversity of animals where humans work, live and farm (well over 50% of the
U.S. land area) will be reduced. This would be unsustainable because
biodiversity drives ecosystem function, and functional ecosystems produce the
natural services that sustain human populations. This project addresses the
ability of plants to support food webs by comparing food webs in residential
landscapes comprised of native plants with food webs in landscapes built from
introduced plants. The research focuses on birds and their insect prey because
both are excellent indicators of food web stability and diversity, and thus of
overall biodiversity. Using Carolina chickadees, the study will measure how
landscapes created from Asian plants alter: 1) insect communities; 2) the diets
of nesting chickadees; and 3) the breeding success of chickadees in residential
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study integrates outreach with science by
conducting research on properties enrolled in Neighborhood Nestwatch, a citizen
science program. Results will be published in the primary and popular literature
to target landowners and policy-makers at all levels of environmental expertise.
The public lacks an understanding of how plants and the insects that eat them
enable more charismatic vertebrates, such as birds, to exist in urban
environments. This study will help provide such understanding, which is key to
sustainability because it is the public who will determine what urban ecosystems
will look like in the future. In the process of this research, students will be
trained in ecology and equipped with the skills needed to tackle major
environmental challenges in the future.