* 1257183
* Collaborative Research:  Does the legacy of long-term chronic climate change alter ecosystem responses to short-term climatic extremes?
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* John Blair, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,903.00

Climate change may be manifested in the Midwestern United States as a
combination of gradual warming and changes in rainfall along with increases in
extreme weather events such as heat waves and droughts. Such gradual and extreme
changes have typically been studied independently, however they are most likely
to occur simultaneously, raising important questions about how they may
interact. For example, will the nature of ecosystem responses to drought be
affected by a gradual increase in temperature? This project will address this
question by building on a long-term climate change study in a Kansas grassland,
the Rainfall Manipulation Plots (RaMPs) experiment. The RaMPs experiment has
imposed 15 years of altered rainfall patterns, larger rainfall events and longer
periods between events, and 10 years of continuous (1-2 degree C) warming. Those
treatments have resulted in consistently dry soils, increased plant water
stress, reduced plant growth, genetic changes in populations of the most
abundant grass species, and changes in soil carbon dioxide emissions, nutrients,
and microbes. These varied responses are predicted to increase the ecosystem's
resistance to extreme drought and its ability to recover after drought. To test
those predictions, two years of extreme drought (similar to the 1930's dust
bowl) followed by a year of normal rainfall will be imposed on experimental
plots and multiple ecosystem responses will be measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
field-based course for undergraduates entitled 'Climate Change and Grasslands'
will be offered. This course will enhance students' basic understanding of the
scientific process and introduce them to the complexities of climate-ecosystem
interactions through lectures, class projects and field trips that showcase
results from climate change experiments in Wyoming, Colorado and New Mexico.