* 1257576
* Investigate the role of small RNAs of a necrotrophic fungal pathogen B. cinerea in suppressing host Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* Hailing Jin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2016
* USD 690,806.00

Botrytis cinerea is a successful fungal pathogen that can infect more than 200
plant species. So far, no host resistance to B. cinerea has been identified.
Botrytis uses rather sophisticated strategies to infect host plants; however,
the molecular mechanisms of its success are not well understood. Small RNA
(sRNA)-mediated RNA interference (RNAi), is a conserved gene silencing mechanism
that suppresses gene expression in a sequence specific manner. RNAi has not been
well studied in pathogenic fungi, and the roles of sRNAs in host pathogenesis
have not been explored in fungal pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
preliminary data, the investigator has hypothesized that some Botrytis sRNAs are
delivered into host cells and function as a novel class of virulence effectors
to suppress host immune responses by hijacking host RNAi machinery. This project
aims to identify and functionally characterize these Botrytis-derived sRNAs from
infected Arabidopsis (a model plant) and tomato, which can potentially target
host genes with putative function in immunity. The role of the host target genes
in host defense responses will also be examined. This project would reveal a
novel strategy that successful pathogens employ to suppress host immunity. The
output of this project would be truly transformative and would shed light on the
molecular mechanisms of the pathogenicity of virulent fungal pathogens. Such a
fundamental discovery would promise to open new perspectives in the pathogen-
host interaction field and crop disease management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. As a female
faculty, the investigator will serve as a mentor to female underrepresented
minority high school students. These students will receive summer training in
plant molecular biology in her lab. The investigator seeks to stimulate student
interest in agriculture and plant sciences and ultimately help deliver high
quality students to UCR and other colleges.