* 1257429
* Role of a CLE-WOX Intercellular Signaling Module in Controlling Polarity and Patterning During Leaf Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Fletcher, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 05/31/2017
* USD 431,608.00

A central question in developmental biology is how groups of cells organize
their activities to generate complex tissues and organs. Research has shown that
small mobile proteins play key roles in conveying signals between neighboring
cells, so that the cells can coordinate to generate patterns that make one end
of an organ different from the other, and to produce the various functional
tissues within the organ. Although these signaling proteins and their downstream
pathways are well understood in animals, very little is known about the
corresponding pathways in plants despite their clear importance for continuously
producing new organs throughout the plant life cycle. The main research
objective is to analyze the signaling pathways through which cell and tissue
patterning events are organized during leaf formation in plants. This project
will utilize genetic, molecular and biochemical methods to investigate the roles
of the CLE5 and CLE6 signaling proteins in leaf patterning in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. The expected results are (1) the identification of genes
that control CLE5/6 activity during early leaf development, (2) a thorough
understanding of how CLE5/6 control leaf polarity and boundary formation, and
(3) the discovery of key downstream genes in the pathway. Another important
component is integrating research with education at the undergraduate and K-12
levels. UC Berkeley undergraduates from under-represented minority groups will
assist with the project to obtain valuable research experience. In addition, a
one week plant learning module will be organized for freshmen at the minority
serving MetWest High School in Oakland, CA that will educate them about
fundamental topics in biological science while providing hands-on exposure to
plant biology through the use of simple research protocols. This study will
provide new insights into the ways in which mobile signaling proteins direct the
complex process of leaf formation, which can ultimately be used to improve
agricultural and biofuels crop yield by maximizing leaf biomass.