* 1257965
* Repeatability and genetic architecture of adaptive introgression: a long-term experimental evolution study in sunflowers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Loren Rieseberg, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 690,237.00

How frequently, and under what conditions, does evolution take the same path?
When independent populations evolve the same characteristics, are the underlying
genetic changes similar or different? Advances in genetic techniques are finally
allowing answers to these fundamental questions about the way evolution works.
However, these issues have not yet been explored in hybridizing lineages,
despite the fact that hybridization (mating and cross-fertilization between
different species) is widespread in wild plants, animals, and fungi. This
project examines replicate populations of experimental hybrid sunflowers which
have been evolving in the field in Texas. Morphological and physiological
measurements will determine whether they are converging or diverging in their
traits, and new genetic DNA sequencing techniques will be used to determine
whether the genetic basis of trait changes are similar or different across the
replicates.

The proposed research is the first to experimentally examine not only the
repeatability of hybrid evolution, but also to characterize its genetic
architecture in the wild. It will answer fundamental questions about the way
that evolution produces biodiversity, and will inform plant and animal breeding
efforts. The project will also impact science education in several ways,
including: (a) outreach to K-12 science classrooms and (b) integration of
research and education via training of fifteen undergraduate students (many from
underrepresented groups), two technicians, and one postdoctoral fellow. Public
outreach via a new Evolution in Action website will include a lay introduction
to experimental evolution studies and will demonstrate real-time evolution via
regular updates on the traits and genetics of the experimental populations.