* 1257956
* Collaborative Research: Nitrogen Retention and Ecosystem Succession: Theory Meets Data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gary Lovett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 503,387.00

Nitrogen is a critical nutrient for forests, and scarcity of nitrogen often
limits forest growth. Theoretical considerations in ecology indicate that as a
forest ages and its growth slows, its uptake of nitrogen from the soil should
also slow, leading to increased loss of nitrogen in drainage water. Long-term
measurements of nitrogen in streams draining the Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest in New Hampshire contradict this expected pattern. This project seeks to
understand the discrepancy between the theory and the data by testing the
hypothesis that young forests extract nitrogen from deep soils, but as the
forest ages, re-accumulation of the nitrogen in the soil delays the loss of
nitrogen in drainage water. The hypothesis will be tested by a field experiment
to determine the propensity for nitrogen accumulation in soil beneath forest
stands of different ages, and careful accounting of the amount of nitrogen in a
sequence of forests ranging from 15 to over 200 years old. In addition, a
computer simulation model of forest ecosystems will be revised to incorporate
these new observations. This work is important for management of forests to
minimize loss of nitrogen, a key plant nutrient. Air pollution adds excess
nitrogen to the forest, and if it is lost in drainage water, it can pollute
streams and lakes. The project will involve training of two graduate students
and two postdoctoral associates, and a teacher training module will help two
high school science teachers develop a unit for teaching about forest ecology in
their classrooms.