* 1257857
* Climate change and environmental gender determination in a geographically-widespread species
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Fredric Janzen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 730,690.00

The biological impacts of rapid changes in climate and habitats are major
scientific and societal concerns. The need for clarifying these effects is
particularly acute for species that are already imperiled. Turtles may be the
most endangered group of vertebrates and, in the vast majority, temperatures
experienced in the nest permanently determine offspring sex. This temperature-
dependent sex determination (TSD) will be examined with a multi-year field,
laboratory, and modeling study of wild populations of the painted turtle,
Chrysemys picta, from climatically-divergent locations across the United States.
This project will focus on measuring geographic variation in maternal nesting
behavior and embryonic thermal sensitivity as potential mechanisms used by
turtles with TSD to adapt to local climates. Teams of student researchers will
conduct research at the field sites and in the laboratory each year. These
activities will include monitoring behavior of nesting turtles, assessing
incubating eggs and developing embryos, and recording environmental and habitat
data. This information then will be incorporated into cutting-edge computer
models to illuminate how changes in local climate will affect nest temperature
and thus offspring sex ratio. In turn, the model predictions will be tested
experimentally to identify how populations with TSD must adjust behaviorally
and/or physiologically to offset any imbalance induced by thermal
alterations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These integrated studies should provide a
comprehensive understanding of how species with thermally-sensitive traits might
adjust to forecast scenarios of rapid changes in climate and habitats. The
findings will be particularly germane to conservation of species with TSD. This
multi-year program also will (1) build a broadly applicable tool for translating
between temperature measurements at point sources (nests, plant roots, etc.) to
thermal variation at the habitat level and then to regional climate, (2) improve
understanding of the scientific method by enhancing a lesson plan for 5th-grade
students, and (3) continue to provide first-hand scientific and educational
opportunities for numerous students (including underrepresented minorities,
persons with disabilities, and women).