* 1257730
* Biogenic amines, the Extracellular Matrix, and Neuronal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Sarah Certel, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2017
* USD 495,564.00

The development of a cell occurs in a complicated context of multiple
interacting factors from the molecular and subcellular levels to the external
environment of the cell. In addition to their well-established role in neuronal
communication, classical neurotransmitters are also involved in aspects of the
development of neuronal cells (neurons). Experiments in this project address how
the development and neuronal geometry of complex amine neurons depend on the
localization and distribution of the neurotransmitter octopamine, in combination
with surrounding extracellular matrix components and how these altered neurons
affect aggressive behavior. This project utilizes cutting-edge genetic tools
with classical mutational analysis available in the model organism, Drosophila
melanogaster, to determine how the morphology of neurons is affected by altered
octopamine levels and extracellular matrix components. The outcomes of these
experiments will significantly contribute to understanding how the individual
microenvironment modulates the development, circuit connectivity and function of
neuronal cells that form during embryogenesis and affect the behavior of an
animal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase the exposure of Montana
K-6 students' to science and scientific research through the creation of an
engaging science podcast designed for second-sixth grade classrooms which will
be shared with public schools across the state. The podcast integrates this
research on Drosophila neuronal development and aggression into a visually
stimulating presentation to promote learning and spark students' interest in
science. In addition to the podcast, live specimens of different Drosophila life
cycle and developmental stages will be sent to the classrooms, as the inclusion
of living examples provides a significant hands-on learning component
solidifying the video information into a fun and memorable experience. In
addition to receiving research training and mentoring, graduate students
involved in this research will participate in local elementary school
presentations to demonstrate aspects of their research. These interactions
provide a meaningful experience to build the student?s own scientific
presentation skills and engage the public at an elementary school level.