* 1257699
* Integrating approaches from behavior and engineering to explore how male songbirds respond to anthropogenic noise
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Koorosh Naghshineh, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 05/31/2017
* USD 313,200.00

Natural landscapes are being converted to urban areas at an accelerating pace,
leading to concerns regarding the ability of wild populations to persist in
cities. A major factor associated with urbanization is increased human-generated
or anthropogenic noise, which is intense, low frequency sound originating from
traffic and residential and industrial machinery. For animals that communicate
with vocalizations, such as songbirds, increasing anthropogenic noise is
problematic: noise overlaps vocal signals and changes how signals are
transmitted through the environment, which may affect the ability of males to
establish breeding territories and attract mates. Some songbirds respond to
noise by flexibly changing their vocal signals, calling louder or at higher
frequencies. What is not known is whether songbirds have other ways in addition
to signal adjustments to minimize the negative effects of noise on vocal
signaling. Through a unique collaboration between a behavioral ecologist and a
noise engineer, the research will explore whether males make decisions about
where to establish breeding territories, where to sing within them, and how to
adjust song, all based on variation in anthropogenic noise. To answer these
questions, the research will use "noise mapping" to visualize noise over time
and space, and behavioral observations and noise introduction experiments to
document songbird responses to noise. The detailed study of noise variation will
generate new insights regarding how animals respond to noise, as it
simultaneously considers multiple potential solutions to the challenge of vocal
signaling in noise. The research will provide valuable interdisciplinary
training for high school, undergraduate and graduate students studying ecology
and engineering, public outreach through sound walks in natural and urban
landscapes, and information that will improve design and value of urban parks
and forests for wildlife.