* 1257598
* Collaborative Research: Tracking genes in real time as they traverse a hybrid invasion landscape.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Jarrett Johnson, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2018
* USD 60,647.00

Sixty years ago, barred tiger salamanders from Texas were introduced into
California, where they hybridized with native, endangered California tiger
salamanders. The result is a completely novel landscape in which some salamander
populations are composed entirely of hybrid individuals and some are largely, or
completely comprised of individuals with native genes. For the last 25 years,
the Shaffer laboratory has collected and stored tissue samples from across the
range of the California tiger salamander, providing a unique data set to study
the distribution and spread of non-native genes. The current research project
uses cutting-edge genomic tools to characterize historical and contemporary
salamander populations, and to track the spread of thousands of non-native genes
as they invaded the native range of the California tiger salamander over the
last quarter century. Many species hybridize in nature, and the movement of
genes between species is an important component of understanding how species
adapt to changing environments. This project provides an unparalleled
opportunity study the spread of genes between species in real time as it occurs
in nature.

This research also addresses a fundamental, and difficult issue in the
conservation of endangered species: what is the conservation value of hybrids?
Hybridization is generally viewed as a serious threat to endangered species,
since hybrids are not genetically the same as individuals in the ancestral
species, and hybrids are usually not protected. This research will directly
confront the role of hybrids in endangered species management by providing
conservation agencies the opportunity to better understand how hybridization
proceeds in nature. Additionally, the PIs will provide training and support for
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, and will contribute resources
for K-12 education.