* 1257540
* Functional Analysis of cilia in Hedgehog signaling and Gli activity regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Aimin Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 510,000.00

The development of animals ranging from flat worms and fruit flies to humans
relies on communications between cells mediated by Hedgehog (Hh) family of
signal proteins. The primary cilia, tiny 'hairs' on the surface of most of our
cells, are needed for cells to respond to Hh, but it remains unclear how they
achieve this important function. This project focuses on Gli2, which turns on
gene expression in response to Hh. First, the PI will take a molecular approach
to test the hypothesis that the transportation of Gli2 into the cilia share the
same mechanism used for its transportation into the nucleus. Subsequently, the
PI will perform a structure/function analysis to define amino acids in Gli2
protein critical for its ciliary localization. Finally, the PI will create a
genetically engineered mouse that produces a Gli2 protein incapable of entering
the cilia. Using this mouse, the PI will test the hypothesis that Gli2 activity
is turned on specifically in the cilia. Recent reports linked the cilia to many
other signal proteins (e.g. Wnt, Bmp, PDGF etc); hence this research will not
only advance understanding of how Hh regulates cell behavior through cilia-based
signaling, but also provide more general insight into how cilia regulate
information flow to ensure normal development of an animal.

The integration of research and education will be achieved by applying the
research material to undergraduate teaching, encouraging undergraduate students
to participate in lab research and providing opportunities for graduate students
to be involved in teaching activities. Female and minority students will be
recruited to participate in this project through NASA-sponsored programs.
Finally, the PI will be actively involved in outreach activities such as
participating in Pennsylvania Junior Academy of Science activities (K-12
education) and Upward-bound programs for first-generation, economically-
challenged students.