* 1257786
* Collaborative Research: Neosuchian Evolution and Crocodylian Origins - 190 Million Years of Biodiversity and Biogeographic Response to Climate and Tectonics
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Christopher Brochu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 166,888.00

This research focuses on the evolutionary history of neosuchians ? living
alligators, crocodiles, and gharials -- and their closest extinct relatives.
Neosuchians have a rich fossil record on every continent spanning almost 200
million years. They were surprisingly diverse, including seagoing animals with
flippers and sharklike tails, small crushing forms with anvil-like teeth, and
30+ foot giants. Many aspects of neosuchian evolution and diversity are unclear.
This includes the exact number of extinct species, the interrelationships of the
several lineages, the geographic origins of modern crocodylians, and the role
large-scale earth changes, including changes in climate and sea level, played in
shaping neosuchian biodiversity. The investigators will examine specimens in
museum collections around the world, including fossils and the skeletons of
modern species, to assemble a comprehensive, precise history of neosuchians from
their origins to the present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neosuchians are one of the
few groups of animals for which we can simultaneously collect data from every
living species and sample a substantial amount of extinct diversity with
fossils. This project will further develop the use of neosuchians as a model
group for studies exploring and reconciling conflicts between data from living
and extinct species. This, in turn, will improve techniques used to estimate
divergence time from molecular data - something central to the modern life
sciences. Because of their global distribution, neosuchians will also allow us
to explore the interrelationships of diversity and climate over very long time
periods. This, in turn, will improve strategies to conserve modern crocodylian
species, some of which are gravely endangered.