* 1257689
* Collaborative Proposal:   Genomics across the speciation continuum in Heliconius butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* William McMillan, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 139,592.00

Discovering how genomes change as populations diverge is essential to
understanding how species arise. When populations begin to diverge most of their
genomes will often remain very similar, except for those regions that are
responsible for adaptive differences between the populations. As populations
become increasingly isolated from each other during the speciation process,
their genomes also become increasingly different from each other, particularly
at regions that underlie adaptive or reproductive differences between the
populations. Yet researchers know little about how, why, and where differences
actually accumulate across the genome. This collaborative project will leverage
recent advances in genome sequencing technology and the frequent hybridization
between divergent races and species of Heliconius butterflies to assemble a
moving picture of how genomes change over time and test specific hypotheses
about what causes genomes to change in certain ways.

This project will provide one of the most comprehensive examinations of the
genomic consequences of speciation. With this knowledge, researchers will begin
to understand the type of genetic changes that lead to the origin of new
species. The use of cutting edge genome sequencing technology, along with the
expertise of the collaborative research team, will lead to the development of
new analytical tools and methods that will be broadly useful to scientific
community. Training and outreach workshops will provide unique opportunities for
students, teachers, and researchers to gain hands-on experience in how genomics
can be used to study the amazing diversity found in nature.