* 1257306
* Collaborative Research:   LTREB Renewal:  Impacts of insect herbivory on the pace and pattern of primary successional change at Mount St. Helens
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,010.00

This long-term project tests the hypothesis that insect herbivory is a major
factor influencing recovery of natural communities following catastrophic
disturbance, a process known as primary succession. Since Mount St. Helens
erupted in 1980, field surveys and experiments have been used to quantify the
impacts of herbivores on two key community members - lupins, which facilitate
soil development, and willows, which provide the main source of three
dimensional vegetation structure required by many animals. Over the next five
years, these approaches will be continued in order to determine how effects of
herbivores on host plants are linked to community development, if these effects
attenuate as communities become more complex, and the factors that cause
herbivore effects to vary across space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
study have revealed previously unrecognized mechanisms that influence the
recovery of natural communities from catastrophic disturbances such as volcanic
eruptions. The project provides long-term data essential to management and
restoration efforts. The project also enhances science education through student
involvement and work with the National Volcanic Monument and its non-profit
partner, the Mount St. Helens Institute. The researchers will assist the Mount
St. Helens Institute in developing resources that enable high school science
classes to participate in research at the site.