* 1257476
* ABR: Novel Glycoprotein Hormone, Signaling Mechanisms, and Transcriptome Profiling in a Basal Vertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Stacia Sower, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 12/31/2018
* USD 767,147.00

This research will investigate the brain and pituitary glycoprotein hormones and
respective receptors that regulate reproduction in a the basal vertebrate, the
sea lamprey. Lampreys have an ancestral unique pituitary glycoprotein hormone
(GpH) not found in any other vertebrate. This project will examine the origin
and/or divergence of the pituitary glycoprotein-hormone-receptor families and
the molecular mechanisms and dynamics of pituitary GpH signaling. Results will
tell whether these hormones share common functional and developmental features
with the other hormones found in all other vertebrates. This project will
provide key information in neuroscience, neuroendocrinology, molecular biology
and vertebrate biology, and it will provide training oppportunities for
postdocs, undergraduates and graduate students in these areas. Gaining a further
understanding of reproductive hormones and their respective receptors,
interactions with neurotransmitters and testing analogs will be critical for
development of novel strategies for improving and controlling reproduction. The
PI as Director of the Center for Molecular and Comparative Endocrinology (CME)
facilitates worldwide and local collaborations, laboratory exchange visits and
chalk talks that yield benefits leading to increased student/postdoc engagement
in the research community. Outreach activities are varied and broad, including
public talks and collaborating with a Biotechnology Program at a local community
college. A lamprey brain atlas will also be developed as an interactive
neuroanatomy digital resource to be available for the scientific community. The
PI and members of the laboratory are involved with an international group of 47
scientists who are annotating the lamprey genome. The data generated through the
research will consist of nucleotide and protein sequences, phylogenetic
analysis, graphs, three-dimensional structures of the receptors, reconstructed
microscopic images, photographs, and hand-recorded observations, and will be
made available to qualified parties by the PI so long as such a request does not
compromise intellectual property interests, interfere with publication, invade
subject privacy, or betray confidentiality.