* 1257449
* Post-transcriptional Control of Cytoskeletal Genes Required for Axon Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Ben Szaro, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2018
* USD 645,000.00

Understanding how neurons build an axon is central to understanding how cell-
cell communication is established in the developing nervous system. This project
focuses on how neurons coordinate the synthesis of the many structural proteins
needed to make an axon with the signals that stimulate axon outgrowth. Whereas
this coordination was once thought mainly to occur by regulating the
transcription of genes into RNAs, new information indicates that much of it
happens afterward by directing the trafficking of these RNAs for translation
into proteins. In neurons of newly developing frog (Xenopus laevis) embryos,
suppressing expression of the RNA-binding protein, hnRNP K, disrupts this
trafficking, leading to the loss of both key axonal structural proteins and the
axon itself. Building on preliminary data indicating that hnRNP K initially
assembles into protein-RNA complexes within the nucleus as the targeted RNAs are
being made, experiments of the first objective use reverse genetic approaches to
characterize how this assembly occurs in developing neurons within the intact
embryo. Experiments of the remaining two objectives use mutant forms of hnRNP K
introduced into frog embryos, along with biochemical and histochemical assays,
to characterize the cell-signaling pathways that govern hnRNP K?s activity
during axon outgrowth. By providing new information about how neurons coordinate
axon outgrowth with synthesis of the necessary structural proteins, this work
has the potential to provide fundamentally new insights into how cells in
general use RNA-binding proteins to jointly regulate the fates of functionally
inter-related RNAs. The broader impacts of this work will be to provide research
training for PhD students and undergraduates at a public university with a
culturally diverse student body, and spinoffs from this work will impact courses
in molecular and developmental biology and in neuroscience.