* 1257424
* Control of Boreal Forest Soil Decomposition Processes by Plant Secondary Compounds
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Andres Soria, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2019
* USD 707,981.00

Plants produce a vast and variable array of secondary chemicals that are not
essential for basic metabolism, yet play important roles in defense,
competition, and reproduction. Considerably less is known about the role of
secondary plant metabolites in ecosystem processes like carbon cycling and the
breakdown of environmental pollutants. Phenolics, flavonoids, and tannins can
inhibit the decomposition of plant matter. Some of these same compounds have
been shown to enhance the microbial degradation of aromatic contaminants in
soil. Interestingly, boreal forest trees in Alaska possess remarkably high
concentrations of secondary compounds. The boreal forest is also a critical
component of the global carbon budget, housing nearly one third of the World's
vegetation carbon and soil carbon. This study will make use of long-term study
boreal forest sites in Alaska and Finland, including some petroleum-contaminated
field plots, to test the hypothesis that certain plant secondary chemicals
inhibit plant litter decomposition, while at the same time promoting pollutant
degradation by microorganisms. Comprehensive analyses of plant secondary
chemistry, litter decomposition, and contaminant degradation will be integrated
with cutting-edge molecular approaches for characterizing microbial community
composition and function in soils associated with an array of different boreal
forest trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate valuable information
about the chemical interactions between plants and microbes and the
ramifications for ecosystem processes and global carbon cycling. New insights
into plant-chemical-microbial interactions that promote organic contaminant
degradation will also provide insight into the resilience of boreal forest soils
to organic contaminants, and may lead to affordable methods for mitigating
contamination in remote, cold regions using native plants. Opportunities for
advanced research training will be provided to Alaska Native high school
students as well as undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher. The public will be engaged with the themes and findings of this
project through novel arts events resulting from collaborative interactions
between artists and scientists.