* 1257960
* Beyond Drosophila: Comparative transcriptomics of schizophoran flies to resolve a rapid radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Brian Wiegmann, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 599,975.00

Large comparative studies of fly genes are currently limited to mosquitoes and
the Drosophila (fruit fly) complex. Drosophila belongs to Schizophora, a group
of flies with over 50,000 species that includes model organisms, disease
vectors, and agricultural pests. Schizophoran phylogenetic relationships are
poorly understood because flies diversified very rapidly in the past, leaving
few genetic clues to decipher relationships. The investigators will use a new
and innovative approach that harnesses the power of transcriptome DNA sequencing
to reveal thousands of genetic clues to decipher this rapid radiation of
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate an ortholog database
that will allow other insect researchers to study genes across a wide diversity
of insects. The study will advance our understanding of insect evolution by
exploring the evolution of a wider range of genes. The researchers will also
provide comprehensive training to a PhD student and several undergraduates in
modern evolutionary research. Fly biodiversity and evolution-based outreach will
be developed and presented through collaboration with Nature Research Center in
Raleigh, NC. Results of the study will be used in educational materials to
promote research, the understanding of evolution, and species conservation to
the public and k-16.