* 1257330
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Assembling the Science of the Future: Epistemic Virtures in the Exact Sciences, Physiology and Literature of Post-Enlightenment France (1780-1840)
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Travis Wilds, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 11,317.00

Introduction

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports research on
the history of scientific and literary work in post-Enlightenment France with a
focus on the normative conditions for acquiring knowledge that emerged as
science and creative writing evolved into separate, autonomous pursuits. In
particular, the award funds archival research on the letters of Pierre-Simon
Laplace and manuscripts of Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire. Archival research
will serve to reveal their strategies for developing and promoting criteria for
knowledge associated with the exact sciences and physiology.

Intellectual Merit

The works and correspondence of these two major scientists and public figures
have not received due attention. These documents are pertinent to understanding
the contentious character of the dispute involved in the process of mutual
definition that made referring to literature and science as distinct fields
possible in France. The project aims to show that the emergence of separate
scientific and literary fields characteristic of modernity came at the price of
networks that spanned an integrated cultural space. The project will involve
methodological and theoretical innovations that facilitate relating both
scientific and literary texts, and history of science and science studies
methods in new ways.

Broader Impact.

The theoretical and methodological innovations to be implemented in this project
should be applicable to a range of other historical contexts where the dynamics
organizing competition and innovation are weak, decentralized or in flux. In
addition to planned publications in professional journals, this innovative
approach will be the subject of two academic seminars at UC-Berkeley, one
focused on methodological concerns for discussion with literary and history of
science scholars from Berkeley, and the other on integrating primary and
secondary history of science texts into undergraduate curricula.