* 1257496
* WIDER: EAGER: State Policy and Undergraduate STEM Education, Uncharted Ground
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Catherine Middlecamp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 194,926.00

This project is coordinated with and strengthens and accelerates progress in a
complementary project that is happening in the same timeframe. Project goals are
to give greater weight to designing and especially implementing undergraduate
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses in higher education
that incorporate evidence-based practices, and to equip citizens to address
global challenges involving STEM (in areas such as energy, environment, health,
and food). Research indicates that both problems can often be successfully
addressed by connecting STEM courses to the STEM components of real-world
problems. The design of this project is to positively influence institutions of
higher education to give more weight to these goals by making them more aware of
and connected to the needs of state-level policy-making bodies. State-level
policymakers are taking on growing importance in setting the direction of STEM
education and are exploring how policy levers can be used to effect meaningful,
lasting improvement in the design and delivery of STEM undergraduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This WIDER project is coordinated with a "Venture Project"
currently funded through the NSF/ BIO Directorate-supported National Socio-
Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC). Among its activities SESYNC is
supporting a venture called "State Policies to Transform Undergraduate STEM
Education." The PIs of this venture are coordinating and working with teams from
five states: California, Colorado, Maine, Maryland, and New Mexico. This project
is identifying similarities and differences in their educational systems and is
examining each state's policy issues with STEM parameters to find ways to
improve the content and pedagogy in undergraduate STEM courses and to align STEM
education with state priorities for environmental and economic sustainability.
These state teams include representatives from higher education, state
government, and business &amp; industry. Jointly they represent a spectrum of
different sizes and complexities, presenting distinctive economic and social
structures and educational systems. Through this project these states are
learning jointly to strategically utilize existing networks at the state level
to promote evidence-based approaches to the curriculum that draw from the
research-based literature on effective approaches to the application of ideas
and forms of inquiry derived from the study of STEM to real-world problems. It
is this knowledge that both practicing scientists and engaged citizens must
address for a sustainable future. The use of real-world problems is an
especially effective high impact practice for deepening knowledge and
understanding of complex concepts and principles.