* 1257815
* Collaborative Research: Computational Models for Neuroendocrine Control of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Matthias Scheutz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 325,000.00

The long-term objective of this research project is to identify the interactions
among chemical messengers that control behaviors. Neuropeptides regulate social
behaviors in representative species from all vertebrate classes. Species
differences in behavior, however, have made development of clear mechanistic
models difficult. This project investigates the complexity of behavioral
mechanisms using a combination of animal experiments and computational models.
Field and laboratory studies will be combined to address important emerging
questions on neuropeptide modulation of male vertebrate behaviors. The agent-
based modeling approach is especially well-suited to address this problem.
Synthetic experiments with the model allow for exploration of conditions
impractical or impossible in empirical tests. The model is expected to propose
novel mechanisms underlying neuropeptide control of behavior. This project thus
implements a tightly controlled experiment-model-experiment loop and develops a
new paradigm for a systems biology approach towards understanding social
behavior. Neuropeptides alter a variety of vertebrate social behaviors,
including parental, aggressive, and reproductive behaviors. Conserved behaviors
and chemical messengers will make the empirical results and the model broadly
applicable to vertebrates. Results will significantly advance our understanding
of the effect of neuropeptides on vertebrate behavioral plasticity. This project
also includes a significant training component, with involvement of an
undergraduate field biology class (with a 30% minority makeup) and training of
graduate students in a unique inter-disciplinary environment. The data
management plan includes deposition of new software at SourceForge and archiving
of digital data in the PI's institutional databases.