* 1257803
* Collaborative Reseearch: US IGNITE: EAGER: Exploring Ultrafast Networks for Training Surgeons Using Virtual Reality Based Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2017
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 11/30/2017
* USD 193,000.00

This project will develop and demonstrate new virtual reality based applications
for training medical residents and doctors in microsurgical techniques using the
Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) infrastructure and
capabilities. The microsurgical virtual environment will enable students to
learn the appropriate way of handling the soft tissues and developing the needed
surgical skills needed to become competent micro surgeons. Currently, surgical
training is usually limited face-to-face situations where the expert surgeon and
the trainees are in the same room performing intricate procedures, typically on
cadavers. Since the experts in microsurgical techniques are not available in
most parts of the country, such training is not readily available to many
medical students. The new virtual reality based surgical training application
will address this challenge by eliminating the need for the experts and the
trainees to be co-located. The GENI-enabled ultra-fast networking capabilities
will be exploited to demonstrate a breakthrough application where a
microsurgical expert in El Paso, Texas will teach medical residents in Oklahoma
and Wisconsin. The application will exploit cloud-based framework to allow other
sites to be easily integrated into the system so that trainees at many
distributed locations can be trained
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
provide specialized surgical training to students in distributed locations
through a virtual reality environment can revolutionize medical education
outside of major centers of excellence. The project will address issues of
access to specialized health care by providing specialist training and access to
higher education without geographical limitations. This project also lays the
foundation for more significant telemedicine applications in which doctors offer
healthcare services including surgical and non surgical consultations which can
include consultations with peer doctors and/or patients at distant locations.