* 1257849
* Brockport Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science (BPMACS) Scholars Program - Completing Their Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Stanley Radford, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

The Brockport Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science (BPMACS) Scholars
Program - Completing Their Degrees provides 28 to 32 scholarships of up to $5400
each year to juniors, seniors and Master's degree students in the fields of
physics, mathematics and computer science. An important emphasis of the program
is to ensure that BPMACS scholars complete their degrees in a timely fashion.
Scholars in the current BPMACS program have achieved 98% college-wide retention
and on-time graduation rates, and it is the goal of the new program to match
this success rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cadre of STEM professionals from the
three participating departments of Mathematics, Computer Science and Physics
administers the program, supported with the full backing of an involved
administration. The seven academic members of the Program Board are committed to
recruit a diverse applicant pool for the program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the program is strengthened by strong academic programs of
the three STEM departments involved and by the requirement that student awardees
are maintain a 3.0 GPA out of 4.0 in their major and overall each semester. The
team administering the program consists of two mathematicians, three computer
scientists, and two physicists and includes the chairs of all three
participating departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program achieves broader
impacts through the large number (85 - 90) of STEM scholars it anticipates to
graduate, its collaborative relationship with the Empire State STEM Hub, its
focus on minority and female recruitment and awardees, its financial support for
student research presentations at regional and national professional meetings
and its interface to college/industry forums through its series of invited STEM
lectures.