* 1257347
* RAPID: Understanding and Designing Community Dynamics in a Massively Open Online Course Platform, the Peer 2 Peer University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Brian Butler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 09/30/2015
* USD 178,806.00

In this project, the researchers will collaborate with one of the foremost open
education platforms, the Peer 2 Peer University (P2PU), to study how online
cyberinfrastructure can be designed, implemented, and analyzed to foster
educational experiences at a massive scale. With the rise of massively-open
online course platforms (MOOCs), there is a great need to understand how these
infrastructure technologies can be used to facilitate open education at scale.
Specifically, this project involves (1) implementing and conducting design
experiments on the P2PU platform, to generate new knowledge about how to improve
cyberinfrastructures for open learning; (2) collecting and analyzing data from
the P2PU platform to contribute foundational knowledge of open learning dynamics
and the issues open learning communities face; and (3) working with P2PU to
create and share publicly available datasets, practices, and standards that will
spur wider big-data driven research on cyberinfrastructures for learning and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabled by new cyber-infrastructure
technologies, a rapidly developing family of "massively open online courses"
(MOOCs) hold the potential to make interactive educational experiences available
at massive scale. At the same time, researchers, educators, and policy makers
are increasingly interested in the potential for big-data driven learning-
analytics, to transform how educational experiences are designed, deployed and
evaluated. Together, these trends present several cyberinfrastructure challenges
that will be explored in this project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- How should MOOC
platforms be designed, deployed and evaluated? What design features support
appropriate types of learner engagement? How do features, such as badges and
group recommendations, facilitate meaningful
involvement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- How can developing MOOC platforms be used
to meet the growing needs for cyberinfrastructure skills education and workforce
development? Do MOOCs provide a suitable platform for building the technical,
managerial, and scientific skills necessary to use and support emerging
cyberinfrastructures? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-- What cyberinfrastructure is
needed to support high-impact, data-driven learning-analytics research? What
data standards and practices are necessary to support studies of open
communities for education and learning? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MOOC platforms
have significant potential to increase the accessibility of STEM training, and
of education more generally. Understanding open platforms such as P2PU also has
the potential to broaden the population of individuals and institutions that can
participate in the creation and design of open education experiences. This
project will help us better to understand a rapidly emerging, highly disruptive
example of cyberinfrastructure (MOOC platforms). The project will thus
contribute to multiple research agendas in such fields as: computer-supported
collaborative learning (CSCL); human-computer interaction (HCI); virtual and
online communities; and, more generally, information systems, and organization
science. The measures, standards, and practices pioneered in this project will
also significantly accelerate the development of data-driven research and
learning-analytics techniques suitable for the design, management, evaluation
and improvement of the nation's growing educational cyber-infrastructure.