* 1257773
* Stress hormone effects on disease resistance, tolerance and transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2019
* USD 610,123.00

Superspreaders are disproportionately responsible for the infections of other
hosts. Perhaps the best-known human superspreader was Typhoid Mary, who caused
53 deaths due to Salmonella bacteria transmission. Although the frequency of
"Typhoid Marys" is unclear, they are probably not rare. Superspreading is
implicated in the rapid expansion of SARS (Sudden Acute Respiratory Syndrome)
and HIV across the globe. For most infectious diseases, 20% of hosts cause 80%
of infections. The goal of this research is to determine whether
glucocorticoids, major vertebrate stress hormones that have been implicated in
disease transmission, are involved in superspreading. Stress hormones could
impact superspreading by affecting how parasites (or vectors, such as mosquitos
and biting flies) choose hosts on which to feed, how hosts resist or tolerate
parasites, or how hosts transmit parasites to other hosts or vectors.
Surprisingly, there has never been a systematic study of the effects of stress
hormones on all aspects of one complex host-vector-parasite system. This
knowledge gap is significant and deserves attention because many anthropogenic
and natural factors alter stress hormone regulation, and these factors are
increasingly important in the context of global change. By knowing how and when
stress hormones affect host-parasite interactions, we may become better able to
predict and control zoonotic disease outbreaks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: To investigate the role of stress
hormones in superspreading, interactions among zebra finches (ZEFI), Culex
pipiens mosquitos, and West Nile virus (WNV) will be studied. WNV was chosen
because it has decimated some songbird populations and is thought responsible
for more than 33,000 human infections and 1150 deaths. ZEFI and Culex were
chosen because their genomes have been sequenced, providing opportunities for
strong experimental approaches. Stress hormones are predicted to impact i) ZEFI
behavior to Culex exposure, ii) Culex blood-feeding preference on ZEFI, iii)
ZEFI resistance to WNV infection, iv) ZEFI tolerance of WNV infection, and/or v)
ZEFI competency to transmit WNV to Culex. Ultimately, data will be used to
determine directly when stress hormones have the largest impacts, information
valuable for human and wildlife populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: In animals, superspreading appears important for the transmission of
several zoonotic diseases (infections that spill from animal into human
populations) such as West Nile virus and some hantaviruses. In the context of
global change, basic research on understanding superspreading has significant
societal value because zoonotic diseases are predicted to become more prevalent.
Collaboration with the Tampa Museum of Science and Industry, which attracts more
than one million guests annually, will include the development of a Science
Works Theater that helps the public understand disease ecology. Training
workshops for Hillsborough County high school teachers will also be held,
providing teachers tools to train incipient scientists in modern disease
biology. For USF students, about 40% of whom come from under-represented
backgrounds, robust learning experiences will be provided. Individuals on the
project will learn animal husbandry, minor surgeries, how to work in a high-
security infectious disease research facility, modern lab assays, data analysis,
and scientific writing.