* 1257338
* EAGER:   Identification of chemosensitive regions in brainstems of herps
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Lynn Hartzler, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 246,679.00

Poikilothermic vertebrates experience a broad range of temperatures during their
normal life histories with considerable impact on their acid-base balance. Given
the fundamental importance of pH regulation, poikilothermic vertebrates should
have a well-defined set of mechanisms to compensate for the effects of
temperature on acid-base. Thus it is intriguing that, instead, there is a broad
spectrum of acid-base regulating strategies in response to the challenge induced
by variable body temperature. For any pH-regulatory strategy the response to
acute temperature-induced metabolic alterations in pH requires an ability to
sense those perturbations and appropriately adjust the depth and rhythm of
breathing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this project are to
identify chemosensitive regions of the brainstem and characterize cellular
properties of sensory neurons within those regions in bullfrogs, Tegu lizards,
and Savannah monitor lizards. These experiments address major elements of the
feedback loop for ventilatory control and maintenance of pH homeostasis in
animals subject to variable body temperatures. Comparative, integrative
approaches are essential to finding common underlying mechanisms. Reduced
preparations like the brainstem slices used in these experiments are useful for
discovering physiological mechanisms critical for understanding how systems
work; however, it is also necessary to integrate this information into the
feedback loop since it is the organism as a whole which is responding to its
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wright State University's Biological Sciences
department actively encourages involvement of undergraduate students in
research, and the PI will continue to encourage women and other minorities in
the STEM disciplines to explore research both as an important learning
experience during their undergraduate and/or graduate education and as a career
choice. The PI and her trainees are active participants in outreach programs in
local school districts including science fairs and "PhUn week" (organized and
sponsored by the American Physiological Society). The PI also strongly
encourages her trainees to share what they have learned with their communities
for public engagement and for them to learn to teach and convey the importance
of research.