* 1257732
* Signaling Mechanisms in the Crustacean Molting Gland
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Lars Tomanek, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 989,147.00

Crabs, lobsters, and shrimp are ecologically and economically important
crustaceans in marine environments. The hard, calcified shell provides
protection and support, but restricts growth. As a result, these animals must
periodically shed the shell, a process called molting. Upon molting, animals
stretch the new shell before it hardens, providing more space for tissue growth.
The entire process is controlled by molting hormone produced by a pair of
molting glands. Little is known about the signaling genes that control the
molting gland, in particular the genes required for committing the animal to
molt. This "point of no return" decision is critical for survival and growth in
all crustaceans. The research supported by this award will address the question:
"What are the endocrine and molecular mechanisms controlling molting in
crustaceans?" The studies will focus on the roles of the molt-inhibiting hormone
(MIH), a global translation regulator called mechanistic Target of Rapamycin
(mTOR), and a number of growth factor signaling pathways that mediate critical
transitions in molting gland physiological states. The project involves a team
of investigators from four universities using state-of-art DNA sequencing
technologies to create a complete catalog of all the genes expressed in the
molting gland, and physiologic assessment of the molting process. The research
will identify genes essential for the activation of the molting gland and its
regulation, both positive and negative, by environmental signals. The broader
impacts of the award will include both educational, and resource benefits. The
project will train 1 postdoc, 4 graduate students, and 6-8 undergraduates in
molecular biological and biochemical techniques, as well as provide summer
research experiences for 3 underrepresented ethnic minority undergraduate
students. The results of the research will be compiled into a database that will
be a valuable resource for researchers to manage fisheries, develop effective
aquaculture practices, and mitigate the harmful effects of pollutants and
climate change. Other results from the project will be disseminated through a
symposium/special session at the 2015 SICB meeting, a public display at Bodega
Marine Lab, a K-12 outreach program, and publication in peer-reviewed journals.