* 1257391
* Collaborative Research: Disrupted Nitrogen Cycles in the Brazilian Amazon
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Christopher Neill, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2016
* USD 592,032.00

Funds are provided to study nitrogen (N) cycles in the Brazilian Amazon. The
research aims at quantifying N transformation and transport pathways in natural
and agricultural settings in the Neotropics. The shift in agriculture combined
with the increase in nitrogen fertilizer inputs in tropical regions have the
potential to drive profound losses of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere, or
increased movement of soluble N to rivers and streams. The proposed field
research will quantify N2O fluxes and N fate in the vadose zone, groundwater and
streams under natural conditions (tropical forest), single cropping of soybeans,
and double cropping with soybeans and maize. Remote sensing will be used to
scale up results from the field and model to the Amazon region, and
incorporation of research results into a dynamic vegetation model (IBIS) that
has been parameterized for the Amazon and will be used to estimate N emissions
under different climate and land use management scenarios in the future. The
work will test two hypotheses: (1) that increased N fertilization will lead to
moderately but not greatly higher N2O emissions compared to natural forest
because soils are well-drained and are not expected to go anaerobic long enough
for accumulation of N2O, and (2) that N losses to streams will be minimal in
N-fertilized plots because of high rates of uptake by maize crop and retention
of any residual N leachates in deep, clay soils through anion
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will aid in understanding effects of
changing agricultural practices on greenhouse gas emissions and stream pollution
in the Amazon. Partnerships with local Brazilian scientists and training of US
and Brazilian students will be important impacts from the research. Public
outreach and broad dissemination of results will be achieved through regular
presentations to agricultural producers and policy makers in Brazil through
established contacts, as well as the support of a US journalist to visit the
research field sites, which are locations of long-term ecological and
biogeochemical research.