* 1257053
* The evolution of lateral gene transfers from bacteria to animals
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2017
* USD 599,999.00

The exchange of DNA and genes among bacteria is common and contributes, for
example, to the spread of antibiotic resistance between different bacterial
pathogens. In contrast, until recently gene transfer from bacteria to animals
(including insects) was believed to be rare and unimportant. The number of
complete DNA sequences for insects is rapidly growing and these have revealed
that gene transfers between microbes and insects are actually common. Some of
these transfers have become functional insect genes, potentially giving those
insects new biochemical capabilities. The goals of this research are to answer
two basic questions: 1) What are the functions of bacterial gene transfers in
insects and 2) How do inserted bacterial sequences become active insect genes?
To address these questions, the complete DNA sequences from different insects
are examined for candidates of bacterial origin. The candidates are then
confirmed using molecular approaches, and their functions are examined by
knocking out the genes using genetic methods. Sequences are also examined to
evaluate how they have changed to allow for activation of the gene in the
insect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project involve science
and education, and include implications for pest control. For example,
pesticides designed to act on bacterially acquired insect genes found in a pest
will likely have few toxic effects on other species. The project also has
significant education outreach, which includes working with educators at
regional community colleges to develop discovery based opportunities for
community college students through workshops and research internships.