* 1257217
* Inductive Mechanisms in Arthropod Germ Line Specification
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Cassandra Extavour, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2018
* USD 550,001.00

Eggs and sperm are made by special cells called germ cells. Germ cells are
critical not only to organismal survival but also to species survival and
evolution, because they are the only cell type capable of producing the next
generation. It is therefore critical to understand the genetic and molecular
mechanisms that make sure germ cells are specified in embryos. Studies using
traditional model organisms such as mice and fruit flies have suggested that
some animals use an 'inheritance' mechanism to specify germ cells, whereby germ
cell-determining substances are placed into developing eggs before embryonic
development begins. In other animals, an 'inductive' mechanism operates, whereby
cells exchange signals to determine which cells should become germ cells. For
decades it was thought that most animals used the inheritance mechanism, and
that mammals were exceptional in using the inductive mechanism. Prior research
by the PI challenged this assumption by discovering the first example of a non-
mammalian animal that uses the inheritance mechanism. To make this discovery,
they studied germ cells in a cricket called Gryllus bimaculatus. The current
project will extend this novel finding by determining whether the signals used
to specify germ cells are actually the same in both mammals and crickets. If
this proves to be the case, it could mean that the same signaling mechanism was
used to specify germ cells in a last common ancestor of all animals. This work
has high transformative potential, as it will have a radical impact on our
understanding of how germ cells are specified in diverse animals, and how the
mechanisms used to specify germ cells evolved. The current project will also
develop new educational tools that use science fiction films to engage both the
general public and university undergraduates in the study of developmental
biology and genetics.