* 1257000
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Travel, Botany, and Naturalism in the Ottoman Empire
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Margaret Jacob, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/28/2014
* USD 22,680.00

This doctoral research explores the role of travel as a method of acquiring
knowledge in the early modern Ottoman Empire. While travel has long been seen as
a fundamental motor of Western thought, it has not received similar recognition
in Ottoman historiography. Surviving manuscript collections suggest that in the
late seventeenth century travel writing became increasingly popular among
Ottoman intellectuals and their travelogues record indirect pilgrimage routes to
Mecca, in which authors investigated and discussed miracles, wonders, and flora.
The present study will explore how this new genre of writing transformed travel
into a knowledge-making practice that emphasized direct experience and
naturalistic depiction. The origins and impact of this epistemological
transformation will be investigated through research in the manuscript libraries
and archives of Istanbul from January to November 2013.

This research applies current methods and questions developed by historians of
science to the field of Ottoman studies, which has been traditionally dominated
by social and economic history approaches. The field of Ottoman history of
science is both vastly under-researched and has yet to adopt advances in science
and technology studies from the past thirty years. Using recent work on
seventeenth-century history of science in Europe as a reference point, the study
addresses such topics as the history of scientific observation, the scientific
self, and the role of wonders and marvels.