* 1257739
* Comparative analysis of host-shift speciation in the redheaded pine sawfly, Neodiprion lecontei (Hymenoptera: Diprionidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Catherine Linnen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2017
* USD 607,764.00

The proposed research aims to understand how plant-feeding insects adapt to
their host plants and the extent to which this process leads to the formation of
new species in nature. Whereas most pine sawflies feed only on a single type of
pine, the redheaded pine sawfly (RHPS) is a major pest of multiple pine species
throughout eastern North America. Using a combination of fieldwork, laboratory
experiments, and DNA sequencing, the proposed project will determine whether:
(1) RHPS are adapted to different pine species, (2) RHPS from different pines
are genetically distinct, and (3) RHPS from different pines can produce
offspring together, which will indicate whether these are distinct, unrecognized
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprising ~25% of all species, plant-feeding
insects are among the most diverse organisms on Earth. By describing how insects
adapt to host plants and determining the link between adaptation and species
formation, the proposed research will help explain the origin of a sizeable
fraction of biodiversity. At an applied level, determining whether RHPS is
comprised of multiple unrecognized species will have direct implications for
managing outbreaks of this destructive pest. Additionally, this project's
integrative nature provides an ideal training environment for undergraduate and
graduate students. Finally, because host plant adaptation is an intuitive
process and RHPS is part of the local fauna, this research can be used to convey
basic evolutionary principles to Biology students. To this end, a related
teaching module (lesson plans, presentations, activities, and assignments) will
be developed and assessed in high schools in eastern Kentucky.