* 1257063
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Degeneration in Miniature: History of Cell Death and Aging Research in the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,10/31/2013
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 12,155.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation improvement grant
supports an investigation in the history of cell degeneration research. The
dissertation focuses on four historical episodes from the 1930s to 1990s. The
first three episodes are largely written in draft form. This grant will support
research on the fourth historical episode documenting H. Robert Horvitz's study
of cell death in the nematode C. elegans from the late 1970s to the early 1990s.
Horvitz, a molecular biologist, shared the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine with two others. This current proposal requests funding mostly for
archival visits and interviews to characterize the fourth historical episode
through the early 1990s when Horvitz represented cell death as a specific
cellular state of differentiation caused by a network of gene expressions. This
development opened the door for future genomic approaches to cell death, aging
as well as cancer research through studying the model organism C.
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific study supported by this grant and the encompassing dissertation
research will serve to provide an analytical account of the emergence of diverse
meanings of cell degeneration, such as being a protector of health, a sculptor
for development, and a limitation of lifespan, in the contexts of these research
programs and broader biomedical concerns. The study will contribute to deeper
understandings of the complex history of biomedical research including insights
about scientific practice and connections with broader historical backdrops and
consequences. The study will also contribute to discussions in history and
philosophy of science and science studies on the roles of new biological
material, research styles, and priorities in the modern development of biology,
especially with the intricate interplay between changing experimental systems
and concepts of cell degeneration these systems
embodied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;History of
science projects that contextualize and problematize current knowledge and
research programs on a particular topic, in this case cell degeneration, are of
substantial interest to scientists in the field (cell biology) and related
fields (such as molecular biology, physiology, cancer research, and research on
aging). In addition, the results of this project are to be communicated to the
public through the online encyclopedia of embryology, the Embryo Project,
through an online virtual exhibition about history of biology of aging at the
Marine Biological Laboratory Repository, and through a prize-winning podcast by
Chemical Heritage Foundation, Distillations.