* 1257111
* Regulation of Flower Initiation and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 05/31/2017
* USD 500,684.00

In annual plants, which include most crops species, onset of flower formation
triggers a transition from biomass and resource production in the leaves and
branches to allocation of these resources to the next generation in the seeds
formed in the flowers. Both timing of the onset of flower formation and proper
flower development are important for plant survival and for agriculture.
Understanding the regulation of these processes will allow optimization of the
duration of the vegetative phase for biofuel production or food production and
optimal elaboration of the reproductive structures for food production. Despite
much recent progress in the understanding of the regulation of both of these
processes, much remains unknown. The plant specific transcription factor LEAFY
(LFY) is a master regulator of the switch to flower formation and of early
flower development. This project uses LFY as an entry point and Arabidopsis
thaliana as the plant model species to address two key questions that represent
major gaps in the understanding of flower development: (1) What are regulators
that act downstream of LFY to trigger the switch to flower formation? LFY sets
in motion the series of events that result in formation of the first flower.
Despite the importance of this developmental switch for plant reproductive
fitness and human sustenance, key regulators of this transition that are induced
by LFY remain unidentified.The project will take a novel genetic approach to
address this question. (2) How do LFY and another important regulator of flower
development, the MADS box transcription factor APETALA1 together direct the cell
fate changes required to form a floral meristem? It is now widely accepted that
LFY and AP1 together orchestrate early flower development. In this aim, insight
gained from recent genomic datasets will be harnessed to identify candidate
regulators important for early events in flower morphogenesis followed by
elucidation of their role in plants. These early events in flower morphogenesis
are poorly understood in all plant systems so this investigation should generate
novel insight of broad significance.