* 1257590
* An experimental test of the developmental stress hypothesis - fitness consequences of early versus late contaminant exposure
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* John Swaddle, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 472,000.00

Biologists predict that stress early in life should have a larger effect on
organisms than the same stress experienced later in life. This theory is called
the developmental stress hypothesis and if correct means that early stress
experiences may have long last effects that impact an individual fitness by
altering cues that are used by animals to assess each other as mates and/or
competitors. If this hypothesis is correct then may taking into account
environmental stressors it is possible to design more effective preservation and
conservation actions as we know the mechanisms for how and why certain
individuals will mate with each other and produce offspring that survive. This
project will test the developmental stress hypothesis by examining
physiological, immunological, developmental, and behavioral consequences of
exposure to low levels of mercury in a well-studied bird?the zebra finch.
Mercury is a global toxin but we know little about how small non-lethal amounts
of mercury harm the body. Mercury contamination has been described by the
current Federal administration as the "most important global chemical issue
facing us today", so increasing our understanding of the impact on wildlife of
this pernicious and mobile toxin will have important implications for national
and international efforts to regulate mercury pollution. Graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this project will indicate whether early
life exposure to mercury is more damaging than later exposure to the same small
amount of mercury. Pilot data indicate that the immune system will be
suppressed, brain functions impaired, and breeding severely depressed; and that
these effects will be most notable in the case of early-life exposure to
mercury. This could change our perception of what a "safe" level of mercury is.
As the zebra finch brain is a model for understanding human speech learning this
project will also give insight as to how mercury affects human health.