* 1257003
* Disequilibrium and Transient Dynamics:  Disentangling Responses to Climate Change versus Broader Anthropogenic Impacts on Eastern Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Charles Canham, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2019
* USD 347,447.00

U.S. forests face an unprecedented array of threats. Scientists have typically
studied these threats in isolation, but it is clear that changes in the
distribution and abundance of tree species over the next century will depend on
the cumulative impacts of a wide range of human impacts. The proposed research
will link an existing, well documented and tested model of forest dynamics to
the continental-scale forest inventory data maintained by the U.S. Forest
Service Forest Inventory and Analysis Program. The new framework will expand the
model to assess the effects of a broad suite of human impacts on eastern U.S.
forests, including (1) climate change, (2) changes in logging regimes, (3)
introduced pests and pathogens, and (4) increasing nitrogen (N) deposition and
CO2 concentrations. Preliminary results suggest that the direct effects of
climate change alone on the distribution and abundance of tree species in the
eastern U.S .will be relatively small over the next 50-100 years, in part
because direct climate impacts on adult tree survival are relatively small.
However, processes that increase the natural mortality rates of adult trees,
such as harvesting or the spread of pests or pathogens, are expected to interact
with the effects of climate change by opening the forest canopy and allowing the
establishment of new species.

This research addresses a clear need of resource managers and policy makers for
transparent, data-driven models that can be used to understand and predict
forest response to a broad range of human impacts. For instance, the new model
will be able to project the effects of proposed increases in forest harvest
rates for production of energy biomass on subsequent forest productivity, and
how the effects could change in combination with other human-caused impacts such
as the accidental introduction of pests and pathogens. The project will also
provide training and workshops for students and management professionals in the
use and application of this new tool for sustainable use of the nation's
forests.