* 1257881
* IOS: The Adaptive Significance of Juvenile Coloration:  Precocial Partner Preference
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Matthew Lovern, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

In many animal species males and females differ in appearance and behavior and
these differences usually arise about the time of puberty, when extensive
hormone changes occur. However, there is no theoretical reason why differences
cannot develop earlier in life as long as the advantages of the differences are
expressed later, as adults, in gaining reproductive mates. Nevertheless, this
early expression of differences (and the later advantages) has not been the
subject of much study. In one excellent case, hatchling male collared lizards
that are setting up their territories develop a bright color signal and treat
other hatchling males aggressively and hatchling females non-aggressively. These
young males begin to pair bond with young females as future mates and repel
young males as future mate rivals. This study uses biochemical, genetic,
molecular, and field approaches to document the hormones responsible for the
development of the early sexual differences in this species, and the genetic
advantages expressed later in life. This species is a model for the study of
this phenomenon, and results should apply broadly, even to humans. The research
should spur more investigation of early male-female differentiation and plant a
paradigm shift in evolutionary ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both graduate and
undergraduate students will take part in this research and especially Native
Americans will be recruited to learn how science is done and communicated.
Undergraduates will be individually mentored through all stages of the research,
including presentation of results at public conferences. Results will be
published in scientific and lay outlets, including magazines, newspapers,
television, and the internet. Data will be available at the Oklahoma PetaStore
(http://oscer.ou.edu/petastore.php), free to all academic users, and readable
results and significance on a webpage accessed from the main public webpage of
the Department of Zoology at Oklahoma State University
(http://zoology.okstate.edu/).