* 1257785
* Collaborative Research:   Genomic approaches to comparative phylogeography in a biodiversity hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* John Klicka, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/29/2016
* USD 299,998.00

This project addresses how, when, and why organisms diversify and become
distinct species. The focal system is an under-studied biodiversity hotspot:
Mexican pine-oak woodlands. Sampling of 34 emblematic vertebrates will occur
across four major mountain ranges in Mexico and linked regions in the United
States. Species include 21 birds, 4 amphibians, and 9 reptiles. DNA data will be
collected using novel techniques that capture hundreds of genomic regions, which
will be assayed to determine: (1) if there are overlooked cryptic species; (2)
whether common barriers (e.g. lowland regions) have influenced diversification
across species; and (3) whether the timing of species origins coincides with
periods of mountain building or glacial cycling through deep
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will uncover new biodiversity in a part of
the world that is known for its species richness and that is under severe threat
from habitat loss. Knowing the basic units of biodiversity is the first step
toward mitigating such threats. This study will also help understand how
biodiversity is generated and over what timescale. All specimens collected will
be deposited in natural history collections at two U.S. museums, and will be
available for many other studies -- natural history collections are public
repositories of biodiversity with virtually limitless future potential on
subjects ranging from public health and disease to basic science.