* 1257805
* MAP kinase signaling in the Arabidopsis embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Wolfgang Lukowitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2018
* USD 508,000.00

Vascular plants have two fundamentally different axes of growth, roots and
shoots, which first become established through precisely orchestrated cell fate
decisions in the early embryo. While the mechanisms underlying this patterning
process remain poorly understood overall, previous work has clearly identified a
key role for the YODA (YDA) cellular signaling pathway. The YDA pathway, which
contains a mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase module, becomes activated upon
fertilization and promotes division of the zygote into a large basal and a small
apical daughter. This asymmetric first division defines polarity and sets the
stage for subsequent elaboration of the main axis with root and shoot poles.

In this project, the molecular mechanisms of YDA signaling in the zygote and
early embryo will be analyzed using a diverse set of methodologies, including
classical genetics, comparative phylogeny, molecular biology, genomics,
microscopy, and biochemistry. Particular attention is dedicated to factors
regulating the core MAP kinase module in the context of fertilization, as well
as the gene expression programs targeted by the pathway and executing the
establishment of polarity. The expected results will make pioneering
contributions to our understanding of how the basic body plan of plants is laid
out and may inform targeted approaches for initiating embryos from somatic cells
in culture.

The project will lead to training of a post doctoral associate and a graduate
student in plant genetics, molecular biology, genomics, and advanced microscopy.
Participation of a high school teacher, high school students, and undergraduate
students is an integral part of the research plan; recruitment will be through
the Georgia Intern-Fellowships for Teachers (GIFT) program, the Empowered Youth
Program (EPY), the University's Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP),
and the NSF-sponsored Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (PSLSAMP).