* 1257160
* Collaborative Research:  Influence of below-ground species interactions on dynamics above ground: Trait-mediated indirect effects from soils to parasites of leaf-feeding herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Jacobus de Roode, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2016
* USD 328,884.00

Almost all known organisms, from humans to soybeans, are attacked by parasites
that cause disease. Parasites vary in their transmission rate, which influences
how quickly they can spread; and in their virulence, a measure of how strongly
they worsen the health of their hosts. Recent research now shows that other
organisms in the environment can influence the transmission and virulence of
parasites. For example, antibiotics in milkweed plants that are eaten by monarch
butterflies can protect the butterflies from parasites, and female monarchs that
are already infected with parasites show a preference for laying their eggs on
plants containing high concentrations of the antibiotics. But what makes one
milkweed plant contain more or less antibiotic than another? Fungi in the soil
interact with the roots of plants to influence the concentration of antibiotics
in plant leaves, and so may be determining rates of parasitism above ground.
Using monarchs as a model, this project explores interactions between soil
fungi, plants, herbivores, and their parasites. The researchers hypothesize that
the abundance and identity of the fungi in the soil help determine the infection
rates of the butterflies above ground, and that plants that are colonized by
soil fungi become more attractive to egg-laying butterflies that are already
infected with parasites.

This work has broad impacts beyond the study of butterflies. The parasites
studied in the project are related to those that cause malaria in humans, so the
research may help understand the transmission and virulence of human parasites.
Many crop pests have parasites that might be made more effective by managing
soil fungi. Students trained on this project will come from diverse backgrounds
and join established mentoring programs at the University of Michigan and Emory
University. Schoolteachers will develop teaching plans in association with the
project, and monarch butterflies remain popular for teaching scientific
principles to the general public.