* 1257625
* RCN:   Synthesizing Deep Time and Recent Community Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Anna Behrensmeyer, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2020
* USD 399,990.00

Understanding the structure, function, and dynamics of ecosystems is a central
goal of ecological research. Paleo-biologists are engaged in parallel efforts to
reconstruct past ecological communities using associations of fossil plants and
animals. Modern ecology knows a lot about how the individual components of
ecological systems operate in the present day, but considerably less about the
linkages that hold together communities and ecosystems over long periods of
time. Paleo-ecological studies in deep time (from thousands of years to several
hundred million years ago) can reveal how communities shift over evolutionary
time and how they respond to major environmental changes. This project will
establish a Research Coordination Network to bring together ecologists and
paleo-biologists in an effort to bridge the gap between ecology and paleoecology
and apply modern ecological theory to gain in-depth understanding of land-based
faunas and floras over the past 400 million years. The network resources and
expertise will focus on the following central question: What are the patterns
and causal processes of animal and plant community assembly and disassembly over
geological time and up to the present-day? This project will generate new
perspectives on change in the planet's ecosystems before human impact, allow us
to compare what is happening now, and give us some ideas about what may happen
in the future.

This Research Coordination Network will produce a more comprehensive model for
community assembly and disassembly that uses both neo- and paleo-ecological data
and insights. This project will also produce a new synthetic book, Foundations
of Paleoecology, which will integrate ecological theory with the paleo-biology
record, and a public database of ecological communities of different land plants
and animals over different scales of space and time. Additional broader impacts
from this network include research experience and training of undergraduates and
graduate students, and outreach to the general public through the new National
Museum of Natural History, Deep Time exhibit and through games and teacher
manuals to promote the teaching of linkages between ecology and paleoecology in
public schools.