* 1257474
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive plasticity, timing, and population divergence in a songbird species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 642,041.00

This research asks how animals know whether and when to migrate and when to
breed. The focal animal is a songbird in which populations with separate
breeding ranges winter together but differ in whether or not they migrate. When
spring arrives the non-migrants begin to breed, while the non-migrants delay
breeding despite living in the same environment. Research on the mechanisms that
account for different responses to identical environments could help to explain
how animals monitor the environment and adjust their physiology to their needs.
The dark-eyed junco is a songbird and an ideal model to address these questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate plasticity in hormone
systems using hormonal "challenges" and pharmacological manipulations. It will
also explore differences in gene expression between resident and migratory
juncos from recently diverged populations (California) and longer diverged
populations (in Virginia) that over-winter together but breed in different
places at different times. The prediction is that migrants will differ from
residents in their response to challenges and that recently diverged populations
will differ less than populations that diverged longer ago. Another prediction
is that gene expression in a common garden will differ between longer diverged
populations as compared with recently diverged populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;The research will enhance
understanding of why and how some animals are able to thrive in changing
environments, while other animals' ranges retreat, and some species are lost.
This research will provide numerous opportunities to train graduate and
undergraduate students, and knowledge gained will be disseminated broadly. The
project will enable promotion of a documentary film starring the study species
and designed for use in high schools and public venues for adult learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data Management.&lt;br/&gt;Data supporting results in
published papers will be made available on Genbank and/or Dryad. All data
generated from this research will be archived in an online repository maintained
by the Indiana University Library
(https://scholarworks.iu.edu/dspace/handle/2022/7911).