* 1257532
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Environmental and internal influences on the activities of the Calvin- and reductive citric acid cycles in hydrothermal vent symbiosis Riftia pachyptila
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Kathleen Scott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2018
* USD 320,001.00

All life on Earth depends upon the fixation of carbon dioxide to organic carbon
by organisms that power this process with light energy or high-energy chemicals.
There are four known pathways that catalyze carbon fixation. Based on
phylogenetic distributions and functional attributes, it has been posited that
the Calvin Benson Bassham cycle, found in plants, algae, and some bacteria,
dominates in aerobic terrestrial and marine aerobic habitats due to its
resilience to oxygen, while other 'oxygen sensitive' carbon fixation pathways
are relegated to hypoxic or anoxic environs like vents and hot springs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contrary to this supposition, there are symbioses found in
hypoxic diffuse flows around hydrothermal vents in which the bacterial partner
uses the Calvin Benson Bassham cycle. Tubeworm-bacterial symbioses, in
particular Riftia pachyptila ("Riftia"), are the dominant keystone species at
hydrothermal vents in the Pacific Ocean. These symbiotic systems fix carbon at
mass specific rates comparable to the fastest growing plants. Surprisingly,
recent studies suggest that the bacterial symbionts use two carbon fixation
pathways, the Calvin Benson Bassham cycle and the reductive tricarboxylic acid
cycle. The use of these two pathways by a single organism (the bacterium) to fix
carbon is unprecedented, and may be a strategy to cope with the high variability
in environmental conditions encountered by hydrothermal vent organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the work proposed here, Riftia will be incubated in
high-pressure aquaria under conditions that mimic the environmental variations
found in situ. Biochemical assays on the bacteria and tubeworm host will be used
to ascertain the relationship between environmental conditions, metabolic
activity and differential use of the two pathways, to understand how they act in
concert to sustain carbon fixation in a dynamic environment. These data will
considerably further the understanding of the influence of environment on carbon
fixation by bacteria as well as plants, and will also be helpful for determining
why different organisms have the different carbon fixing
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are equally committed to the proposed
scientific research and our proposed education and outreach. We plan to support
three major programs: (1) graduate student development (2) undergraduate
mentoring, and (3) the design of high-impact educational curricula using real
research data and experiences. This study will enable the support and training
of undergraduate and graduate students who will be intimately involved in
designing and engineering the experiments, analyzing the data, and formally
presenting and documenting the work. The proposed research contains significant
field and laboratory components, which affords students and teachers the
opportunities to participate in this project at a variety of levels.