* 1257024
* EAGER: Solving Markov Random Fields with Mutual Exclusion Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 71,624.00

This project explores a new way to increase the expressive power of Markov
Random Fields (MRF) while at the same time improving the computing efficiency
and the quality of solutions. The research focuses on utilizing quadratic mutual
exclusion constraints (QMCs) expressed in quadratic equality form. Current
approaches to increasing the expressive power of MRFs face a very challenging
problem of higher computing time. In contrast, this approach is able to restrict
the solution search space with QMCs, which in turn not only leads to
significantly better solutions but also to reduced computing time.

Many problems in computer vision, including but not limited to image and video
segmentation, stereo, and image restoration, object detection and recognition,
tracking, and activity recognition, are formulated as optimization problems
involving inference of the maximum a posteriori (MAP) solution of a Markov
Random Field (MRF). QMCs are more general than mutex constraints expressed in a
linear equality form. Hence QMCs offer increased expressive power to more
accurately model many computer vision problems. This property is particularly
important when unary and binary MRF potentials are unreliable and uninformative,
which is the rule rather than an exception in real applications. Hence, this
project can increase the ability of computer vision systems to broaden their
application scope, ranging from image retrieval to computer vision systems on
mobile robots.