* 1257938
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution in LTER Experiments:  Ecological and Evolutionary Consequences of Long-Term Nitrogen Addition for the Legume-Rhizobium Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Katy Heath, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2017
* USD 145,000.00

One little-publicized aspect of human-caused, global change has been a doubling
of the availability of nitrogen to plants via the manufacture of fertilizer and
the burning of fossil fuels. Nitrogen is the element that most strongly limits
plant growth on land, so one ecological consequence is likely to be a rise in
the total productivity of plants. A more surprising and opposite consequence
could be a fall in a major, natural source of nitrogen for plants, the
association between species of plants in the Pea Family, known as legumes; and
root-dwelling bacteria, known as rhizobia, which convert nitrogen gas in the air
into ammonium, a form of nitrogen that plants use to make proteins and other
molecules essential for life. Legumes that can get more nitrogen directly from
the soil tend less to associate with rhizobia, which demand carbohydrates from
the plants. Over time, global change in nitrogen is thus predicted to reduce the
abundance of rhizobia and drive the evolution of less cooperative rhizobia that
make less nitrogen available to the plants. This could in turn increase reliance
on synthetic fertilizers, and feedback upon the global nitrogen cycle. This
project will use an existing, 22-year-old experiment in nitrogen addition
experiment at the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site at the Kellogg
Biological Station as a window onto what may happen to the natural nitrogen
supply over the decades to come.

The broader impacts of this project include applications to agriculture,
research training for students, and promotion of diversity in the scientific
workforce. A number of cropping systems, including the rotation of soybeans and
corn, use the association between legumes and rhizobia as a source of nitrogen.
Inquiry-based labs for two large undergraduate courses will be based on the
project and submitted for publication by Teaching Issues and Experiments in
Ecology, a widely used resource for science educators. To promote equitability
and diversity in the academic community, the project will create web-based
materials and organize panel discussions that will guide undergraduate students
from diverse backgrounds through the process of applying to and succeeding in
graduate school.