* 1257702
* ARTS: Litter Bugs: revisionary and phylogenetic research on the least studied true bug infraorder (Insecta: Hemiptera: Dipsocoromorpha)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Christiane Weirauch, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 437,526.00

Museums house an untapped wealth of biodiversity in their unsorted shelf
collections of samples from around the world. Researchers from the University of
California, Riverside, together with an international team of collaborators,
will investigate the biodiversity of "Litter Bugs" (true bug infraorder
Dipsocoromorpha). These insects are tiny, inhabit cryptic microhabitats, and
show highest species diversity in the tropics. Using trap samples already housed
in museums combined with some additional fieldwork, the team will build the
largest and best-curated collection of Dipsocoromorpha in the world. Integrative
taxonomic revisions will reveal the true diversity of selected groups. The
phylogeny of this group of insects will be investigated using morphological and
molecular approaches, resulting in a new taxonomic classification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Litter bugs feature remarkable differences among the
sexes, including hardened forewings (a trait that is rare outside the beetles),
and stunningly complex terminalia. The phylogenetic foundations created during
this project will lead to a greater understanding of the evolution of these
unique features. Biodiversity information for these insects will become
available through publications and cybertaxonomic tools, most importantly an
online "Virtual Collection of Dipsocoromorpha". Two graduate students and
several undergraduate students will be trained in modern systematic methods and
knowledge transfer and collaborations fostered among the community of insect
researchers.