* 1257355
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Strong tests of life history theory using experimental reduction of embryo energy content in diverse marine invertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Bruno Pernet, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2017
* USD 218,972.00

Biologists studying the evolution of life history strategies examine trade-offs
between traits to understand how natural selection acts to maximize reproductive
success. One fundamental trade-off occurs between the size and number of
offspring: an organism can produce many small offspring, or just a few large
offspring. There is a large body of theory explaining how these strategies
affect reproductive success, but in animals, tests of this theory have been done
in only two groups: vertebrates and sea urchins. The proposed research uses
experimental embryological techniques to test theory in a much more diverse
suite of animals, including members of two of the three major lineages of
bilaterally symmetric animals: deuterostomes (hemichordates and echinoderms) and
lophotrochozoans (annelids, flatworms, and molluscs).

The proposed work integrates research and education at two institutions focused
on providing meaningful student research experiences. The grant will support the
development of a series of web-based lesson plans that will be made available
for adoption by any institution of higher learning. These lesson plans will be
developed through a series of pilot programs run during introductory and upper
level biology classes at both institutions. The grant will provide direct
support for 8-10 undergraduates and one graduate student, while lesson plans
will provide in-class research opportunities for hundreds of additional
students.