* 1257718
* Collaborative Research: Parental care and the integration of personality and plasticity at multiple levels of phenotypic variance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* David Westneat, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2018
* USD 677,140.00

Labile traits like behavior exhibit variation at multiple levels of
organization; within individuals, among individuals, and among populations and
species. The nature of this variation influences evolutionary processes, and can
help explain how organisms respond to rapid environmental changes and why some
thrive in new habitats and others dwindle. In this project, variance in parental
behavior of house sparrows will be measured across multiple breeding attempts
and separated into its constituent components. Manipulations of offspring demand
will test among two alternative hypotheses for why individuals that routinely
assiduously care for offspring also are more flexible. A novel statistical
technique will be used to assess hierarchical patterns of variance in parental
behavior. Additional experiments using controlled feeders in both free-living
and captive subjects will test if differences in within-individual variance in
care are a byproduct of decisions affecting mean levels of care or adaptive
management of random variance in available food. Finally, measurements of
hormone levels in response to manipulations as well as a novel experiment in
which two hormones will be manipulated will test between alternative hypotheses
about the underlying mechanisms that influence phenotypic variance in parental
behavior at multiple levels. The project will train a post-doctoral scholar,
support graduate research projects, foster undergraduates to gain experience in
blending biology and statistics, and help support several initiatives to provide
new opportunities for experiencing research to those without access to active
scientific studies.