* 1257110
* Collaborative Research:  Integrating genetics, life history, and morphology to understand the diversification of an enigmatic metazoan lineage
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Richard Hochberg, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2019
* USD 217,062.00

Rotifers are critical members of freshwater communities because of their
important roles in energy and nutrient cycling. Rotifers have also proven to be
valuable models for aging and toxicology studies, and are a key early diverging
lineage for understanding the pattern of evolution within the animal clade.
Despite this importance, rotifer species remain difficult to identify and few
phylogenetic relationships within the clade are well supported. This
collaborative effort linking researchers at the University of Texas El Paso,
University of Massachusetts Lowell and Ripon College will increase phylogenetic
and taxonomic resolution within phylum Rotifera by using a combination of
advanced molecular and morphological techniques. This research will result in a
new phylogenetic classification for the clade, in addition to insights into the
rates of molecular evolution and the rates and drivers of cryptic speciation
within the rotifer lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
scientific training focused on rotifer systematics to graduate and undergraduate
students at each of the three collaborating institutions. An undergraduate
laboratory module, newly designed museum exhibit, and scientific workshops will
all help disseminate the results broadly. The public will be able to access an
interactive tutorial and key to rotifer species, plus other results from the
project via the Encyclopedia of Life website.