* 1257333
* A Study of Networked Infrastructures that Supply Water for Both Shipping and Municipal Use
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Edward Berger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 148,047.00

Introduction

This postdoctoral fellowship will support research on water infrastructure in
Panama; it focuses specifically on the networked infrastructures that supplies
water for both shipping and municipal use. The project has three phases focusing
respectively on installation, maintenance, and use. Each phase is structured in
terms of a core question. The first phase asks how the water management
infrastructure that links the canal with the two cities at its endpoints, Panama
and Colon, shaped system development and regional water distribution problems.
It will be answered through historical research at archives in the US and
Panama. The second asks how expectations and practices of infrastructure
maintenance compare between the two institutions that manage water in the study
region. This question will be answered through participant observation and
interviews with work crews and administrators at both water management
institutions. The third asks how urban water users perceive delivery problems
and develop household strategies to cope with them. This question will be
answered through semi-structured interviews and participant observation in urban
Panama.

Intellectual Merit

The project will advance scholarship in three areas. It will merge STS
scholarship on infrastructure and political ecology in a novel manner resulting
in a new, powerful framework that will benefit both fields. It will utilize the
new framework to advance scholarship in the emerging Science and Technology
Studies subfield, Water Studies. Finally, it will provide evidence to better
theorize how infrastructure functions across geographical and cultural
differences, illuminating how these systems work when irregular maintenance and
service interruption are a part of everyday life.

Potential Broader Impacts

Infrastructures have become visible sites of economic anxiety, political
struggle, and ecological crisis in recent years. Communities worldwide face
problems of service delivery associated with aging infrastructure and state
budgetary shortfalls. The research will generate new knowledge about technology,
society, and ecology under these conditions that is relevant to engineers,
planners, and administrators who seek to design and manage socio-technical
systems in more culturally appropriate, equitable, and sustainable ways. The
project will illuminate how urban water problems are produced and might be
ameliorated. Findings will be disseminated to multiple audiences through
academic conferences, publications in peer-reviewed journals, public workshops,
and the training of engineering students.