* 1257508
* Collaborative Research:  Incorporating Biotic Interactions into models of species assemblages under climate change:   A comparison of single-species and community-level approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* John Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2017
* USD 121,399.00

How biological communities respond to environmental change is determined both by
the tolerances of individual species and by interactions among species, such as
competition, predation, and mutualism. However, little progress has been made in
understanding how biotic interactions influence species distributions or in
incorporating their effects into models of species assemblages at regional to
continental scales. This project will develop and test new methods that consider
species interactions by accounting for patterns of species co-occurrence to
predict how species and biological communities respond to changes in climate.
Observed changes in the distributions of plants and mammals in eastern North
America during the last 21,000 years will be combined with independent
simulations of past climates to examine how the strength and direction of
species interactions vary across broad regions and in response to changes in
climate. These data and analyses will also be used to test whether ecological
models that consider species co-occurrences have a better predictive ability
than existing approaches that model species individually and to identify
possible limits to our ability to predict how biological communities may respond
to future changes in climate. Results will help address the grand challenge of
understanding how changes in climate alter natural systems and their associated
ecosystem services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond providing important insights
into how species interactions influence the response of biological communities
to changes in climate and our ability to predict these responses, this project
will also provide cross-disciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate
students and early-career scientists in global change ecology, paleoecology, and
statistical modeling. Minority and first-generation undergraduate students will
be recruited through campus programs at Frostburg State University and the
University of California-Merced. Public outreach to rural communities will be
conducted through public lectures and engagements at open house events in an
underserved region. In support of open, reproducible science, all publications,
datasets, and computer code will be made publicly available.