* 1257916
* Interaction Strengths in Mutualistic Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Amy Freestone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

Mutualisms occur when species interact with each other in a way that benefits
both; a familiar example is pollination by bees. Essential to the survival of
many species, mutualisms are critically important for the functioning of natural
ecosystems. When many different mutualists depend on each other, they create
complex webs of interactions, known as mutualistic networks. A key feature of
these networks is the strength of each pair of interactions, which is difficult
to measure accurately when there are many of them. This study provides such
measurements for a mutualistic network of fruit-eating animals and the fruiting
plants whose seeds they disperse. Specifically, birds, bats and primates feeding
in fig trees will be studied in Madagascar. Interaction strengths and the role
of these interactions in the community will be investigated by field
observations, experiments, laboratory assays, and statistical analyses.

In addition, the project team will take practical steps to increase public
awareness of mutualisms, improve ecological training of students, and promote
effective conservation planning. In particular, the team will share project
results with the public through outreach programs and training for middle- and
high-school students and teachers, and will enhance ecological training of
undergraduate and graduate students via mentorship programs coordinated with the
research. Finally, they will increase capacity for science-based conservation
planning by working with land managers in the United States and Madagascar.