* 1257895
* Compensatory Mechanisms Regulating Neuronal Fate Following Notch Signaling Perturbation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Margaret Saha, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The process by which a sheet of undifferentiated cells within a developing
embryo gives rise to a fully operational brain remains a pressing scientific
problem with significant implications for understanding how brains function.
Each neuron in the developing brain must adopt an appropriate cellular identity
through a precise genetic program of spatial and temporal gene expression.
Although these genetic programs do not always play out in an accurate manner,
embryonic tissues have an enhanced ability to recover from perturbations as
compared to adult tissues. The overall goal of this research is to identify the
molecular mechanisms by which the embryonic nervous system responds to and
recovers from these deviations from normal development. The experiments will
employ a well-suited animal model system, namely the amphibian Xenopus laevis,
that displays not only remarkable ability to compensate following genetic
perturbation of the developmentally important Notch signaling pathway, but also
employs a similar suite of genes to those regulating early human neural
development. Using molecular, cellular and genetic tools, this research will
uncover the specific genes and pathways that allow tissues to recover from
genetic perturbation of Notch signaling. This will broaden our understanding of
the ways in which the highly conserved Notch signaling pathway function to
promote proper development of the nervous system in
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This knowledge will contribute to
understanding how and why processes go awry in human brain development and how
these genetic pathways can potentially be manipulated in the emerging field of
regenerative medicine. Equally importantly, the research will entail extensive
undergraduate involvement in a manner that blends teaching and research; a cadre
of undergraduate students, working with the principal investigator, will conduct
the research as part of their science education and the experiments will also be
incorporated into a new research-based genomics course. In order to engage the
broader community, local teachers will have the opportunity to participate in
the research through summer workshops.