* 1257344
* 2012 National Workshops on the New Clockwork for Time-Critical Systems- October 24, 2012, Baltimore, Maryland and October 25-27, 2012, Baltimore, Maryland
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 71,897.00

This project is to support two meetings sponsored by the High Confidence
Software and Systems (HCSS) Coordinating Group (CG)of the Networking and
Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) Program, the Nation's
primary source of Federally funded revolutionary breakthroughs in advanced
information technologies such as computing, networking, and software. The two
meetings are the 2012 National Workshop on the New Clockwork for Time-Critical
Systems, which is scheduled for October 25-27, 2012 at the Hyatt Regency
Baltimore Inner Harbor in Baltimore, Maryland, and the 2012 CPS Education
Workshop Planning Meeting, which is scheduled for October 24, 2012 at the Royal
Sonesta Harbor Court Baltimore, also in Baltimore, Maryland. The objective of
the New Clockwork workshop is to define a list of needs for research on time-
critical aspects of cyber-physical systems so that future research can develop
robust foundations for reasoning about time in cyber-physical systems across
scales, managing resources to meet timeliness requirements, and ensuring service
agreements through new tools, techniques and methodologies. The workshop will be
structured as a sequence of panels, presentations and breakout sessions. The
workshop will produce a report for the HCSS agencies. The objective of the CPS
Education Planning Meeting is to lay groundwork for a workshop that would
perform a similar analysis of future educational needs and directions in support
of high confidence cyber-physical systems. Both meetings will include
participation by invited researchers and representatives from Government and
industry.