* 1257117
* Standard Research Grant: The Fukushima Disaster and the Politics of Nuclear Power in the United States and Japan
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Michele Lamont, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 175,684.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports research on societal
aspects of the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster. The project will address a
number of questions such as how different understandings of the disaster are
emerging in Japan and the US, how underlying ideas about nuclear power are
changing in the disaster's wake, and what implications these developments have
for policy and governance. The researchers will use both quantitative and
qualitative methods, including discourse analysis and interviews. The project
will compare Japanese and US discourses about Fukushima in three domains: Mass
media coverage, legal and policy documents, and stakeholder perspectives from
science, industry, and civil society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear power has reemerged as a clean energy source
in a time of rising concern with climate change. Public anxiety concerning
nuclear accidents remains a key obstacle to further development of this energy
technology. It is therefore critically important for scholars and policymakers
to understand how events such as the reactor meltdown at Fukushima are
interpreted, reported, and affect public attitudes. Since reactor safety and
nuclear waste management are matters of international concern, it is also
important to understand cross-national similarities and differences in the
characterization and communication of nuclear risks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have a number of broader impacts. It will facilitate postdoctoral training
and human resources development, inform risk communication practices, and offer
advice to bodies such as the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.