* 1257601
* ARTS:  Taxonomic revision of Aphelinus species of the world using advanced bioinformatics and molecular methods
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Woolley, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2017
* USD 660,680.00

This project will produce a worldwide review of Aphelinus species, a group of
minute parasitic wasps. Many new species are known to occur, including cryptic
species that differ only slightly in traditional morphological characters.
Specimens will be photographed to record coloration and taxonomic characters,
DNA will be extracted using non-destructive methods, and next-generation
sequencing methods will be used to generate molecular characters. The data will
be analyzed to characterize species and to provide an evolutionary framework for
classification. Selected crosses will confirm reproductive isolation. An on-line
data management system will be used to store and organize collection records,
literature, digital images and morphological and molecular data. Following
publication of the results, data will be delivered to online sources of global
biodiversity information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aphelinus species are natural
enemies of aphids, and a comprehensive and robust taxonomy will greatly
facilitate their use in the biological control of those important pests. Rates
of speciation are extremely rapid in Aphelinus, making species difficult to
characterize using traditional molecular methods. Next-generation sequencing
will provide orders of magnitude more information to infer evolutionarily
relationships, and the project is one of the first to apply these methods to
insect taxonomy. Two graduate students will be broadly trained in the theory and
methods of contemporary systematic biology. Aphelinus species are superb model
systems for study of speciation in parasitoids, and the complex, inter-related
effects of mate recognition, host-switching, and endosymbionts. This project
will provide the essential foundation for these studies.