* 1257891
* RUI:  The nervous system of the Nine-banded Armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Jeffrey Padberg, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,549.00

Understanding how brains become organized into specialized regions (touch,
motor, vision, etc.) is essential to understanding how brains develop, as well
as how they might be impacted and potentially repaired following developmental
disorders or injuries. An effective strategy for acquiring a better
understanding of brain organization involves examining mammals that possess
unique body structures and behaviors. The goal of these studies is to
characterize the organization and function of brain regions in the nine-banded
armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), utilizing anatomical and electrophysiological
recording methods. This project will reveal how mammalian nervous systems
process specialized sensory inputs. Armadillos are covered in bony plates and
are highly dependent upon their sense of hearing. These traits are expected to
impact the brain regions responsible for touch, movement and hearing;
understanding this relationship will shed light on analogous systems in other
mammals such as humans. In addition to possessing sensory specializations,
armadillos also uniquely give birth to identical quadruplets (basically clones),
setting the stage for related neurodevelopmental studies with identical
littermates for comparison, an ideal experimental situation unattainable with
any other mammalian developmental model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
will take place at the University of Central Arkansas and involve training
undergraduate and master's students, many of whom are first generation college
students, in cutting edge neurobiology research methods. Participating students
will engage in the scientific process in a comprehensive hands-on manner, and
gain research experience that will prepare them to pursue careers in
neurobiology or other related STEM fields. The intense interest this work has
generated in the pilot stages indicates that the incorporated educational
outreach programs will help address a serious need for science education,
particularly among Arkansas grade school students, where approximately 40% of
those assessed perform below basic achievement levels (2011 Nation's Report
Card, National Assessment of Educational Programs, U.S. Department of
Education).