* 1257138
* Trusting Strangers in the Sharing Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Karen Cook, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,068.00

SES-1257138&lt;br/&gt;Paolo Parigi&lt;br/&gt;Karen Cook&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates whether individuals
can be made more trusting of others through the use of technology. The
investigators will recruit participants from on-line companies operating in the
sharing economy, i.e., from websites where users share tools, hospitality, pet
sitting, and car rides. The broad research hypothesis is that trusting strangers
on-line makes individuals more trusting in general and that there are two key
mechanisms for developing trust online: (1) the reputation systems that these
websites develop to facilitate interactions, and (2) the individual social
networks that create communities of users with similar levels of trust. The
assumption on which this research rests is that trust can be engineered, i.e.,
that the amount of interpersonal trust we have toward others is not determined
exclusively by cultural factors, societal norms or family
upbringing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct behavioral
experiments and collect data on the participants in the study. The experiments
will capture whether repeated, on-line interactions with strangers produce
behavioral changes in the lives of the participants. Participants will be
randomly assigned to two conditions and followed over time. In one condition,
they will be playing against a simulated agent that will pose as a generic user,
while in the other condition they will play against a simulated agent that will
pose as a website member. By measuring differences in how participants play
these games in the two conditions we will be able to assess changes in the
evolution of their levels of trust toward others. A portion of the subjects
recruited for these experiments will come from outside the United States. The
study will be conducted in two countries, Romania and the Netherlands, because
they represent societies with low and high levels of generalized trust,
respectively. This will enable cross-cultural comparisons and an examination
whether the mechanisms identified operate similarly under different cultural
conditions, particularly in high and low trust societies. In addition to the
behavioral experiments, the researchers will also analyze a number of sharing
economy web-based communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the sparse scholarly
research to date on the mechanisms used to build trust where trust might not
otherwise emerge because of weak or corrupt institutions or the prevalence of
conditions that are not conducive to fostering trustworthy behavior. In general,
this is also a problem for Internet-mediated interactions that must be resolved
to gain the confidence of those who use this medium for exchanges or other forms
of interaction. Furthermore, understanding the fundamental nature of these
processes will be beneficial not only to society but also to those mandated to
protect individuals from fraud and harm, as well as to those who hope to benefit
in various ways from the capacity to connect people from very different walks of
life and cultures. Research findings will contribute to a better understanding
of whether such networks foster greater cultural understanding or a variety of
other positive aims. Knowing how these types of network are formed, work,
maintained and grow is very important for a well-functioning society, a growing
economy, and effective governance.