* 1257427
* Connections among Genotype, Phenotype and Fitness in Escherichia coli High Temperature Lines
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Brandon Gaut, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2018
* USD 659,505.00

An improved understanding of the process of evolutionary genetic adaptation must
rely in part on a better understanding of how genetic changes are linked to
changes in structural and functional characteristics of organisms (phenotypes)
that result in improved reproductive success (i.e., fitness). However, the
relationship between genotype and phenotype is not well understood, limiting an
understanding of the evolutionary process. The work funded by this award will
investigate the relationship between genotype and phenotype on an unprecedented
scale in the bacterium Escherichia coli. The bacterium has been adapted through
artificial selection experiments to thermal stress (42.2 C) for one year in over
100 replicate populations. A clone from each population has been genotyped
completely by genomic sequencing. This grant will characterize the phenotypes of
these replicate populations and then relate these phenotypes explicitly to the
known genotypes. The phenotypes that will be measured include patterns of gene
expression and features of cell metabolism. Of particular interest will be a
contrast between clones that adapted by mutations in either the transcriptional
termination gene rho or the RNA polymerase subunit gene rpoB. The work will
determine whether these different genetic solutions lead to similar functional
changes in phenotypes and whether the two adaptive pathways are mutually
exclusive. To address the latter issue, mutations of both rho and rpoB will be
introduced into a single genetic background, and the evolutionary fitness of
double mutants will be determined at high temperature. By characterizing both
phenotypic changes and genetic interactions associated with adaptation, this
work will impact the heart of evolutionary theory, including classical views on
the adaptive process. In addition, this project will continue a successful
outreach project that introduced K-12 teachers to lab modules that facilitate
"hands on" teaching of evolution in the classroom, based on the E. coli model.