* 1257610
* Collaborative Research:   An inclusive phylogeny for the Pseudoxyrhophiine snakes in Madagascar: understanding causes of species diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Christopher Raxworthy, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This study will examine processes that lead to the diversification of species --
in number, form and ecology. First, a phylogeny of the Madagascar
pseudoxyrhophiine snakes will be produced. This highly diverse group of
vertebrates, with more than 130 species, occurs in arboreal, terrestrial,
fossorial, and aquatic habitats, as well as tropical rainforests, mountain
forests, swamps, grasslands and deserts. Using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
techniques to generate hundreds of genes, the first comprehensive phylogeny of
this snake group will be produced. Second, the phylogeny will be integrated with
morphological and ecological data (including remotely-sensed data and GIS), in a
computationally intense framework, to reveal how species, ecology and morphology
evolve together over time and to examine the processes associated with adaptive
radiations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also train undergraduates,
doctoral students, and a postdoctoral researcher. Results will be widely
communicated to the public via the American Museum of Natural History's Science
Bulletin, CUNY's TV Program "Study with the Best", and other formats. In
addition to revealing complex evolutionary processes, results of this research
will also have valuable conservation applications for this group of snakes.