* 1257101
* How motor action shapes emotion in the brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Daniel Casasanto, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 465,268.00

_____________________________________________________________________________&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is the diversity of the human experience reflected in the
brain/mind? What is universal about the brain and mind, and what depends on the
particulars of people's physical and social experiences? This project explores
how the actions we perform with our bodies shape the neural processing of
emotion. It asks whether right- and left-handers, who perform many actions
differently, use correspondingly different areas of the brain to process one of
the most basic components of human emotion: affective motivation (our
predisposition to approach or avoid physical or social stimuli). The research
team, led by Dr. Daniel Casasanto at the University of Chicago, will use a
combination of behavioral tasks, brain imaging, and neural stimulation to test
the hypothesis that the way people use their hands to perform approach-related
actions and avoidance-related actions may determine how approach- and avoidance-
related emotions are represented in the brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
important clinical implications of this basic research. FDA-approved neural
therapies are currently in use to treat depression and anxiety disorders. These
treatments are based on a one-size-fits-all model of the brain and mind. If the
way we use our hands influences how emotions are distributed across the cerebral
hemispheres, this may signal that treatments that are beneficial for right-
handers may be detrimental for left-handers. Tailoring neural therapies to the
specifics of patients' interactions with the world may be crucial for developing
safe, effective treatments for common mental health issues.