* 1257272
* Hierarchical Control of Cognitive Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Gordon Logan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2017
* USD 493,914.00

Many studies have shown that novice performers in demanding tasks (e.g.,
driving, carpentry, typing) are conscious of each step, attending to the details
one by one. On the other hand, skilled performers are only conscious of high-
level goals, leaving the details to lower-level processes (hierarchical
control). These studies leave an important question unanswered: How does this
hierarchical control emerge with practice? How do experts develop lower-level
control processes that take care of the details? The proposed research focuses
on skilled typewriting, where associative learning causes all the keystrokes in
a word to be activated in the motor system at the same time, so the motor system
must decide when to make each keystroke. Novice typists activate one keystroke
at a time, using higher-level processes to control serial order. As typists
acquire skill, words are associated with each of their constituent keystrokes,
so the presentation of a word activates all of its keystrokes at once, forcing
the motor system to control serial order. This creates a lower-level control
process that produces keystrokes, which is distinct from the higher-level
control process that produces words to be typed, resulting in hierarchical
control. The proposed research will test this proposition in four projects in
which the investigators will present typists with novel types of keyboards and
tasks, and examine learning over many sessions. They will measure the emergence
of hierarchical control in terms of parallel activation and the conscious
awareness of the details of the task. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
have an important impact on basic and applied research. Typing has now become a
ubiquitous activity in modern life, and understanding the science behind the
skill will have a broad impact on education as our workforce ramps up for the
21st century. The proposed research may also provide new criteria for evaluating
successful training in other areas requiring expertise, going beyond simple
tests of speed and accuracy to more sophisticated tests for the emergence of
hierarchical control. More generally, the projects will promote new connections
between research on cognitive control and research on motor control, since both
are required in typewriting.