* 1257331
* ARTS: Overcoming the nematode taxonomic impediment through integration of novel tools for species discovery and phylogeny: Cephaloboidea as a case-study
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,02/28/2018
* James Baldwin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/28/2018
* USD 646,300.00

Human existence depends on soil, soil organisms and their processes; these are
basic to sustaining environmental systems, agriculture and human well-being.
Microscopic nematodes are a key component to soil systems: they are unmatched in
species diversity, often with thousands of individuals in a handful of soil.
Surprisingly, most nematode species remain hidden to science i.e. undiscovered
and un-named; their species-specific environmental roles are generally not
understood at a level useful to define, understand and sustain healthy
ecosystems. This project will develop new DNA/microscopy technology to implement
novel, efficient, cost-saving approaches to nematode species discovery and
description, including evolutionary and ecological relationships. A California
desert will be the experimental site for developing these tools, but the
application and benefits are global.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatically improving
nematode identification tools will support soil ecologists and other biologists
in the broader goals of understanding biological diversity and soil ecosystems
for the benefit of humanity. The impact is broadened by developing online
identification aids designed for non-specialists as well as for teaching tools.
The project will train a graduate student and several undergraduates. Through
small college collaboration it will provide research experience for female
minority students. New instructional tools and training approaches involving
soils will be developed for grades 5-12.