* 1257133
* Spiders on the clock: the ecological implications and neurohormonal underpinnings of circadian rhythm in foraging and antipredator behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Darrell Moore, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 04/30/2017
* USD 415,000.00

Nearly all living things, including humans, have daily biological rhythms. This
"internal clock" helps regulate physiological and behavioral changes over the
course of a twenty-four hour period. This study will test the hypothesis that
the internal clock conveys an advantage to individuals by allowing them to
anticipate, and adjust to, changing conditions. The project will explore
connections between rhythms in aggression and wariness and the internal clock in
orb-weaving spiders. Spiders are a particularly good model organism for such
work because they are both predators and prey, and, thus, must balance
aggression and wariness to be successful. Spiders are also practical because
their behaviors are easily measured and experimentally altered. Initially, this
study will describe the relative influences of the internal clock and external
cues of a variety of aggression-related behaviors. The role of brain chemistry
and in regulating aggression will also be studied by measuring hormone levels in
individuals. Finally, this study will test how daily changes in aggression
levels relate to changes in the organism's environment. This work will provide
much-needed insight into the regulation of behavioral rhythms, and how the
environment influences them. Along with gains in basic research, this project
will provide substantial educational opportunities for students in the Southern
Appalachian region. This project will support three graduate students and
provide six summer fellowships for undergraduate students.