* 1257142
* RUI:  The Impact of Multiple Functional Roles on the Morphological Diversification of Turtle Shells
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Charles Stayton, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2018
* USD 162,154.00

Since most parts of organisms perform multiple functions, to understand how
conflicting functional demands can affect those parts, evolution is critical;
however, neither a theoretical framework nor extensive real-world data are
available to address this topic. To address this gap, this study will integrate
detailed anatomical and engineering analyses (including computer modeling and
real-world validation using models) of the shells of all 300 living species of
turtle. Three functional attributes will be considered: shell strength, shell
drag during swimming, and shell stability when the turtle is overturned. The
data will be used to address three questions. Do shells that must perform more
functions evolve differently than those with fewer functions (e.g., do aquatic
turtle shells evolve differently than those of land turtles, which don't need to
be efficient underwater?). Are there shells that perform poorly for any of their
functions? If different functions impose different requirements on shells (e.g.,
flat shells seem best for swimming, but worse for strength), how do shells
compromise among functions during evolution? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will address several recent Grand Challenges in Organismal Biology, helping
scientists to understand how organisms interact with their environment during
evolution and integrating the analysis of biological structures with advanced
engineering techniques. All data will be made publicly available via the Dryad
(www.datadryad.org) and Biomesh (www.biomesh.org) databases. The results will be
applicable to other biological shells (e.g., eggs or skulls) or to the
development of artificial structures such as small submersibles. This project
has an extensive educational component. Twenty to twenty-five undergraduate
students will work on this project, receiving applied training in cutting-edge
imaging and analysis techniques (skills applicable in careers from medicine to
engineering) and experience with scientific research. Students will also develop
public communication skills when they help develop and present biology lessons
with the PI at local primary schools.