* 1257946
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   AN INTEGRATIVE APPROACH TO THE PERFORMANCE AND EVOLUTION OF HIGH PERFORMANCE SUCTORIAL DISKS IN FISHES
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Lakshminarayana Mahadevan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 266,229.00

This research will combine the skills of a comparative physiologist, an
engineer, and a systematist to unravel the performance, design principals, and
evolution of the sucker disk that allows some fishes to cling to rocks. These
fishes, called clingfish, adhere to fouled, irregular substrates in pounding
surf and while launching feeding attacks to pry limpets from the rocks. The work
will involve a field component to measure the irregularity of substrates in the
field, a pure modeling component that seeks to understand the effects of disk
shape and material properties on suction, and a phylogenetic survey component.
In the survey the suction abilities of clingfishes from all over the world will
be quantified and the relationships among clingfish species will be determined
using phylogenetic methods. The shape and underlying structure of the disk will
also be investigated. The results of these studies will be deposited in several
public databases, including Genbank, Tree of Life, and a custom database for
morphological data such as CT scans. Other broader impacts of the grant include
the development of biomimetic suction systems that could be used in surgical or
robotic settings, development of tools for modeling soft matter interactions,
education and outreach at the K12 and undergraduate level, and support of
graduate education.