* 1257700
* CAREER: Art and Vision: Scene Layout from Pictorial Cues
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Stella Yu, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2013
* USD 151,027.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Art and Vision: Scene Layout from Pictorial
Cues&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stella (XingXing) Yu
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Boston College&lt;br/&gt;Artists are the
masters of visual perception. Studying art and vision together can provide new
solutions to fundamental problems in computer vision. We focus on inferring
scene layout from a single image. This problem has been studied since the
earliest days of Artificial Intelligence research, resulting in a host of so-
called Shape-from-X methods, where X could be shading, perspective,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, each of these methods works under its own
assumptions which often do not hold in real images. How these cues interact and
integrate remains elusive. Painters constantly use a combination of four
techniques: occlusion, perspective, shading, and form to effectively evoke a 3D
percept from a 2D picture. Studying their techniques can lend insights into the
computation of recovering scene layout from pixel values. The PI proposes to
bring artists and vision scientists together to solve the computational problem
of scene layout from pictorial cues. This project realizes it in three
areas:&lt;br/&gt;education, experiments and computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new interdisciplinary course, Art and Visual
Perception, has been developed at Boston College to give a comprehensive cross-
examination of how art contributes to the understanding of vision, and how
vision contributes to the generation and viewing of art. Students are actively
engaged in both art practice and vision experiments.&lt;br/&gt;Learning art and
vision together results in a deeper understanding than studying each discipline
separately. Students' assignments also result in valuable datasets for vision
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational approach to scene layout from
pictorial cues in this project is to group pixels into spatially organized
surfaces from a global integration of multiple pictorial cues in a spectral
graph-theoretic framework. The goal is to turn artistic rendering knowledge on
how these cues interact into a computational reality.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
study geometry (occlusion and perspective), appearance (brightness and color),
and form using eye tracking and psychophysics experiments and computational
models. These efforts are organized into two phases that progress from inferring
the spatial layout from scenes made of planar surfaces (rooms and streets) to
scenes made of curved surfaces (landscape and generic
scenes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is
most remarkable about vision is its ability to perceive 3D spatial layout from a
single 2D image. The proposed research replicates this ability in computation
from a grouping perspective.&lt;br/&gt;Compared to statistical learning
approaches, the grouping method is not only generic and thus scales well with
the number of scenes, but can also produce a precise organization of surfaces in
the scene.&lt;br/&gt;Compared to traditional Shape-from-X approaches, the
grouping method examines each pictorial cue in conjunction with others. The
integration of these multiple pictorial cues allows them for the first time to
become applicable to real images. The PI has developed the essential grouping
machinery in spectral graph theory for depth segregation. Compared to most
existing formulations on this topic, it has unparalleled conceptual simplicity,
computational efficiency, and guaranteed near-global optimality. The proposed
research on brightness and color perception, in connection with Shape-from-
Shading and surface organization, will help clarify the role of low- level and
high-level mechanisms in the long-standing scientific debate between Hering and
Helmholtz on color perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges the gap between art and science
not only in research but also in education by developing a new curriculum that
traverses the areas of neuroscience, psychology, computer science, and visual
arts, by involving students in art practice and scientific experiments, and by
providing a forum for artists and scientists to exchange ideas on visual
perception. These interdisciplinary efforts befit the liberal arts education
tradition at Boston College. This project will not only benefit from the strong
Fine Arts department on campus, but also cultivate computer science awareness
and outreach to non-technical people, and promote the growth of the young
Computer Science department at Boston College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;URL:
http://www.cs.bc.edu/~syu/artvis/&lt;br/&gt;