* 1257733
* ARTS:   Classification and evolution of the ant-parasitic genus Orasema (Hymenoptera: Eucharitidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2017
* John Heraty, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2017
* USD 566,000.00

This project will target a taxonomic revision of the genus Orasema, a
specialized group of ant parasites. Adult wasps lay their eggs away from the
host in plant tissue, and their minute larvae use a variety of specialized
behaviors to gain access to the ant nest and attack the ant brood. While common
in some habitats, very little is known about these wasps. Using both molecular
and morphological tools, this study will describe more than 170 species from
North and South America, and provide a robust evolutionary hypothesis of their
relationships. Research will focus on developing identification keys, and the
study of their oviposition behavior, host associations and host preferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Orasema attack some of the most invasive and pestiferous
species of ants, including fire ants in the genera Solenopsis and Wasmannia, and
the invasive Pheidole megacephala. A mature and sophisticated species-level
taxonomy will help to better evaluate the potential of Orasema for use in
biological control. Orasema belong to the Chalcidoidea, a megadiverse lineage of
mostly parasitic wasps with more than 500,000 estimated species. Taxonomic
expertise is desperately needed for this economically important group, and
training will focus on novel methods to train new researchers and accelerate the
descriptive process.