* 1257898
* HARNESSING MODERN PHYLOGENETIC COMPARATIVE METHODS TO UNDERSTAND THE DIVERSIFICATION OF ANOSTOMOID FISHES
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Brian Sidlauskas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2017
* USD 501,433.00

This project investigates how the biodiversity of one of the world's most
important groups of freshwater fishes evolved. Containing tetras, piranhas and
many other popular aquarium fishes, order Characiformes represents one of the
most diverse groups of fishes on the planet, but some of its families include
species of many varying shapes, sizes and diets, while others include numerous
species with similar habitats, food sources and anatomies. Why are some groups
more diverse than others? How do its many species fit together on their family
tree? How do a dozen or more ecologically similar species coexist in a single
river? This project will tackle such questions by assembling a comprehensive
tree-of-life for the very diverse characiform superfamily Anostomoidea
(headstanders and relatives) using traditional DNA analysis, study of skeletal
anatomy, and a new genomic approach. Then, that tree-of-life will serve as a
framework with which to investigate the evolution of anatomical and ecological
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this project synthesizes the
expertise and genetic resources of two countries to forge an enduring
international collaboration and reconstruct the evolutionary history of some of
the most intriguing South American fishes with precision and detail that would
be impossible if the labs were to work alone. It draws on diverse human capital
in the US and in Brazil, including the author of previous evolutionary studies
on these fishes, one of Brazil?s leading fish geneticists, an expert on
taxonomy, a leader in genomics and macroevolution, and students in both
countries. Other broader impacts include the involvement of undergraduate
students in research and outreach, development of a DNA-barcode library and
interactive online identification key, sponsorship of graduate students at a
training workshop and active participation in the Smithsonian's "The Scientist
is In" program, which brings the public into direct contact with museum-
affiliated researchers and specimens.