* 1257869
* IOS: The Function and Evolution of Plant Phased siRNAs in Signaling Pathways and Microbial Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Darla Sherrier, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

The goal of this work is to investigate in plants the function and evolution of
a novel class of regulatory small RNAs. Prior work demonstrated that plant genes
like those known to confer resistance to pathogens are the targets of a set of
"microRNAs"--suppressive regulatory RNAs just 22 nucleotides in length. These
microRNAs are believed to function as master regulators of a very large family
of protein coding disease-resistance genes, and part of their activity is to
trigger the production of additional small RNAs (21 nucleotides in length) that
have an unusual, regularly spaced pattern, or "phasing" of biogenesis. The
regulation of this gene family, and several others targeted by microRNAs in the
same way, is a new paradigm for microRNA function. The investigators have
identified these small RNAs as conserved in many crop plants, including soybean,
an alfalfa relative, tomato and potato. The aim of this project is to
investigate this novel gene regulatory circuit to understand its function in
plants, its role in plant defenses or beneficial microbial interactions, and
whether it can ultimately be developed as a tool for improving plants or
altering plant-microbe interactions to reduce disease or improve beneficial
interactions. The project will utilize methods that include plant genomics,
plant cell biology, plant-microbial interactions, and RNA analysis. The expected
result is the dissection and understanding of a novel and complex gene
regulatory mechanism. The broader impacts of the project range from a local
impact on the training of students and a post-doc who will be directly involved
in the project, to national and international impact to the scientific community
in the databases and web tools that the project will release.