* 1257189
* ENGAGE - Behavioral responses to advanced energy metering technology: A large scale experiment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* William Kaiser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 446,912.00

Electricity generation accounts for over 40 percent of the carbon dioxide
emitted by the United States. This project will investigate how energy usage
information provided through advanced metering technology can induce
conservation behavior. It tests the long-term effectiveness of real-time
feedback on electricity use combined with messages aimed at motivating
behavioral change. The interdisciplinary research team will combine innovative
electrical engineering and computer science methods with insights from
psychology and consumer behavior research to design optimal interventions for
changing energy use behavior. The research will involve two experiments. In the
first, residents of 120 campus apartments used to test the effectiveness of
three different types of messages: pecuniary, pro-social, and pro-self
conservation messages. The second experiment will investigate the effectiveness
of public recognition of conservation behavior. The results will be applicable
to the 65 million smart meters to be installed in the United States by 2015 to
provide measurable outcomes for energy management. The research findings will be
integrated into undergraduate courses at UCLA including the capstone design
courses in Engineering, the Environmental Sciences senior practicum, and the
UCLA Sustainability Action Research Teams (ART). This project will also help K12
students gain experience in the energy field through UCLA?s High School Summer
Research Program and engineering Tech Camp, and will engage students from
underrepresented minorities by offering research opportunities for a freshman
class through the Center for Excellence in Engineering Diversity.