* 1257762
* Specialization by bumble bees and the evolution of nutritionally diverse floral rewards
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2018
* Daniel Papaj, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2018
* USD 470,620.00

In this project the PIs will study the critical relationship between food
resources provided by flowers and decisions made by pollinators on foraging.
Flowers attract pollinators by offering different food sources, pollen and
nectar. Understanding how these floral rewards influence bee behavior is key for
conserving ecologically and agriculturally important pollination mutualisms.
Most previous research on floral rewards has focused on nectar, bees' source of
carbohydrates. However, bees also consume pollen from many plant species,
gaining the protein needed for egg production, larval development, and survival.
While many plant species chemically or physically protect their pollen from
consumption, 8-10% offer pollen itself as a reward. Collection of pollen rewards
often requires a technique called sonication or "buzz pollination." During
sonication, bees rapidly contract their flight muscles, producing strong
vibrations that forcibly expel pollen.

This study will reveal how the nutritional composition of floral rewards (e.g.
carbohydrate/nectar vs. protein/pollen) influence individual bees, propensity to
specialize on flower types. Such specialization is critical to plant
reproductive success because it transfers pollen to conspecifics. Further, given
evidence that nutritional factors contribute to pollinator declines, it is
important to understand how bees specialize on particular nutrients in relation
to colony needs. Yet, little is known about how bees' propensity to specialize
depends upon whether a flower offers only nectar, only pollen, or both. Further,
it is unknown whether energetically expensive collection routines, such as
sonication, influence specialization. Behavioral experiments will help
understand how reward composition and handling costs affect bee and plant
fitness. Untangling the connections between bumble bees' nutritional state,
floral morphology, and reward composition will provide a better understanding of
the foraging patterns of these native, economically important pollinator
species, widely in decline. The research will involve outreach including a
native bee identification workshop and web resource developed in parallel will
promote understanding of these questions both within and beyond the scientific
community. Many economically important crops, such as tomatoes, eggplants,
blueberries, and kiwifruit are buzz pollinated by native bees.