* 1257186
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Tritrophic interactions and the temporal stability of host-use by an oligophagous herbivore
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Eric Lind, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 52,915.00

Many animals must balance the need to find food against the risks of being eaten
themselves, by predators, when feeding. As a result, the best food source, or
host plant, for an herbivore may fluctuate, because both plant nutritional
quality and the intensity of predation change in time and space. The goal of
this project is to assess the preference and performance of a common butterfly,
the Silver-spotted Skipper, on an array of plant species that are currently used
by its caterpillars as food plants. The researchers will construct an
experimental garden of these common plants and measure differences in survival,
growth, and reproduction of juvenile and adult skippers among plants over time.
These data will be used to construct an ecological model predicting food plant
effects on local populations of skippers. In addition, behavioral observations
of predation on caterpillars in the field will be made to compare the activity
and composition of the natural enemy communities found on different food plants.
In combination, these approaches will provide a uniquely comprehensive
investigation of temporal variation in plant-based and enemy-based measures of
success in a common herbivore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
the factors determining the diets of plant-feeding insects will contribute
significantly to the design of effective biological control strategies to
minimize economic damage caused by insect pests. Because the herbivore under
study feeds on several invasive plants, the results of this research will be
useful to land managers charged with protecting the integrity of natural
communities. Extensive educational outreach to K-5 schools in the Washington,
DC, area will provide both students and teachers access to hands-on projects
exposing them to ecological principles, the practice of careful observation, and
the scientific method. Teachers will learn to use local insects in classroom
exercises that support science curricula.