* 1257716
* EAGER:  Functional genomics of genes under selection in natural populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 130,928.00

This EAGER project addresses a long-standing goal of evolutionary genetic
studies - the identification and characterization of genes under natural
selection. Such studies can lead to a better understanding of the evolutionary
forces and constraints on phenotypic change and potential responses to
environmental challenges. Next generation sequencing and genome wide genotyping
technology have spawned a revolution in evolutionary studies. The genetic basis
of morphological, behavioral and physiological traits can potentially be
uncovered and their evolutionary dynamics studied in natural populations.
However, a limitation with research on non-model species is that the function of
genes under natural selection cannot easily be explored in the wild because
experimental manipulations on individuals may be limited. In this study, the
investigators propose a novel approach for understanding function of genes under
selection that involves study of cell cultures established from tissues that
express the genes under selection. The researchers will demonstrate this
approach in cells derived from multiple tissues of gray and black wolves, where
a single substitution in a gene confers coat color phenotypes. This gene also
has roles in cellular immunity, antibacterial response to infection, and even an
involvement in reproductive and aggressive behavior. The investigators plan to
develop protocols for cell culture, transcriptome collection, and network
analysis that can be generally applied to other animal species. Different
variants of genes can be studied in these cell lines and their effect on cell
and organism function assessed through a gene expression network analysis. The
results of this approach will be predictions of function that can be further
tested by study of natural populations.

The project will provide opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher and
graduate students at UCLA to learn new molecular and bioinformatic approaches to
study gene function. Additionally, this project provides an example for
conveying evolution information to the public using the wolf-dog system. The
project will also establish web-based access to findings aimed at researchers
and collaborators as well as the public and students who have interest in the
project.