* 1257528
* Collaborative research: Evolutionary trade-offs in the adaptation of decomposers to global warming: Implications for ecosystem C balance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 352,569.00

Soil fungi responsible for the decay and recycling of carbon may evolve in
response to global warming. This could have serious consequences with respect to
global change. This team of investigators posit that warmer temperatures may
favor the evolution of fungi that can break down material that is long-
lived(?recalcitrant?) in the soil . As a consequence, more greenhouse gases
would be released to the atmosphere in a feedback loop that could lead to even
warmer temperatures. This issue is particularly urgent in the northern, boreal
forests of Alaska, which store large amounts of recalcitrant matter in their
soils, and which are warming more rapidly than elsewhere. Research team members
will be simulating global warming in such forests and examining its effects on
fungi and their degradation activities. In addition, they will be exposing fungi
to warming in laboratory experiments that will use genetic and physiological
tests to examine how their ability to decompose recalcitrant materials changes
over time.

Human life cannot exist without fungi to decompose organic matter, since they
recycle nutrients from dead organisms for use by plants, animals, and people.
This study will provide explicit predictions of the different ways that global
warming maybe affecting fungi. It will also be one of the first to examine the
evolution of these microbes in response to global warming. In addition, the
investigators will train one postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students and
several undergraduate researchers, with an emphasis on recruitment of students
from underrepresented groups in science. The investigators will also invite
students and teachers from a nearby elementary school to participate in day-long
mushroom forays and a global change field trip.