* 1257379
* Regionalization of the Parhyale Bodyplan
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Nipam Patel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 557,000.00

Most animals, including humans, display an obvious organization of specific body
parts and organs along the anterior to posterior axis (A-P axis, head to toe for
humans), and over the past several decades scientists have discovered a set of
genes, known as homeotic genes, which control the placement of organs and
appendages along the A-P axis. While these genes were first discovered in fruit
flies, they were subsequently identified in all animals and found to play a
common role in controlling the development of such varied species as flies,
mice, humans, and worms. While the overall functions of these genes are well
conserved, changes in where and when these genes are activated can create
remarkable changes in body organization. The aim of this research is to
understand the role that these genes have played in the evolutionary processes
that have generated animal biodiversity. To do this, the investigators will
focus on a group of animals that shows the greatest diversity in the
organization of their appendages, the crustaceans, which include shrimp, crabs,
lobsters, and an emerging model system called Parhyale. Using modern genetic
approaches, the investigators will determine the specific roles of individual
homeotic genes in Parhyale, and then use comparative methods to determine if
changes in the patterns of homeotic gene expression are responsible for the
differences between appendage organization in the various species. The research
is expected to reveal the specific types of developmental and evolutionary
changes that can be mediated by these genes. This research will train students
in the laboratory and will be used to illustrate evolutionary principles to K-12
students and local community college students. Broader outreach to the general
public will include public lectures and media presentations.