* 1257631
* Signaling Network for Brassinosteroid-Regulated Gene Expression in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2018
* USD 863,615.00

The increasing demand for food, feed and biofuel makes it very important to
increase crop production, especially under adverse climate conditions. Plant
steroid hormones, Brassinosteroids (BRs), have the potential to promote crop
yield and improve plant performance against bacterial and fungal diseases and
stresses such as drought and high temperature. Understanding BR functions in
plants is essential to fully harvest its beneficial effects. Although BR
signaling pathway has been well established, how BR regulates thousands of genes
for various hormonal responses is not well understood. In this project, the
investigators will use genetic, genomic, and computational approaches to
establish gene regulatory networks through which BRs control the expression of
the large number of genes for plant growth and stress tolerance. While the
genetic and genomic studies will define the gene functions, the computational
approach is required to build models for how hundreds to thousands of genes
coordinate to carry out specific functions. The combination of functional
genomic studies and computational modeling in establishing and validating
transcriptional networks in hormone signaling is novel and is anticipated to
provide unprecedented new insights into BR signaling network. The knowledge can
be applied to agriculture to increase crop production. Moreover, the
computational and bioinformatic tools developed and validated in the context of
this project will be applicable to other systems biology studies. The research
will also provide outstanding training opportunities at the interface of
functional genomics and computational modeling for graduate and undergraduate
students. High school science teachers will be recruited to participate in the
research and to integrate such research into high school science education. The
BR mutants will be introduced to an undergraduate laboratory course, in which a
large number of undergraduate students each year will design and perform
experiments to learn how plant steroid hormones control plant growth.