* 1257628
* Genome-wide dynamics of neutral and fitness-related variation in a pedigreed population of Florida Scrub-Jays undergoing regional decline
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* John Fitzpatrick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2017
* USD 737,950.00

This study examines genomic consequences of population decline within the
endangered Florida Scrub-Jay, a bird species currently disappearing across its
entire range. Capitalizing on a remarkable 43-year study of a locally protected
population, DNA from 4,000+ individual jays sampled over 25 years will be
characterized and compared using 9,000+ genetic markers. Ancestor-descendant
pedigree, behavioral and structural characteristics, and lifetime reproductive
performance for each individual are well documented. Combining field and whole-
genome data for such a large sample of individuals over multiple generations is
unprecedented for a wild animal population, providing exceptional opportunity to
1) measure how a contracting population changes genetically through time; 2)
associate specific genes with individual variation in performance-related
attributes; 3) identify areas of the genome responsible for reduced performance
among inbred individuals; and 4) document how changes in immigration rate affect
genetic structure of local populations. Overall, this longitudinal genomic
characterization of a declining population promises to be the most detailed ever
conducted in a free-living organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides being broadly
informative for conservation genetics, this project is especially compelling
because the Florida Scrub-Jay is a popular public symbol for biodiversity
conservation amidst rapidly growing human populations. As local populations
disappear, demand increases for information about the condition and viability of
each population that remains. This study provides the means to measure genetic
health of remnant populations, informs habitat protection priorities, and helps
prescribe effective translocation strategies for genetic rescue of the most
critically endangered populations. Students of all ages will gain experience in
genetic methods, and outreach will occur at Archbold Biological Station and
through Cornell Lab of Ornithology.