* 1257530
* Environmental, Endocrine and Epigenetic Drivers of Sociality in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Dustin Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 03/31/2018
* USD 675,000.00

The mechanisms that influence variation in the morphological, physiological, and
behavioral characteristics of animals are important because they determine how
organisms cope with environmental challenges, and because these responses can
affect behavior in later stages of life. Recent evidence suggests that so-called
epigenetic mechanisms can affect how animals respond to environmental change.
Epigenetic mechanisms are heritable changes in gene expression that are not
encoded in the DNA sequence. When epigenetic changes occur early in life, there
can be long-term consequences for physiology and behavior. For example,
increased DNA methylation (a form of epigenetic control) in the machinery that
controls the receptor for stress hormone during development can impair an
adult's physiological response to stress. Because coping with stress represents
a central way in which both humans and non-humans respond to environment change,
it will be important to determine if and how developmental stressors might
negatively affect organisms throughout their lives. Using a long-term study of
superb starlings (Lamprotornis superbus) in Kenya this project will (1) explore
the developmental effects of environmental stressors on DNA methylation in the
stress hormone receptor machinery, as well as in the entire genome, and
subsequently (2) determine how DNA methylation during development affects adult
stress physiology, reproductive behavior, and fitness using a long-term DNA
collection, stress hormone samples, and experimental manipulations. This work
will create new avenues of research using epigenetic tools in non-model
organisms, where the lessons learned can be applied back to other model systems
including humans. This study will train American and Kenyan students through
field courses, workshops, and research projects in the field and lab.
Researchers will also work closely with a grassroots conservation organization
in Kenya to educate rural school children about conservation and wildlife of
threatened organisms and ecosystems and about climate change.