* 1257685
* The molecular mechanisms by which novel pathogens emerge
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Raymond St.Leger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* rollie clem
* 08/31/2017
* USD 525,000.00

This project will investigate the mechanisms by which pathogens evolve new host
ranges; despite the direct relevance of host-range evolution to wildlife
disease, agriculture, and human health, these mechanisms are still poorly
understood. The common, ecologically important and widely studied insect-
pathogenic fungus Metarhizium is an ideal model for studying the evolution of
pathogens, pathogenesis and infectious disease. Closely related strains of these
fungi have independently evolved as either broad-spectrum generalists (infecting
a broad range of insects) or as specialists with narrow, specific host ranges
(with particular strains infecting only locusts, grasshoppers, scarab beetles,
or other particular insect groups). Some of the generalist insect pathogens also
form beneficial associations with plant roots. Atlases of genomic diversity and
gene expression will be assembled for four generalist and seven specialist
Metarhizium strains, and coupled with bioinformatic analysis and hypothesis-
driven experiments on select candidate genes, to determine: 1) the number,
nature and networking of genes that regulate and execute infection processes; 2)
the factors controlling virulence, host-range specificity and host-switching; 3)
key targets for engineering alterations of pathogen performance for
environmentally benign management of insect pests, and 4) development of a
tractable model for studying mutation rates over evolutionary time. The focus of
this research on the genetic basis of transitions between specialist and
generalist host ranges will provide a much-needed model for understanding the
evolution of new diseases. Finally, this project is excellent for research
training as it exposes students to genomics, bioinformatics, molecular biology,
microbiology, microscopy and fundamental scientific principles of host-pathogen
biology and evolution. In addition to training a postdoctoral associate and two
graduate students, this study will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students, including six from underrepresented groups; research
activities will also be used to develop lesson plans for various classroom
projects.