* 1257579
* Control of Adult Patterning during Metamorphosis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Ian Duncan, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 01/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

In recent decades it has become clear that animal development is remarkably
parsimonious, with the same underlying regulators being used repeatedly to
pattern different structures at different stages of the life cycle. In large
part, this parsimony is achieved by changes over time in the responsiveness of
target genes to these regulators. Such changes explain how the same regulator
can activate or repress distinct sets of target genes at different stages of
development. The goal of this research is to understand how target gene
responsiveness is controlled during the life cycle. The focus of the work is
insect metamorphosis, a process known to involve global shifts in such
responsiveness. The work tests the hypothesis that pupa-specific target
responsiveness in Drosophila is controlled by the E93 gene. E93 encodes a gene
regulator that is expressed specifically at the pupal stage, and is required for
most or all patterning processes that occur at this time. E93 is known to
function during leg development to control the pupa-specific responsiveness of
the Dll gene. This work tests whether other genes that change their
responsiveness in the pupa are also regulated by E93, and determine the
molecular mechanisms by which E93 acts. An understanding of how E93 controls
target gene responsiveness will have broad significance, as similar mechanisms
likely direct life cycle transitions in many other organisms, including
ourselves. The work includes outreach activity at a local high school. In a
project to characterize the evolution of E93, students will collect and classify
local insects, purify their DNA, and conduct phylogenetic studies of the E93
gene. After a year of piloting, the project will be expanded to include selected
schools within the city of St. Louis, engaging students who otherwise would have
little or no exposure to research.