* 1257882
* Collaborative Research: Community ecology of partial consumption: Integrating plant demography into herbivore competition
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Brian Inouye, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Ecologists are well-equipped with theory for competition between species that
consume and deplete shared resources. Resource depletion, i.e., consuming
resources quickly enough to limit the resources available to other consumers, is
a well-established pathway by which different consumer species interact.
Unfortunately, approaches based on resource depletion apply to only a subset,
and perhaps a minority, of consumer-resource interactions in nature. Many
consumer species consume resource organisms only partially, and do not appear
substantially to reduce available resources. This includes many herbivores,
which leave much green plant material unconsumed; non-fatal parasites,
parasitoids, and pathogens, whose hosts can continue to forage, mate, and
otherwise go about life while infected; and mutualists such as pollinators,
defenders, and cleaners, which collect rewards provided by hosts in return for
these services. A key feature of such species interactions is that resource
organisms respond to partial consumption via changes in their survival, growth,
and reproduction. The effects of these demographic responses on resource
competition have been little studied. Building on previous promising theoretical
results showing that resource demographic responses can critically affect the
outcome of competition, this project will develop mathematical theory to
accomplish three goals. First, general theory will establish the different
possible roles of the demography of partial consumption in biological settings,
ranging from competition between herbivores to competition for access to
mutualistic partners. Second, models will integrate plant demographic responses
to herbivore attack with other known pathways of interaction between the
different herbivores of a shared plant host. Third, applications such as
biological control of resource populations will be investigated
quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory developed in this project will
have broad application within and potentially beyond the ecological sciences.
Further, the project will support the quantitative training and mentoring of a
postdoctoral researcher in the construction and analysis of mathematical models
to address ecological questions, as well as training in presenting results to
non-mathematical audiences. Attempts will be made to recruit applicants from
groups underrepresented in STEM fields. Postdoctoral involvement will also
broaden dissemination of research results through increased publication and
presentation.