* 1257735
* Social interactions and the maintenance of genetic polymorphism
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 451,000.00

For decades biologists have struggled to determine whether and when individual
behavior is influenced more by "nature" (genes) or "nurture" (social
environment). While both are known to matter, emerging research suggests that
"nature" and "nurture" are actually complex phenomena that are frequently
difficult to disentangle. This question becomes even more complex when
individuals are part of a social group. Therefore the goal of this project is to
understand how social groups behave toward individuals with different sets of
genes and how individuals with different genes might respond differently to the
same social cues. One way to make this problem more tractable is to use tightly
controlled experiments with an animal species in which specific behavioral
differences are regulated by a single gene. The proposed research will use two
genetically determined color forms of male mosquitofish that differ in the
amount of aggression they display toward other members of their group. The
experiments will determine how group composition affects the behavior of
juvenile and adult fish. The studies will answer critical questions of the
interaction between individuals and groups, such as how does living in a "high
aggression" group affect the health and behavior of a juvenile fish, and does
any effect of "high" vs. "low" aggression depend on the juvenile's own genetic
makeup or is it regulated primarily by the social environment?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon publication data will be stored and available on
DRYAD (datadryad.org. Results of these experiments will be broadly useful in
understanding the factors that influence aggression and other social behavior in
animals, including humans. In addition, the project will stimulate teaching and
learning, increase research opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups, and contribute to public understanding of science. The project will
support the training of one female Ph.D. student, and will involve
undergraduates from under-represented groups. The investigators will also
develop a workshop on animal social behavior and genetics for Florida secondary
school teachers as part of a funded "BioScopes" project. The workshop will
consist of lectures and "hands-on" activities that can be adapted to the
teachers' classrooms.