* 1257310
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Extreme polyphagy, extreme diversity or both? Armored scale insects of tropical rainforests on 4 continents
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Geoffrey Morse, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 180,410.00

The investigators will survey the armored scale insects of tropical rainforest
sites on four continents. They will build a reference collection of specimens
and their DNA. Using both DNA sequences and anatomical features, they will
discover and describe new species, investigate their evolutionary history, and
produce an online interactive key. Many armored scale insects are invasive
pests, costing an estimated $2 billion per year in the US. Many of these pests
can feed on an extraordinarily large diversity of plants, and are probably
native to areas with high plant diversity such as tropical rainforests. However,
the armored scale insect fauna of tropical rainforests is unknown. In a pilot
study, the investigators found that several of these worldwide pest species are
common in a Panama rainforest canopy. These may be some of the most abundant
herbivores on earth. This project will investigate them for the first time in
their probable ancestral habitat, and will likely discover other species that
are not yet invasive pests but that are likely to become invasive pests in the
future. At the same time the investigators will develop tools that will enable
inspectors to identify these pests if and when they show up in plant quarantine.