* 1257385
* LTREB Renewal:  Evaluating the Role of Metacommunity Dynamics in the Assembly of Vernal Pool Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Sharon Collinge, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,999.00

This project leverages a long-term, highly replicated field experiment in native
plant restoration to study how sustainable communities of species assemble and
why they disassemble. Vernal pools, which are temporary wetlands that are
inundated in spring and dry in summer, represent discrete, high diversity
habitat patches for plants that are able to tolerate extreme physical
conditions. The project examines naturally occurring and restored pools that
vary in size, connectivity, and seeding treatment in order to identify the
relative importance of local and regional factors affecting local species
composition. Over the next five years, data collected on the abundance of all
observed species, pollinator dynamics, seed set, germination rates, and pool
hydrology will be integrated into mathematical models to determine factors that
significantly influence plant species composition, community dynamics, and long-
term stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To restore and manage natural communities
effectively, ecologists must understand processes affecting their formation and
dynamics. When restored ecosystems reach alternative states that do not match
conservation priorities, active management is necessary to modify factors
controlling the structure and composition of these communities. This field study
will generate data critical to inform conservation and restoration efforts.
These results will also mitigate endangered species losses on Department of
Defense lands. Rural school students will participate in the project by
designing and implementing their own research. Graduate and undergraduate
students will also receive direct research experience through participation in
the proposed field studies.