* 1257955
* EAGER: C3STEM:  Enabling Community-Situated, Challenge-Based, Collaborative STEM Education Using Broadband Cyber Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Aniruddha Gokhale, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 03/31/2015
* USD 356,819.00

This project uses broadband communication to support a diverse community of STEM
learners, including K-12 students, their teachers and parents, school
administrators, community organizers, city planners, and university faculty and
graduate students. The project will build a community-situated, challenge-based,
collaborative cyber-learning environment (C3STEM) that harnesses computational
thinking, modeling, simulation, and challenge-based learning to support STEM
learning in the context of a city traffic planning. C3STEM will use the traffic
domain as the source for real-world problems for STEM education by developing
projects through which high school students (from at least two schools) will
collaboratively address problems of traffic congestion and safety in urban and
suburban environments. Classroom-based student groups will work with their
classroom teacher, traffic experts, and the Vanderbilt researchers to analyze
real traffic data from regions near their homes and schools. The collaborative
effort will lead to the students gaining an understanding of the traffic
patterns, which will support the students developing agent-based models that
align with the observed patterns in their section (e.g., traffic congestion
along selected thoroughfares at different times of day and the effects of
stoplights and interstate on/off-ramps). This process will teach fundamental
concepts of data analysis and computer-based modeling and will motivate other
curriculum-related mathematics and science lessons such as, Physics concepts,
such as inertia, speed and acceleration, and Mathematical concepts, such as
algebra, calculus, probability, and statistics. The project will leverage GENI
and broadband infrastructure to provide real-time collaborative sessions and
large-scale data transfers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Via
the combination of broadband communication, live data from community resources,
computational modeling and collaborative learning, the products of student labor
will not simply be for a grade, but their work will be regarded as an
contribution to the community. This represents a cultural shift, which not only
puts STEM in the foreground of active citizenship, but also raises the stature
of teachers and K-12 education. The project results will be not only
disseminated through journals and conferences but student projects will be
displayed on a Web-based 'science-fair' and the PIs will create a Wikibook that
archives the lesson plans and their evaluation. This text can be added to and
revised by the community, as well as informing and supporting future community-
situated, challenge-based programs.