* 1257906
* RCN:   Quantifying Uncertainty in Ecosystem Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Ruth Yanai, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The mission of this research network is to help make the explicit consideration
of statistical uncertainties a standard component of ecosystem studies. The
construction of budgets for whole forest watersheds, for example, has greatly
increased our general understanding of how water, carbon, and other substances
cycle through ecosystems more generally. However, uncertainty due either to
natural variation in observations or measurement error is rarely included in
research reports. This makes it difficult to determine actual rates of change
over time or to compare with confidence results from different sites or studies.
Failure to address uncertainties can lead to wrong conclusions, for example in
identifying missing sources or sinks for nitrogen in a forest. Uncertainty
analysis can also help improve the efficiency of environmental monitoring by
allowing sampling designs to optimize information gained relative to the time
and money required to collect and analyze the data. This network will organize
working groups to address five topics. Expert statisticians will serve on an
advisory board for these working groups and also consider cross-cutting issues,
such as evaluating the possible approaches to quantifying uncertainties in
making observations and building computer models, demonstrating how uncertainty
analysis can be used to evaluate the efficiency of monitoring designs, and
determining how changes in ecosystem measurements over time can best be
detected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building this network will require using several
different approaches to coordination and communication, and for providing an
effective structure for shared learning, including web meetings, conference
calls, email, and annual face-to-face meetings. A broader audience will be
reached through quarterly webinars and through the project web site, which will
have, in addition to working group wikis, pages for frequently asked questions,
educational materials, illustrated step-by-step examples, digital libraries, and
a clearinghouse for sharing software and model computer codes, workflows, and
other products. The overall goal is to facilitate a cultural change that makes
uncertainty analysis an expected and readily attainable practice in ecosystem
studies.