* 1257571
* Homeostasis of Prokaryotes in Natural Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* James Cotner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2017
* USD 525,000.00

Phosphorus is one of the most abundant elements in living organisms but it is
not very abundant on the Earth's surface. Scientists and medical practitioners
have a general idea of how much is required by living things, but they do not
really know how much phosphorus is too little and how much is too much. How do
organisms, communities and ecosystems fundamentally change when there is too
much or too little of this essential element present? This is an important issue
because for the past century, humans have fertilized both terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems with excessive quantities of phosphorus as well as nitrogen.
On the other hand, how do organisms deal with a lack of phosphorus in the
environment? Are organisms able to substitute arsenic, an element that is
typically thought to be toxic, for phosphorus? The answers to these questions
have important implications for understanding how life originated and evolved on
the early Earth in a relatively phosphorus-poor world. The goal of the proposed
study is to understand how organisms regulate their biomass phosphorus
composition in environments where phosphorus availability is extremely high,
extremely low and/or extremely variable. How important is it to be able to store
excess phosphorus and how important is it to be able to 'make do' with less?
These questions will be examined by studying bacteria isolated from lakes in the
agriculturally impacted upper Midwest. The central hypothesis is that
phosphorus-rich environments select for bacteria that grow fast and are not able
to vary the amount of phosphorus they require whereas phosphorus-poor
environments select for bacteria that grow slowly and can vary the amount of
phosphorus they require. The ability of both of these kinds of bacteria will
also be examined to see if they can substitute arsenic for phosphorus. What
happens when both of these 'flavors' of bacteria are present in the environment
and what are the implications of this for other organisms in their community and
in ecosystems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work will train
undergraduates, a graduate student and a post-doctoral fellow. A graduate
student and post-doctoral fellow will work with the PI both on the research-
focused aspects of this project as well as a transformational program that was
developed at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, MN called InSciedOut. In the
InSciedOut program, scientists work directly with elementary school teachers and
students on a project-based science curriculum. Also, the bacterial isolates
from this project will be used in a new course on Practical Genomics at the
University of Minnesota. Outreach activities will be focused on a set of
lectures focused on microbes and the oceans for the Minnesota International
Center's Great Decisions Lecture Series.