* 1257791
* Collaborative Research: Kisspeptin Regulation of Reproductive Physiology of a Coral Reef Fish
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Godwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

Despite decades of research, major questions remain about how environmental cues
control the vertebrate reproductive system. The list of key biochemical
"gatekeepers" for activation of the reproductive system from fishes to humans
includes two important protein hormones, Gonadotropin-releasing hormone and
kisspeptin, that function in the brain. This project would investigate how
social cues affect these hormones in the brain of an animal model system that is
particularly powerful for revealing connections between the social environment
and the reproductive system. This animal model is the bluehead wrasse
(Thalassoma bifasciatum), a fish species that has been the subject of many
foundational studies of environmental influences on reproductive function. This
project will use molecular neurobiology methods to map the gonadotropin-
releasing hormone and kisspeptin signaling systems in the brain of the bluehead
wrasse, in order to compare the expression of these hormones across different
reproductive phases, and to test the effects of manipulating these hormones on
reproductive function. A key element of the project is to provide undergraduates
from North Carolina State University and Indian River State College in Florida
with experience in behavioral field studies and molecular biological laboratory
studies. A second benefit will be an increased understanding of the control of
reproduction in fishes because the bluehead wrasse is a particularly useful
animal for understanding the specific mechanisms of this control. This knowledge
is valuable to the aquaculture industry because the control of reproduction
represents a key barrier to the propagation of fishes in captivity. Finally,
this project will lead to the development of educational materials focused on
Florida marine environments in collaboration with the Center for Ocean Science
Education Excellence. Gene sequences will be archived in Genbank and cDNAs will
be provided to interested parties on a cost-of-transport basis.