* 1257722
* Reciprocal regulation between the circadian clock and the iron homeostasis network in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2018
* C. Robertson McClung, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2018
* USD 555,324.00

C. Robertson McClung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IOS 1257722 Reciprocal regulation
between the circadian clock and the iron homeostasis network in
Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to understanding
the role of circadian regulation of iron homeostasis in plants, which is
important for two reasons. First, iron often limits plant growth and
agricultural yield. Second, although most people acquire iron from plant
sources, plant-based diets are poor sources of iron, and iron deficiency
represents the single most common human nutritional disorder, affecting
approximately one-half of the world's population. The circadian clock integrates
temporal information and coordinates many aspects of biology, including
metabolism and responses to stress. Specifically, the plant circadian clock
regulates the iron homeostasis gene network and, in turn, iron status modulates
clock function. This project should help to shape a temporally integrated
picture of iron homeostasis; the goal is to understand the network of genes
responsible for integrating information about iron status and orchestrating a
coordinated response that is temporally as well as spatially regulated. This
should transform efforts towards sustainable improvements of crop yields in
terms of plant productivity and nutrient content. The project will test the
hypothesis that impaired circadian function adversely affects iron homeostasis
and thus contributes to reduced fitness and, in agricultural settings, to
reduced yield and reduced nutritional quality of food. Understanding the
circadian regulation of iron homeostasis may contribute to crop productivity and
to nutritional quality of food, particularly in crops grown over broad
latitudinal ranges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement Genetics
teaching modules in middle school classrooms in Vermont and New Hampshire in
collaboration with the Montshire Museum of Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic resources (mutant lines and constructs) will be
deposited with the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center. Molecular data will
be deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database.