* 1257246
* Science Advanced through Virtual Institutes (SAVI):  Virtual Institute for Responsible Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Guston, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 498,452.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build research
infrastructure, a virtual institute for responsible innovation. The meaning of
"responsible innovation" is evolving, but roughly the term refers to a process
of engagement in which stakeholders and innovators engage in mutually responsive
dialogues that serve to bring about socially acceptable innovation processes and
products. The proposed institute will focus specifically on nanotechnology and
other emerging technologies such as synthetic biology and geo-
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
virtual institute will facilitate collaborative work on responsible innovation
involving members of a coalescing community of scholars and practitioners in the
US, the UK, the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Brazil and Canada.
Despite divides in geography and political culture, the institute will
facilitate research, training, and outreach on responsible innovation and, in
doing so, it will contribute to the governance of emerging technologies under
conditions dominated by high uncertainty, high stakes, and challenging societal
questions that accompany novelty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual institute project will accelerate work
on responsible innovation, which will in turn serve to enhance connections
between the considered values of the wider community and the processes of policy
decisions and science and technology development. It will also contribute to the
training of students and post-docs in the international, collaborative and
comparative aspects of responsible innovation, and it will develop a dynamic web
site and a virtual graduate course on responsible innovation to be taught across
the Institute and beyond. Partnerships with public and private institutions such
as US NAE, IEEE, and the Bassetti Foundation will result in wide dissemination
of results to and substantive interactions with relevant stakeholder
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is designated as a Science Across Virtual
Institutes (SAVI) award and is co-funded by NSF's Office of International and
Integrative Activities.