* 1257741
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Pathogen accumulation and its consequences for invasive plants
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Stephen Flory, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wilson
* 02/28/2015
* USD 156,244.00

Invasions by non-native species are common and widespread, but the long-term
outcomes of invasions are unclear. Escape from specialized predators and
pathogens may initially enable introduced species to outcompete native ones, but
the dominance of introduced species may be reversed if the predators or
pathogens in their new habitat switch onto them. Alternatively, native pathogens
that attack introduced species might spill back, infect co-occurring native
species, and exacerbate the impacts of invasions. This project will evaluate the
ecological consequences of pathogen accumulation on invasive species to inform
general ecological theory on host-pathogen dynamics and improve our
understanding of the long-term outcomes of invasions. A field survey will
quantify the prevalence and richness of pathogens that accumulate on stiltgrass,
Microstegium vimineum, an aggressive and widespread invader of forest
understories in the eastern U.S. By employing a broad chronosequence of sites,
the study will show the temporal change, geographical extent, and species
diversity of pathogens accumulating on an important invasive plant. Inoculation
experiments in quarantined greenhouse environments will be used to evaluate the
effects of pathogens on the performance of Microstegium and co-occurring native
grasses. Together, these results will serve to evaluate the hypotheses that
pathogens accumulate on and reduce population growth of invasive species or
spill back onto competing native species and indirectly facilitate
invasions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological invasions by introduced species are a
major environmental problem in the U.S. By providing new information on the
factors that promote or inhibit invasions, this project will be of use in land
management and restoration efforts. The study species is itself of significant
concern in a number of eastern States. Research findings will be disseminated to
land managers, the public, and environmental and conservation organizations via
a website and publications. In addition, this project will provide experience
and training for undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher, and
research support to an early-career scientist.