* 1257525
* RUI:   Characterization of coevolution, adaptation, and diversification in a model microbial mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Kristina Hillesland, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,001.00

The claws of a tiger and camouflage of its prey are examples of adaptations that
each species acquired in response to challenges imposed by the other in a
process called coevolution. While coevolution of such antagonists has been
studied extensively, less research has focused on mutually beneficial
(mutualist) interactions between species. In this research, the coevolution of a
mutualistic interaction from its origin through 2000 generations of evolution in
the laboratory will be studied. Coevolution in 22 communities of the microbial
species Desulfovibrio vulgaris and Methanococcus maripaludis will be
characterized by pairing each mutualist with its past and future evolutionary
partners, with partners from independently-evolved mutualisms, and by comparison
to non-mutualistic controls. Mutations in coevolved and control populations will
be identified by genome sequencing to determine the molecular signatures of
coevolution.

This project will give undergraduates experience planning, performing, and
analyzing original research. It will also establish a culture of undergraduate
research in the new school of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
at University of Washington, Bothell. The results will increase understanding
and control of methane production, a greenhouse gas and biofuel.