* 1257554
* EAGER:   Creating Gene Network Prediction Tools Applicable To Plants and Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Cassandra Extavour, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 11/30/2015
* USD 299,988.00

This EAGER is a high risk-high payoff project that offers immense potential
benefit to the scientific community by pioneering tools to allow functional
analysis of genomic data from non-model animal systems. This work will bridge
researchers from the animal and plant communities, building synergistic research
interactions and collaborations. Advances in all areas of biological research
rely on our ability to understand the functions of genes, how genes work
together in genetic networks, and how these genes and genetic networks have
evolved. To gain this understanding, researchers have traditionally relied on
direct tests of gene function and interaction using the techniques of genetics,
biochemistry and molecular biology. However, we are now able to obtain sequence
data at a rate that outpaces our ability to perform these functional tests. In
other words, we can now get sequence data faster than we can figure out what it
means! Moreover, an increasing amount of sequence data is being generated for
organisms where sophisticated genetic tools have not been developed, which means
that we must find a way to predict the functions of these gene sequences without
relying on prior knowledge of other sequences, and without making assumptions
that similar genes work the same way in different organisms. To address this
problem, this project will develop and validate novel computational tools that
will allow predictions about gene functions using new sequence data from
organisms that lack fully sequenced genomes, without relying on previously
generated data on the biochemical or genetic functions of their genes. This
project will build and test these tools using gene transcript sequence data from
insect, crustacean and spider model laboratory organisms. These predictive tool
will change how existing and forthcoming sequence data are used in research
across multiple NSF-supported disciplines. This work will contribute to the
development of emerging model organisms by increasing the utility of existing
data, rather than generating new sequence data, and by extending existing
functional molecular genetic tools for new model organisms. Finally, this
project will make an important contribution to the training of early career
scientists in national and international cross-disciplinary collaboration.