* 1257032
* LTREB Renewal:   Long-term detrital controls on soil organic matter stabilization
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Kate Lajtha, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 472,822.00

Global climate change, changes in forest management practices, and changes in
pollutants in the atmosphere will all interact to alter forest productivity and
return of plant litter (for example, leaf fall) to the forest floor over time.
However, it is not known whether the amount of organic matter in soils will
change in proportion to changes in litter inputs, or whether there might be non-
linear interactions that may lead to disproportional soil changes. Understanding
processes that increase or decrease soil organic matter is critical for
understanding the global carbon balance, as carbon in soil organic matter
amounts to more than the carbon stored in plant mass and in the atmosphere
combined. The flux of carbon between soils and the atmosphere is also large,
with the annual amount of carbon released from soils about 10 times that due to
fossil fuel combustion. The DIRT (Detrital Inputs and Removal Treatments)
experiment, started at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest in Oregon in 1997,
is a long-term study where litter is manipulated either by increasing above-
ground wood inputs, eliminating aboveground inputs, eliminating belowground
(root) inputs, or eliminating both above- and belowground inputs. The experiment
is designed to address such questions as: What controls the long-term storage of
carbon in forest soils? What chemical and physical parts of SOM are most stable?
Can added inputs increase soil carbon storage, or is maximum soil carbon storage
more determined by climate and soil mineral makeup? Monitoring changes in carbon
storage in the DIRT plots will generate a time course of carbon stabilization
and loss under the different treatments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
mechanisms that control soil carbon is vital not only to forest management, but
also to the accurate prediction of feedbacks from forests to climate change. The
DIRT experiment is unique to environmental science and uniquely suited to
explore the role of litter quality and quantity in determining stabilization of
soil carbon, a significant unknown in current ecosystem models. In this project,
focus will also be placed on training of undergraduate Honors students, with
results incorporated into a required Honors Ecology course at Oregon State
University. The project will leverage the Long-Term Ecological Research program
at the Andrews Forest for outreach to forest managers and the public. Both the
project data and the sampled soils will be made freely available to researchers
across the world. The long-term core data are already available on the Andrews
Forest web site and the DIRT web site.