* 1257902
* Collaborative: RUI: The natural history of mutations: sequence and fitness data from Arabidopsis thaliana mutation accumulation lines
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 644,734.00

Mutation is the source of genetic variation and organismal diversity, yet its
precise contribution to evolution remains a fundamental problem in biology. This
study combines next gen sequencing with classical mutation accumulation (MA)
studies to describe sequence-level mutation rates. The researchers will employ
whole genome sequencing to quantify the mutation rate and the spectrum of
mutations in multiple genetic backgrounds of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Sequencing will be done on 100 MA lines derived from the Columbia accession of
Arabidopsis thaliana, which have been assessed for performance in six natural
field environments. Additional sequencing will include 40 lines from each of 8
additional sets of MA lines, established from naturally-collected founder
genotypes from France and Sweden, and 50 lines from natural North American
selections that have been identified to contain a unique haplotype grouping and
divergence pattern of mutations similar to that found in classical MA lines.
These data will estimate with much greater accuracy the type and rates of
spontaneous mutation at the sequence level and will allow the research team to
decompose the spectrum of mutations and connect them to field performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of these datasets will enable the
determination of which types of mutations are more likely to be beneficial,
deleterious or neutral, and whether the effects of certain types of identified
mutations are consistent across environments. There are societal, scientific and
educational broader impacts to improving our understanding of mutations in
plants. Mutation rates are important in plant breeding, in predicting evolution
of herbicide resistance in weeds, and in predicting evolutionary responses of
plants to major environmental changes such as climate change. Undergraduate
students will have early access to sequence data and the opportunity to
participate in the project. The researchers will develop a web-based educational
module that allows students to learn 1) the causes and types of mutation 2)
strategies for studying mutation 3) the importance of mutation to evolution and
to human health and 4) how to use databases describing real mutations.