* 1257541
* Mechanisms of convergent flower color evolution above and below the species level
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Stacey Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2013
* USD 61,726.00

This project will investigate whether evolution may be predictable at the
genetic level. Phenotypic convergence, the appearance of similar forms in
independent lineages, provides an opportunity for testing the predictability of
genetic evolution. Similar phenotypes in different lineages are often due to
similar changes at the genetic level. One possible explanation is that, among
the possible mechanisms for producing a particular phenotype, some genetic
changes are preferentially fixed during the course of evolution. This project
will test the preferential fixation hypothesis by comparing the genetic basis of
white flower coloration above and below the species level. The central
hypothesis predicts that a wide array of mutations will be responsible for
white-flowered mutants within pigmented species, but only a subset of these
classes of mutations will be fixed during transitions from pigmented to white
flowers at the species level. Using a group of species in the potato family, the
PI will apply a combination of genetic, developmental, and biochemical
approaches to test this prediction. The results will lead to a better
understanding of the relationship between microevolutionary and
macroevolutionary change.

These studies will have important implications for manipulating and enhancing
pigment content in horticultural varieties and crops. Plant pigments, including
those targeted by this project, are strong antioxidants that contribute to the
positive health benefits of a diet rich in fruits and vegetables. Thus, a better
understanding of how genetic changes affect pigment biosynthesis adds to the
potential for improving crop species. The project encompasses local outreach
activities for K-12 students in order to promote interest in plant evolutionary
biology and to spread awareness about the importance of plant pigments in human
health.