* 1257679
* Disruption to cortical dopamine systems following adolescent social stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Michael Watt, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 12/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

While mammalian adolescence is an incredibly formative time, it is also a period
of increased susceptibility to the negative effects of stress exposure. In
particular, cognitive deficits seen in adulthood are thought to result from
stress-induced disruption of the prefrontal cortex dopamine system, which
undergoes dynamic alterations during adolescence. For many adolescent mammals, a
common form of stress is social aggression, but it is not known precisely how
this may affect the cortical dopamine system to result in later cognitive
dysfunction. This research will use a rat model to test the hypothesis that the
adolescent cortical dopamine system is particularly vulnerable to social stress,
by examining effects of social aggression experienced in adolescence on various
markers known to regulate dopamine activity. Changes in these markers will then
be related to negative alterations in cognitive function, with complimentary
experiments examining whether cognitive deficits can be reversed
pharmacologically. Findings will provide novel information about how an
essential brain system that changes dramatically during adolescence can be
negatively affected by socio-environmental factors to result in long term
maladaptive behavioral expression, thus furnishing further insight into the
development of mechanisms regulating prefrontal cortex dopamine activity across
adolescence into adulthood.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will have broad
educational impact. South Dakotan students from pre-college to graduate level
will have the opportunity to participate in these studies, providing them with
meaningful and valuable research experiences as necessary for a successful
career in science. The investigators will also volunteer to present and discuss
this work at regional high schools, undergraduate and tribal colleges and the
greater community. This will disseminate scientific knowledge to a wider
audience, highlighting the negative impacts of social stress during adolescence
to relevant groups, and exposing these groups to the potentials of scientific
research and teaching as a vocation that directly contributes to society.