* 1257719
* Collaborative Research: The Performance and Evolution of Environmentally Responsive Biomaterials in a Unique Biological Adhesive System: Spider Orb Web Capture Threads
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Brent Opell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 452,909.00

Materials change their properties in response to the environment in ways that
are often detrimental to performance. However, a new generation of "smart
materials" capitalizes on environmental responsiveness to improve performance in
the laboratory. This project investigates how such "smart materials" evolve and
function in nature, focusing on how adhesives adapt to fluctuating humidity in
the environment. Spider capture threads are sophisticated composite structures
that generate adhesion through multiple mechanisms that could respond
synergistically or independently to the environment. Adhesion starts with the
surface contact of sticky glycoproteins that are encased in liquid glue droplets
and is then enhanced when those droplets and the underlying axial thread to
which they are attached stretch and resist thread "pull-off" by forming a broad,
suspension bridge-like interface. This whole process is controlled in part by
cocktails of salts in the glue droplets that absorb atmospheric water, which
then lubricates the glue and controls the extension of the droplets and axial
threads. This project combines biology and materials science to compare the
molecular compositions of glues, the adhesiveness of capture threads, and how
webs capture insects across a community of spiders to understand how biological
"smart" materials respond to their environments. It will inspire the development
of new synthetic adhesive systems and "smart", environmentally responsive
materials. The project will provide in depth training in interdisciplinary
research to PhD, undergraduate and high school students. It will also develop
new educational resources for K5-K12 summer camps and teacher workshops.