* 1257141
* EAGER: Large Scale Optical Music Recognition on the International Music Core Library Project
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* David Crandall, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2014
* USD 98,551.00

Vast quantities of character-encoded text form the foundation for the
Information Retrieval revolution of recent decades. In contrast, very little
symbolically-represented music exists, preventing music from fully participating
in the Information Age. The International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) is
a large and rapidly growing open library of public domain machine-printed
classical music scores, actively used by many musicians, music scholars, and
researchers around the world. The PI's objective in this exploratory project is
to begin creating the algorithms needed for automatic optical music recognition
(OMR) to convert scanned musical scores into symbolic representations. This is
the first step in the PI's long-term goal of building a system to transform the
library's score images into symbolic representations, bringing the IMSLP
community together in a Wikipedia-like collaboration to mine this invaluable
resource. The result will be a comprehensive and open music library of symbolic
scores allowing unprecedented access while forming the basis of many new music
applications as well as commercial potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there
have been many efforts at OMR over the last fifty years, the current state of
the art is far below what the IMSLP challenge requires. Existing systems require
such laborious error correction that it is not clear if they actually improve on
manual data entry. OMR is much harder than its optical character recognition
(OCR) counterpart due to the fundamentally two-dimensional layout of music,
which makes it difficult to cast the problem in terms of familiar recognition
paradigms. Thus the primary focus of the current work lies in creating and
implementing an appropriate recognition paradigm suitable for the two-
dimensional structure of music notation, building in knowledge of notation
conventions and allowing for automatic adaptation. To this end, the PI will
explore strategies that merge recognition with segmentation, express the desire
for non-overlapping musical symbols in a principled way, and model the
interpretation problem which understands the often ambiguous meaning of the
recognized symbols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A large open music
library of symbolic scores, as well as offering widespread and easy access to
one of our culture's richest traditions, will be transformative for musicians,
music researchers, and music lovers. Libraries will be able to distribute music
scores electronically and globally, allowing for adaptive display, ongoing
scholarly annotation, and registration of scores with video and audio. The
prevalence of symbolic music scores will open up a world of possibilities to
music-science researchers, including systems for music information retrieval,
expressive performance, automatic musical accompaniment, transcription and
arranging, performance assistance, and many others. Finally, the library will
enable important commercial applications. For example, many expect that devices
such as the iPad will form the sheet music "delivery systems" of the future; the
benefits of basing such digital music readers on symbolically represented music
are compelling, including automatic page turning and content-based annotation.