* 1257021
* RUI: Behavioral convergence in Caribbean lizards: morphological and physiological mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Michele Johnson, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2018
* USD 515,500.00

Animals communicate with each other using specific behaviors that are controlled
by the interaction of muscles, hormones, and the central nervous system.
However, it is not yet known whether species that exhibit the same patterns of
behavior have similar muscular, hormonal, and neural traits (collectively
referred to as mechanisms of behavior), or if different combinations of these
traits can produce the same behaviors. This project uses a group of 26 lizard
species in the genus Anolis to determine the mechanisms that underlie two social
behaviors: communication with other lizards through the extension of a throat
fan, and copulation. Because these behaviors are simple, but can be directly
compared across multiple species, this study allows a clear and comprehensive
assessment of the interactions between the neuromuscular traits that control
behavior in all vertebrates. This study is comprised of two components, both of
which aim to determine the evolutionary relationships between social behaviors
and their mechanisms. First, by combining detailed observations of the animals'
natural behavior with biochemical assays that measure the neuromuscular traits
of the animals, this project will determine if species that live in similar
habitats have similar behaviors and their underlying mechanisms, and if species
in different habitats exhibit different behaviors and behavioral mechanisms.
Next, a laboratory experiment will manipulate rates of social behavior in males
of four species by altering their levels of testosterone. This experiment will
determine whether hormone-enhanced behaviors are associated with the same
combination of neuromuscular traits across species. Overall, this project will
provide intensive, hands-on research experiences for 12 undergraduate students,
and will form the basis of a program for fifth grade science teachers and their
students in urban public schools in San Antonio. These efforts will focus on
providing accessible training in the science of behavior and physiology to a
diverse community.

Data will be made available: EthoBank
(http://www.indiana.edu/~ethobank/index.html) and
lizardbase(http://lizardbase.org/pages/index.html)