* 1257175
* A Transdisciplinary Deliberative Model for Just  Research and Policy: Toward Resolving the Crisis of Vanishing Insect Pollinators
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Daniel Kleinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 303,650.00

This project seeks to use deliberative processes with a wide range of stake
holders to develop an alternative experimental paradigm for field studies to
understand the sustainability crisis in honey bees. Scientists agree that what
they call Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD), is caused by a complex combination of
factors, including pesticides, pathogens, parasites and/or poor nutrition yet
field research is currently dominated by toxicological practices which emphasize
the isolation of individual causal factors and experimental control. Analysis of
cumulative and interactive effects of pesticides and other ambient environmental
factors?an approach that beekeepers tend to embrace--has been precluded. This
2-year project aims to innovate experimental field research methods so as to
better incorporate socio-ecological complexity. They propose to experiment with
deliberative strategies for enhancing the influence of non-scientists
(beekeepers, farmers, ecologists) on research aimed at understanding CCD. They
will facilitate face-to-face deliberations using diverse methodological and
conceptual tools for place-based analyses, in conjunction with four pilot field
studies of mono-cultural crops and poly-cultural crops, managed with or without
?reduced risk? insecticides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The environmental and
agricultural sustainability of the United States is threatened by steep declines
in insect pollinators. The proposed activity seeks to make important
contributions to environmental problem solving. It also aims to broaden the
participation of primarily affected and often-excluded, non-scientific (non-
certified) citizens and to include their varieties of expertise in the
production of scientific knowledge and policy. It stands to show that a fairer
process, wherein a broader array of stakeholders shapes the research that
affects their lives, can lead to better science and policy.