* 1257122
* Developmental Mechanisms of Beak Shape Evolution in Galapagos Finches
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Michele Clamp, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 549,999.00

Darwin's Finches are a classic textbook example of evolution by natural
selection. Since Charles Darwin, who introduced these birds to science, they
have been studied by generations of ecologists and evolutionary biologists.
Previous investigations have shown the adaptive significance of their diverse
beak shapes, which allow them to survive on distinct food sources. However, the
genetic and molecular mechanisms behind these highly adaptive biological shapes
remained unknown. Dr. Abzhanov and colleagues recently demonstrated that beak
diversity in Darwin's Finches is not random but follows a particular series of
mathematical transitions and all their beaks can be classified as sets of
related geometric shapes. This project aims to uncover the precise molecular
mechanisms by sequencing, comparing and analyzing multiple genes involved in
development of distinct beak shapes across Darwin's Finches. It is expected that
important new regulatory molecules will be identified and validated using
functional experiments. Therefore, biological diversity will be explained both
by forces of natural selection and by particular genetic changes that made such
adaptations possible. The integration of this work with the long-standing
evolutionary, ecological and conservation studies on Darwin's Finches will
provide a more mechanistic explanation for evolution in the minds of high school
and college textbook writers, school teachers and science news writers and
publicists who bring most significant findings to scientific and general public
audiences. Investigators will work with the Harvard University Museum of Natural
History, which is attended by tens of thousands of K-12 students and teachers
each year, to establish a new educational exhibit on bird evolution that will
focus on the emergence of the bird face from the reptilian condition and
subsequent beak diversification to explain evolutionary processes. Finally, this
project will advance training and mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows and will yield salient research and training research
opportunities.