* 1257479
* RUI: The role of Ralstonia solanacearum effector protein Rsp1281 in bacterial wilt disease
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Raka Mitra, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Bacterial wilt is one of the most devastating bacterial diseases of plants
worldwide, affecting hundreds of plant species including many major crops such
as tomato and potato. The bacterial wilt pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum, is a
root-invading, vascular pathogen that employs a specialized secretion system to
deliver a collection of "effector" proteins directly into plant cells. Effector
proteins are thought to promote disease by interfering with plant defenses. This
project will identify plant targets of a conserved effector, Rsp1281/PopS, which
is present in most R. solanacearum species, is highly expressed within the plant
vasculature and is required for full virulence on several plant hosts. The
investigators will use biochemical, microscopic and genomic approaches to
identify plant proteins, organelles and pathways that are targeted by this
effector. The identification of effector targets of a root-invading pathogen may
yield new information about plant defense pathways employed in roots and can be
useful for developing wilt resistant crops. Additionally, the majority of the
work in this project involves student research, integrating research and
education. A total of approximately 100 students will participate in this
project, acquiring knowledge and skills that will be important in other STEM
courses, in graduate school and for success as future scientists.