* 1257029
* Perspective-Taking in Conversation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Sarah Brown-Schmidt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2016
* USD 305,264.00

Face-to-face conversation plays a key role in children's language acquisition
and adult communication, and in the evolution of languages over time. However,
surprisingly little is known about the cognitive mechanisms that affect language
use in conversation. One feature of conversation is that what we say and how we
say it depends on our insights into the knowledge and beliefs of the people we
talk to. Sometimes these insights are correct, sometimes they fail dramatically,
and other times the insights are still unformed. This research project will
explore how insights into others are formed, how these insights are used, and
how they may fail. A series of experiments will use eye-tracking technology to
study these processes on a moment-by-moment basis as they occur in natural
conversation. The work draws from recent advances in psycholinguistics,
developmental psychology, and social psychology.

This project will provide insights into a poorly understood but core component
of language, that is, appreciating the perspectives of others. It has
potentially diverse implications, including improving education through
perspective-taking in teacher-student dyads and in math education through the
use of perspective-taking in reasoning about the geometry of multi-dimensional
figures.