* 1257701
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Resolving an ancient radiation: gingers, phylogenies, and fossils.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Chelsea Specht, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2018
* USD 362,438.00

The order Zingiberales is a diverse group of economically and ecologically
important tropical plants including banana, gingers, bird-of-paradise, and
canna. This project examines the genetic, morphological, and ecological
evolution of Zingiberales over geologic time scales. Morphological data from
living and fossil species will be combined with DNA data to reconstruct
evolutionary relationships among species and the timing of important
evolutionary events. The geographical distribution of living and fossil species
and changes in their ecology through time will then be examined to understand
how these plants have adapted to different regions and climates through time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of multiple lines of evidence from fossil
and modern data is needed in order to understand evolutionary drivers and
responses, current and historic biodiversity, and how modern ecosystems have
been formed; all of which give us insight to the current patterns of
biodiversity and the ability to predict future evolutionary patterns and
ecosystem processes. The Zingiberales serve as a model for this type of study
due to their ecological importance today and the presence of an extensive fossil
record. In addition, because they are tropical and subtropical plants, they will
help us understand the biology of a warming world.