* 1257438
* Building a robotics commons
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Brian Gerkey, Open Source Robotics Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,035,795.00

This project addresses the lack of commonality which has historically plagued
the robotics research community due to the lack of sharable code. Robotics is an
experimental endeavor, and code, the software that is written to control the
robot, is at the core of any research or development effort. Innovation occurs
best when the community builds on each others' accomplishments and robotics has
progressed to the point that both researchers and developers can benefit from a
shared, high-quality, common software toolbox to build useful and commercially
viable applications with a minimum of duplicated engineering effort. This
software is part of an open source "robotics commons": a shared resource from
which all can benefit and to which are can contribute. To build this commons,
this proposal begins with ROS (Robot Operating System), an open software
platform comprising libraries and tools that facilitate building and running
robot applications. Designed for both robotics researchers and application
developers, ROS is already widely used around the world in classrooms, labs, and
companies. Hence, the intellectual merit of the proposed project revolves around
the software engineering methods used to build, improve, test, distribute, and
support this high-quality robotics commons. In this project, development will
focus on critical, under-served areas within ROS: flexible automation, user
interfaces for non-experts, shared autonomy, robot teams, and improved platform
support. Development will not focus on the algorithms available to the robotics
community; rather, the intent is to provide the community with the best possible
libraries and tools that embody state-of-the-art algorithms and techniques.

Just as the availability of the open source LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL,
and Perl/PHP/Python) enabled the internet revolution in the 1990s, ROS and its
related tools are expected to have tremendous broader impacts to the engineering
community. The OSRF will provide the worldwide robotics community with freely
available open source tools that will enable a generation of robotics students,
developers, entrepreneurs, and enthusiasts to more quickly and easily realize
their aspirations.