* 1258333
* Final Design, Construction and Operations of  Vera C. Rubin Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2024
* William Smith, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Ajhar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 0.00

The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) is a large-aperture, wide-field,
ground-based telescope that will survey the visible sky in six photometric
bands. The images, alerts, and resulting catalogs will be made available to the
United States and Chilean communities with no proprietary period. The LSST
project was selected as the highest priority ground-based project by the 2010 US
astronomy and astrophysics decadal survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survey is
currently planned to last for ten years and will produce a database suitable for
answering a wide range of pressing questions in astrophysics, cosmology, and
fundamental physics. The same data set can be used to characterize the
properties of dark energy and dark matter; produce nearly instant alerts of
detected optical transients such as exploding stars in distant galaxies;
discover and provide orbits for potentially hazardous near-Earth objects; and
catalog billions of objects with both high astrometric precision and
unprecedented photometric depth. No other facility in operation or planned will
have the simultaneous wide area and rapid temporal sampling to address these
issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has already met the requirements of a
Preliminary Design Review (PDR) of the full construction project. The present
Cooperative Agreement provides the umbrella under which funding will be released
for further Design and Development work, allowing the Project team to work
towards the requirements of a Final Design Review (FDR) and to be ready for
construction.