* 1258690
* NSF/DOE Advanced Combustion Engines:  Collaborative Research:  GOALI: Understanding NOx SCR Mechanism and Activity on Cu/Chabazite Structures throughout the Catalyst Life Cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* William Schneider, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 421,875.00

ABSTRACT #1258715 - Fabio Ribeiro #1258690 - William Schneider #1258717 - Jean-
Sabin McEwen

The lack of a practical and cost-effective lean NOx aftertreatment is the major
obstacle to the widespread adoption of fuel-efficient diesel and lean-burn
gasoline engines for transportation. Increasingly stringent NOx emissions
standards demand that NOx conversion to N2 reach or exceed 90% averaged over
standard drive cycles, and even higher instantaneous conversions to compensate
for cold startup and transient operation. These high conversions are very
difficult to achieve under lean conditions, in which NOx must compete with an
overwhelming excess of O2 for a limited amount of reductant. Lean NOx traps can
achieve the necessary NOx conversion efficiencies, but have many operational and
cost issues in their current forms. NOx selective catalytic reduction (SCR)
provides a much more satisfactory solution to lean NOx aftertreatment. In this
approach the usual converter catalyst is replaced with a catalyst that promotes
reaction of NOx with a reductant, such as urea, NH3, or hydrocarbons, to produce
N2 selectively over the competing reactions of reductant with O2.

The selective catalytic reduction with ammonia on Cu-exchanged chabazite
zeolites is the state-of-the-art for lean NOx reduction and enables access to
the fuel efficiency of lean burn engines. Although these materials are used
commercially in a small segment of the transportation market, their structure
and catalytic behavior changes in unpredictable ways as they respond to varying
SCR conditions and in particular as they accumulate deactivating sulfur species.
Real-world application of these catalysts at Cummins reveals that their
performance at low temperatures is diminished in ways not explained by
previously published aging mechanisms. The primary obstacle to the rational
improvement and effective application of NOx SCR catalysts is the lack of a firm
fundamental understanding of the underlying catalyst structure and catalytic
chemistry.

An approach to filling this knowledge gap to lead to maximum SCR catalyst
performance has been proposed in response to the joint National Science
Foundation and Department of Energy solicitation on Advanced Combustion Engines.
The joint Agency award is made through the NSF Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems Division and its Catalysis & Biocatalysis
Program to a multi-disciplined team made up of Professors Fabio H. Ribeiro, W.
Nicholas Delgass, and Rajamani Gounder at Purdue University; Prof. Jean-Sabin
McEwen at Washington State University; and Prof. William F. Schneider at
University of Notre Dame; Dr. Jeffrey T. Miller, Argonne National Laboratory;
Dr. Charles H. F. Peden, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; and Dr. Aleksey
Yezerets, Cummins Inc. NSF GOALI support is also provided to this team that has
many years of combined industrial, National Laboratory and academic experience
in NOx catalysis and catalysis science and a proven record of successful
collaboration.

To dramatically improve the present catalyst materials, to optimize engine
efficiency within emission constraints, and to circumvent deactivation, an
atomic and molecularly detailed model of catalyst performance under all
operating conditions and throughout the life cycle is essential. This team
brings world-class excellence in the variety of experimental and theoretical
disciplines that must be combined to reach the atomic-level understanding of the
dynamic chemical and catalytic properties of this reaction system, which will
form the basis of a predictive model for this SCR catalyst system and for
further catalyst system improvements. Though the students working on this
project will specialize in particular aspects of the research, frequent
teleconferences with the entire team and groups traveling to the National Labs
to do specialized experiments will provide broad experience and direct exposure
to the importance of the interplay between various experiments and molecular
theory at the frontier of catalysis research. Thus, this multi-institutional and
diverse team will prepare graduate students and postdocs to operate at the
highest levels in application of catalysis to the solution of energy efficiency
and environmental problems. It will also provide career-defining educational
opportunities to high school and undergraduate students. For high school
students and educators, Purdue has already developed a hands-on presentation to
interest students in science and engineering. The PIs intend to add the
molecular view of this work to that presentation and deliver lectures to high
schools across Indiana and to bring this view to the many science and
engineering camps that run at Purdue and Notre Dame during the summer.
Undergraduates working in the university research groups and in industrial
internships at Cummins will also benefit from the breadth of scientific exposure
and the unique approach that connects detailed fundamental understanding to the
solution of important practical problems.