* 1258907
* Collaborative Research:  Reacting Tracers in a Turbulent Mixed Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Baylor Fox-Kemper, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 270,587.00

Reactive tracers such as carbonate chemical species and plankton play key roles
in determining the biogeochemistry of the ocean, which is the largest reservoir
of carbon in the Earth system active on short timescales. These tracers react
primarily in the mixed layer, where air-sea exchange occurs and light is
plentiful for photosynthesis. The mixing of these tracers is parameterized in
large-scale, mesoscale eddy-resolving simulations of the global carbon cycle and
climate, but so far the coupling between their reactions and flow physics is not
represented. Understanding this coupling in the upper ocean is complicated by
the presence of turbulent processes spanning a wide range of scales, including
vertical mixing by meter-scale Langmuir turbulence and kilometer-scale stirring
by submesoscale eddies, fronts, and filaments. As such, reactive tracers are not
fully mixed to the point of having zero gradients at all scales, even in the
mixed layer. This leads to heterogeneity, or ?patchiness,? in the spatial
distribution of tracers; the degree and spectral properties of this
heterogeneity are determined by the interactions between turbulent mixing and
biological or chemical reactions. Characterizing the effects of realistic mixed
layer turbulence on reactive tracers with different reaction dynamics and rates
is a fundamental challenge in understanding the interplay between physical
processes and biological and chemical species in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will use large eddy
simulations (LES) to study the effects of multiscale turbulent processes on
reactive tracers in the oceanic mixed layer, spanning scales from meters
(Langmuir) to tens of kilometers (submesoscale fronts and instabilities). The
investigators will examine mixed layer tracer dynamics by drawing on their prior
experience studying Langmuir turbulence, submesoscale features, reacting flows,
and the global carbon cycle. Relatively little work on turbulence and oceanic
tracer reactions over this range of scales is extant, yet small-scale turbulent
mixing has time scales similar to those of chemical processes (such as CO2
hydration), and submesoscale eddies evolve on time scales similar to those of
plankton blooms. Many prior studies of reactive tracers have relied on simple
flow fields (such as two-dimensional or quasi-geostrophic turbulence). This
project will address the full three dimensional complexity of upper ocean
turbulence. At first, relatively simple tracer reactions will be used, building
toward more realistic biological and chemical models. This approach will allow
fundamental turbulence-tracer interactions to be understood before introducing
overly complex reaction models. This project will bring together concepts from
fundamental turbulence physics, chemical and biological reacting flows, and
physical oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Three graduate
students will be trained at the nexus of oceanic physics, biology, and
chemistry. Insights obtained from this project will be directly relevant to gas
and carbon budgets at the interface between the atmosphere and ocean, as well as
biological dynamics in the upper ocean. Both of these processes play a critical
role in the organic and inorganic global carbon cycles, and thus have a direct
impact on understanding and predicting atmospheric CO2 levels and climate
change. Although this study will be focused on fundamental processes, with an
emphasis on physical oceanography and idealized reaction models, there are clear
applications to problems in chemical and biological oceanography. In particular,
with the numerical framework, diagnostics, and fundamental understanding
developed in the current study, the study of reactive tracers can be extended in
the future to more complicated models of biological and chemical reactions in
the upper ocean. The team of investigators is also experienced in more applied
aspects of modeling and parameterization development, and so will ensure the
practical utility of the fundamental work. The data obtained from these
simulations will be made publicly available to support further research on
reactive tracers in the upper ocean.