* 1258088
* Collaborative Research:    Incentive promotions in the US automotive industry
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Florian Zettelmeyer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 137,257.00

This project proposes to investigate incentive promotions in the US automotive
industry. This is done through a program evaluation approach in which attention
is paid to establishing a correct counterfactual outcome for each of the
treatment conditions, and also to ruling out alternative explanations for any
observed price and sales differences. The sales promotions are auto
manufacturers' primary short-run competitive instrument and they are large in
magnitude, averaging $2,566 per vehicle sold in May 2005. This project focuses
on two of the most common types of incentive promotions: cash rebates to
customers ("customer cash") and cash payments to dealers ("dealer cash").
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying incentive promotions is of interest for three
reasons. First, auto industry promotions are a useful setting for examining the
effect of asymmetric information between buyers and sellers on negotiated
prices. While the two bargaining parties are symmetrically informed about
customer cash, the customer is typically uninformed about dealer cash. The first
component of this study measures how much better consumers do in price
negotiations when they are aware that manufacturer-supplied surplus is available
to the negotiating parties. In preliminary estimates the effect of consumers'
information disadvantage is substantial: for a promotion of average size,
consumers obtain $500 less of the surplus if they do not know that the promotion
is available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, auto manufacturer promotions can be
used to investigate how information differentially affects the prices negotiated
by different types of consumers, in particular disadvantaged minorities.
Previous empirical studies of automotive retailing have found significant
differences in prices according to customers' demographic characteristics,
especially race and gender (Ayres and Siegelman 1995, Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer,
and Silva-Risso 2003). There is also evidence that knowing the reservation price
of the opponent is more beneficial to consumers who feel disadvantaged in the
bargaining process (Zettelmeyer, Scott Morton, and Silva-Risso 2006). The second
component of the study investigates whether the information disadvantage of
consumers regarding car manufacturer promotions affects disproportionately
racial minorities and women, groups that are traditionally considered
disadvantaged in the bargaining process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third
component of the study is motivated by the 1995 settlement between the
Department of Justice and the National Automobile Dealers Association, in which
the association is said to have illegally pressured "manufacturers to give
franchise dealers, rather than consumers, all of the discounts and incentives
offered by manufacturers to induce the purchase of a new car," with the goal of
limiting price competition in car sales to consumers. This third project
investigates the settlement's implication that dealers and manufacturers have
different preferences regarding the types of promotion that are offered, as well
as what this implies about the vertical relationship between manufacturers and
dealers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal is to provide
evidence in a real-world setting of the importance of incomplete information on
negotiated prices and its relation with customer characteristics. While
economists commonly agree about the direction of the effects of incomplete
information and consumer characteristics on bargaining outcomes, there is a lack
of evidence that the effects are large enough to meaningfully influence market
outcomes. A better understanding of the effect of incomplete information is
important for policy makers in deciding on information disclosure policies and
in facilitating information access to consumers.&lt;br/&gt;