* 1258555
* RUI: Quantifying ACL-Deficient Knee Stability: Enhanced via Parametric Modeling Using a Hierarchical Verification and Validation Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Roger Gonzalez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 261,844.00

PI: Gonzalez, Roger V. Proposal Number: 0966398

The fundamental motivation of this study is to develop two complementary
computational assessment tools, based on finite element and multi-body dynamic
simulation theory based on established musculoskeletal and parametric modeling
techniques. We believe these computational tools will amend how knee stability
is currently assessed and thus allow for potentially transformative changes in
the current preventative and rehabilitative practices prescribed for ACL
injuries. Currently, insufficient and inadequately corroborated quantitative
measures exist of in-vivo knee stability and menisci/tibal plateau loads and
displacements during intense dynamic activities. Ability to maintain kinematic
stability is imperative in everyday tasks such as standing or rising from a
chair and is especially critical during intense dynamic activities such as
running or climbing stairs. Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury and its
involvement in knee stability and adverse intersegmental loading is an important
and significant topic within biomechanics. Knee ligaments play a secondary role
to muscles, which are the primary knee stabilizers. Nevertheless, the absence of
ligaments makes stability more difficult, especially when muscle coordination is
impaired or when loads are applied more quickly than neuromuscular response time
allows. Thus, considerable interest has been given to knee stability and
intersegmental forces, especially when associated with ligament failure. Our
focus is to quantify knee [in]stability in ACL-Deficient (ACLD) subjects and the
role that this [in]stability plays in increasing intersegmental forces including
how variations in knee geometry contribute to changes in such measures.
Intellectual Merit and Engineering Principles Applied: The project will (1)
further develop a detailed finite element (FE) and anatomical musculoskeletal
computer model to quantify knee ligament strain, anterior tibial translation
(ATT), and intersegmental forces (ISF), (2) develop an improved load-generating
knee specimen experimental apparatus used to verify and evaluate the
computational models, (3) statistically assess the deviation between unimpaired
and ACL-impaired knee stability parameters with emphasis on intersegmental
forces and altered neuromuscular patterns, and (4) improve and extend our pilot
FE models of the human knee to a high-fidelity parametric FE model using
statistical shape modeling techniques. The improved load-generating cadaver
experiment is a significant improvement to current knee studies as it accounts
for time-varying muscle forces from multiple muscles in synchrony with joint
position. Muscle activation and motion data will be obtained from healthy
subjects (ACL-intact) and "coper" subjects (ACLD and functional). Ligament
strain will be measured in eight knee ligament bundles of cadaver knee specimens
during artificial time-varying multiple-muscle loading conditions derived from
human trials. The FE and computational models will perform dynamic simulations
to estimate ligament strain, and the results will be compared with data from the
load-generating cadaver experiments. The computational model will also be
refined to replicate the key characteristics of ligament strain, ATT, and ISF as
measured in the experiment, as well as implement proven techniques of validation
and verification within parametric probabilistic modeling. As a result, this
research is to develop two complementary computational assessment tools (FE and
multi-body dynamic simulations) that will change the way we are able to assess
knee stability and ISF, and allow for potentially transformative changes in the
current preventative and rehabilitative practices prescribed for ACL injuries.
Broader Impacts: This research project is performed primarily by undergraduate
students for academic credit and through research assistantships at LeTourneau
University under the direction of the PI and in consultation with Dr. Dan
Nicolella at Southwest Research Institute (SwRI). To enhance the research
experience provided to these undergraduate students, half of the summer interns
will spend the entire summer at the biomechanics and materials laboratory at
SwRI, co-mentored by Dr. Nicolella and his professional staff as they work on
the computational knee models and perform additional experiments. This project
blends learning, discovery, and research into a unique undergraduate experience
that will provide students with comprehensive preparation for future graduate
studies in engineering.