* 1258820
* Attending the NSF CBET Grantee Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Peng Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2013
* USD 2,000.00

Intellectual Merit

Travel funds are requested for travel to the NSF 2012 CBET Grantee Conference.
The NSF 2012 CBET Grantee Conference will be held from Wednesday, June 6, 2012
to Friday, June 8, 2012 at the Hyatt Regency Baltimore and the Baltimore
Convention Center.

The NSF CBET Grantee Conference provides the opportunity for building more
effective and collaborative relationships amongst the community of CBET grantees
and Program Directors. The conference is designed to enable awardees to share
their technical achievements with NSF Program Directors and also to learn about
current (and/or new) NSF/CBET programs, practices, and supplemental funding
mechanisms. CBET Program and Cluster-specific sessions will also facilitate
discussions amongst these smaller communities to address topics of specific
interest. The conference agenda will provide multiple outlets for networking and
interaction with program officers and other grantees in efforts to promote
discussions and potential collaborations.

Broader Impacts

The Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET)
Division is a major element of the Engineering (ENG) Directorate and critical to
the Engineering Directorates mission at the National Science Foundation (NSF).
CBETs mission is to promote and support transformative research and education in
engineering areas CBETs mission is to promote and support transformative
research and education in engineering areas based on the physical, mathematical
and life sciences; advance scientific and engineering knowledge; and develop a
diverse, globally engaged workforce enhancing the economy of the United States.