* 1258258
* Crisis Econometrics and High Dimensional Nonstationary Regression
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2017
* USD 294,719.00

Financial history shows that asset price bubbles, crises and panics are
intermittent but perennial characteristics of world financial markets.
Experience from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) over 2007-2009 and the present
sovereign debt crisis underscores these historical lessons and bears witness to
the cost of financial instability in terms of real economic activity and
employment. New regulatory initiatives on capital requirements and the Basel III
international financial accord have emphasized the need for improved
surveillance of banks and financial markets to help avoid the "excessive credit
creation" that typically accompanies asset price bubbles. An important practical
issue in such market surveillance involves the assessment of what is "excessive"
in the available evidence. Central bank economists and regulators cannot work to
offset a speculative bubble unless they are able to assess whether one
exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prominent recent example of this conundrum
occurred during the early phase of the 1990s Internet Bubble which created and
destroyed $8 trillion in shareholder wealth in less than a decade. In 1996 Alan
Greenspan famously spoke of "irrational exuberance", expressing concern about
possible asset price inflation but with no supporting econometric evidence and
no effect on market escalation or the subsequent crash. Similarly in the early
2000s, repeated warnings of excessive rises in house prices by the economist
Robert Shiller failed to alert policy makers of the emerging speculative bubble
in housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Econometric work can assist this complex
exercise of monitoring financial markets by quantifying market excesses in
relation to fundamentals. Research by the Principal Investigator (PI) has
provided an early warning alert system of financial exuberance and market
stress. Some of the PI's methods have been adopted by central bank research and
surveillance teams to enhance the monitoring of financial asset, real estate,
and commodity price markets. This work has involved econometric analysis that
focuses on the revealed properties of individual financial time series and the
presence of exuberance in the data. The current NSF project extends that work on
detection techniques to provide anticipative dating algorithms that can help
regulators in market-monitoring activity where there is risk of financial
contagion and crisis concatenation over time and across different markets.
Evidence-based warning diagnostics are useful as alert mechanisms for market
participants as well as for regulators. But to be effective in financial
surveillance and regulatory work, an econometric warning alert system needs to
be reliable in revealing inflationary upturns in the market -- with a low false
detection rate to avoid unnecessary policy measures and a high positive
detection rate to assure appropriate policy implementation. The nonlinear
structure of bubble phenomena typically diminishes the discriminatory power of
test mechanisms. These power reductions complicate attempts at econometric
dating and enhance the need for new approaches that do not suffer from this
problem. One of the challenges of the current project is to develop and test
such methods so that they may be used in an active policy environment. A second
challenge lies in the application of these methods to the ballooning sovereign
debt and credit default swap market, especially in the European Union periphery.
Empirical applications are planned to analyze the European debt crisis using
credit default swap spreads and to track migration of the phenomena through the
financial system and real economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
main branch of research on crisis econometrics the project will develop
automated methods for systems of high dimensional time series allowing for co-
movement and linkages among the variables as well as nonstationarity in the
data. Massive recent improvements in the availability of electronic data offer
new opportunities for statistical analysis including the use of very high
dimensional datasets in practical work. Modern econometric practice now
frequently encounters systems where the dimensionality of the variables may
exceed the sample size. In such cases sparse statistical methods can be useful
in resolving degrees of freedom problems, but that methodology is presently
developed only for linear systems with stationary regressors. Econometric work
in finance and macroeconomics typically involves nonstationary and potentially
co-moving data series. These features introduce challenging nonlinearities and
identification issues that must be addressed in the use of sparse estimation
techniques. The second branch of this project pursues those extensions. Some
related research in the project will consider large dimensional dynamic panels
where an unknown subset of series have a common feature or parameter such as an
autoregressive unit root. The new methodology will provide a data-determined
approach to subset classification in regression, where there is some commonality
in the regression characteristics across certain individuals in the panel. This
type of econometric classification covers many empirical examples of interest
such as convergence clubs that arise in global and regional economic growth
analysis. Research on these panel classification devices will substantially
extend the range of existing shrinkage methods and their potential empirical
applications in economics.