* 1258574
* G8 Initiative: Structural Bamboo Products
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Lorna Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2017
* USD 447,000.00

This NSF award to Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) funds U.S.
researchers participating in a project competitively selected by the G8 Research
Councils Initiative ?Structural Bamboo Products.? This is a pilot collaboration
among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian National Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RCUK), supporting
collaborative research projects selected on a competitive basis that are
comprised of researchers from at least three of the partner countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international project with MIT, the University of
British Columbia (Canada) and the University of Cambridge (United Kingdom)
develops green construction materials and building codes for bamboo. China,
India and Brazil have rapidly expanding economies with increasing demand for
building materials. The production of conventional construction materials such
as steel and concrete is energy intensive and unsustainable: concrete alone
accounts for 5% of global CO2 emissions. Bamboo is a fast growing, renewable
building material widely cultivated in these countries but not utilized to its
full potential in modern construction. Its mechanical properties are similar to
wood but it produces up to six times as much mass per hectare as conventional
timber plantations. Structural bamboo products, similar to plywood, oriented
strand board, or glue-laminated wood products, therefore have enormous potential
to partially replace the use of more energy intensive materials in rapidly
developing countries. This project aims to: characterize the mechanical behavior
of bamboo as a material; develop methods for processing pieces of bamboo into
structural products such as panels and beams; test structural bamboo panels and
beams; suggest adaptations to existing wood building codes for structural bamboo
products; and assess the energy performance and life cycle costs of buildings
made using structural bamboo products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will contribute to the knowledge base and use of
engineered bamboo and increase the sustainability of building products by the
development of a renewable, lower-carbon alternative to conventional structural
components. The development of building codes for structural bamboo products
will contribute to the more efficient and widespread use of bamboo as a building
material. Understanding energy inputs to structural bamboo products could help
identify areas of possible savings. The project will also contribute towards the
development of human resources, in training students and postdoctoral
researchers.