* 1258576
* Preparing Graduate Students to Teach Undergraduate Mathematics: A Working Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Jack Bookman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/28/2014
* USD 29,948.00

This project is supporting a working conference of faculty who are involved in
teacher training and long-term professional development for graduate students in
the mathematical sciences. The conference is designed to promote dialogue among
practitioners in professional development in different programs; between
practitioners and those who research learning, teaching, and learning to teach
mathematics at the college level; and between those who work in existing
programs and those interested in introducing more professional development into
their work with graduate students. A parallel aim is to provide opportunities
for "inter-generational" discussions and knowledge transfer between people who
have spent their careers working in this area and those who are just now
embarking on careers that include working with mathematics graduate students as
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary goals frame the conference
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) to strengthen, inspire and refresh existing
programs by having practice and research inform one
another;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) to develop a menu of best practices to
disseminate via a website and subsequent workshops;
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) to serve as a launchpad for those interested in
initiating a graduate student teaching and professional development program,
highlighting key elements, key questions, and various
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is timely, especially given the
current national focus on higher education, particularly in STEM. Most graduate
students in the mathematical sciences teach in some capacity before receiving
their graduate degrees. Moreover, for those aspiring to academic positions,
teaching will continue to be a large part of their professional lives. Early
attention to graduate student teaching and professional development pays
dividends not just to the current undergraduate students in the courses that the
graduate students are teaching, but also in the subsequent careers of the
graduate students themselves.