* 1258742
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: Low Temperature NOx Storage and Reduction Using Engineered Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Mark Crocker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

Abstract #1258742 Crocker, Mark

Unlike conventional gasoline vehicles, the engines in diesel vehicles ? as well
as some advanced gasoline vehicles ? require excess air to combust their fuel.
Conventional catalytic converters do not operate efficiently under these
conditions, necessitating the use of newer, alternative emission control
catalyst technologies. Currently, these advanced catalytic converters are able
to meet current federal requirements with respect to the emission of gaseous
pollutants, namely nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons.
Furthermore, although diesel engines are more fuel efficient than their gasoline
counterparts, increases in fuel economy are still needed. The drive towards
greater fuel efficiency is resulting in the development of advanced combustion
engines in which greater efficiency results in increasingly lower exhaust gas
temperatures. At such low temperatures, current catalyst converter technology
will be unlikely to meet present emission standards, let alone future standards.
The way to address this situation is to develop new technologies which will
enable catalytic converters to function efficiently at low temperature. This is
a very difficult task. A novel approach to achieving catalyst activity
improvement has been proposed in response to the joint National Science
Foundation and Department of Energy solicitation on Advanced Combustion Engines.
The joint Agency award is made through the NSF Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems Division and its Catalysis & Biocatalysis
Program to Professor Mark Crocker and Dr. Yaying Ji at the University of
Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research (UK CAER), who will team with Dr.
Jae-Soon Choi of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Dr. John Darab of MEL Chemicals
and Dr. Christine Lambert of Ford Motor Co. Emphasis will be placed on the
abatement of NOx emissions, given that this pollutant is the most difficult to
remove, employing an approach that combines materials synthesis, mechanistic
studies, and catalyst evaluation under realistic conditions. Specifically,
materials will be developed that are capable of storing NOx at low temperatures
and then periodically converting it into the harmless products, nitrogen and
water. This work will both lead to the generation of fundamental knowledge
concerning the interaction of NOx with ceramic materials of the type typically
used in catalytic converters for storage or adsorption of a gaseous component,
and to the development of improved catalytic converters for the control of
pollutant emissions at low temperatures. The industrial partners will offer
valuable scale and commercialization input, as well as participation in
fabrication and testing. An additional outcome of this project will be the
education and training of students in key aspects of materials science,
catalysis and environmental engineering. The project will be a collaborative
effort between academia, industry and a national laboratory, thereby providing
multidisciplinary training to students that would not be typically available in
a traditional academic project. Opportunities will be provided to graduate,
undergraduate and high school students to work on the project and receive hands-
on training. Project results will be disseminated using both conventional
methods (scholarly articles, conference presentations) as well as social media
(Twitter, Facebook and a dedicated website), and will be incorporated into a
graduate level course (?Principles and Applications of Catalysis?) taught in the
UK Chemistry Department.