* 1258330
* EAGER: Exploratory Research in Automated Computational Analysis of Inorganic Materials Libraries
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Carla Gomes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2014
* USD 133,440.00

Combinatorial Materials Science represents a potentially powerful approach to
identifying new and unexpected materials. This involves the rapid, high-
throughput synthesis, measurement, and analysis of a large number of different
materials. Understanding the functional behavior of the materials requires a
characterization of the structure-property relations. Crystalline structure
information can be obtained through X-ray diffraction studies. An unsolved
challenge is to develop automated techniques for identification of unique
diffraction patterns and to cluster the resulting patterns into contiguous phase
fields corresponding to regions with different material composite structures.

Intellectual Merit: This exploratory project is aimed at establishing the
feasibility of a unique interdisciplinary approach, involving a team of
materials scientists and computer scientists, to address the challenge of
structure (crystalline phase) identification of the composite materials.
Specifically, the PIs propose to extract the key diffraction pattern features
from the raw experimental data as a first step towards the development of
computational methods for the identification of crystalline phases.

Broader Impacts: The project, if successful, will establish the feasibility of a
key first step in an overall methodology to significantly speed the materials
scientific discovery process in general, and in the search for new materials for
the next generation fuel-cell technology in particular. The project brings
together faculty and students, providing training in materials science,
engineering, and computer science.