* 1258418
* 2013 Coastal Ocean Circulation GRC/GRS, being held June 1-2;  June 2-7, 2013 at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Mark Stacey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2014
* USD 28,500.00

In June 2013, the Coastal Ocean Circulation Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and
an associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will be held at the University of
New England to advance our understanding of coastal ocean circulation, and to
enhance the development of junior scholars. The Gordon Research Conference
brings together a diverse set of scholars working in coastal and estuarine
oceanography to share the latest discoveries and theories in both formal
presentation and informal settings. The Gordon Research Seminar, which will be
held the weekend prior to the GRC and is a new addition for 2013, is a one day
workshop organized and administered by graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars to provide them with an opportunity to share their work and to develop
connections with peers. Discussions with other GRC chairs have indicated that
the inclusion of a GRS has facilitated the interaction of graduate students with
senior scientists during the GRC itself. The Coastal Ocean Circulation GRC is
widely held to be the most important meeting in the community scientifically,
and it is almost certainly the most valuable conference for scholars early in
their careers due to the opportunities for interaction with colleagues spanning
a wide range of career stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The program for the 2013 Coastal Ocean Circulation GRC will
highlight the latest developments in the field, both scientifically and
technologically, and will synthesize recent advances in the understanding of the
physical processes determining circulation and mixing in the coastal ocean.
Invited speakers have been drawn from international leaders and emerging stars
in the field, and lectures will address diverse range of topics, including a
range of physical processes, the dynamics of specific environments,
interdisciplinary applications, and technological development. The steering
committee members will also serve as discussion leaders and will work to ensure
provocative discussion that is inspired by the lectures. This free exchange of
ideas is a hallmark of the Gordon Research Conferences in general, and is one of
the characteristics that make this meeting so important in the field of coastal
and estuarine physical oceanography. Almost half of the conference time is
allocated to informal interactions among participants, which is extremely
effective at aiding the development of junior scientists, and reinforces the
free and open discussion culture of the GRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade, the coastal ocean circulation GRC has
made a concerted effort to ensure participation by women and under-represented
minorities, as well as scientists with disabilities. This year, the GRS offers a
new opportunity to engage these groups in the GRC, and we will take explicit
steps to reach out and ensure their participation, most notably through travel
and registration grants to students and postdoctoral scholars from these groups.
For 2013, the scientific steering committee, which is itself diverse in its
members, has ensured that the invited speakers include members of groups that
are traditionally under-represented in the field. This is particularly valuable
at the GRC, where the informal interactions of the week provide an opportunity
for members of under-represented groups that are established in their careers to
provide mentoring to and to become role models for more junior scientists. Past
GRC's have led to new collaborations that cut across disciplines and career
stages, and have provided opportunities for junior scientists to build their
careers. The addition of the GRS in 2013 will reinforce this attribute of the
meeting, and will provide the students in attendance an opportunity to develop
confidence in their work, and to establish connections with both their peers and
senior scientists that are much deeper than those that are possible at other
scientific meetings.