* 1258290
* EAGER: US IGNITE: An Application-Aware, Cross-Layer Design for Audio-Visual Applications in Medical Ambulances
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,842.00

This project will design and trial a new service called WiMed that provides
high-quality, robust data communications between moving ambulances and the
destination hospital. WiMed maps a small number of large flows to multiple
wireless networks. WiMed is application aware and able to cross-layer and cross-
application optimization when connectivity characteristics change due to
ambulance location. The communications capability will enable high-quality
audio-visual links and real-time patient data transfers between the ambulance
and the receiving emergency room enabling an early assessment of a patient
condition by a doctor and thereby reducing treatment delay. It will also enable
trialing of feeding real-time traffic video feeds to the ambulance driver in
support of navigation guidance for ambulances. Wireless networks that will be
used in the project include the UW-Madison GENI WiMax network, available WiFi
networks, and various public 3G/4G networks. The WiMed system will be trialed on
ambulances operated by the West Allis Fire Department, part of the Milwaukee
County Emergency Medical Services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable
medical ambulances to establish high-quality, robust audio-video and data links
between the ambulance and emergency room doctors thus leading to faster
treatment for patients needing emergency services. All students involved in the
project will acquire significant hand-on implementation, experimentation and
deployment experience in wireless systems applied to socially important
applications.