* 1258040
* Root-to-shoot Signaling: the bps Signal Interferes with Stem Sell Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2021
* Leslie Sieburth, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 01/31/2021
* USD 621,264.00

Agricultural productivity is driven by photosynthetic activity, which occurs in
tissues of plant shoot systems. A major limitation to shoot size (and
productivity) arises from adverse soil conditions, such as drought, compaction,
and saline conditions. Plant roots are biological sensors that detect these
adverse conditions, and by an unknown mechanism, cause the shoot system to slow
or arrest growth. This project will test whether the root-to-shoot stress signal
is the same mobile signaling molecule that is produced in Arabidopsis bps1
mutants. BYPASS (BPS) proteins function to prevent synthesis of a small
metabolite, the bps signal, which moves from the root and arrests shoot growth.
The principle investigator hypothesizes that the bps signal is a previously
undescribed plant hormone, and preliminary data indicate that it stops growth by
interfering with stem cell identity. Approaches include a full analysis of gene
expression changes in shoots treated with the bps signal, and molecular and
genetic experiments to uncover the mechanism of bps signal gene regulation.
Experiments will also investigate whether, in normal plants, the bps signal is
produced in response to stress. These experiments will use transgenic
Arabidopsis plants that carry markers that respond to the bps signal and will
use metabolomic approaches to measure bps signal levels. These investigations
are critical for developing strategies to reducing agricultural crop losses due
to soil-related stresses. Investigators involved in this research also provide
educational opportunities to the community including girl scouts, K-12 schools,
prisoners, and local garden clubs, and develop laboratory teaching materials for
college and high school students.