* 1258622
* Collaborative Research:  The Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study: Sustained Biogeochemical, Ecosystem, and Ocean Change Observations and Linkages in the Subtropical North Atlantic.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 6,002,177.00

Long-term time series are a powerful tool for investigating ocean physics and
biogeochemistry, its effects on the global carbon cycle, and its response to
climate change. In particular, the research goals of the Bermuda Atlantic Time-
series Study (BATS) program at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS)
have been, and continue to be, improving our understanding of the time-varying
components of the ocean carbon cycle, related biogenic elements of interest
(e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus, silica), and identifying the relevant physical,
chemical and ecosystem properties responsible for this variability. The existing
24 years of data from BATS provide robust constraints on seasonal and year-over-
year variability, the response of the Sargasso Sea ecosystem to natural climate
variability and detection of potential climate change signals. Multi-decadal
observations at BATS also provide critically needed rates of change in the ocean
carbon cycle, CO2 sinks-sources in the North Atlantic and the longest global
record of ocean acidification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout its twenty-five
years of operation, the objectives of BATS have been: (1) to document the
temporal variability in nutrient cycles and biological communities; (2) to
quantify the role of ocean-atmosphere coupling and climate forcing on air-sea
exchange of CO2, and carbon export to the ocean interior; (3) to study the role
of physical forcing (e.g., surface fluxes of heat, freshwater and momentum) on
planktonic community structure and function, including new and export
productivity; (4) to study the role of climate-induced variability in surface
fluxes on planktonic community structure and function, and (5) to provide for
development/validation of new oceanographic tools and technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This renewal award to BIOS and the Bigelow Laboratory for
Ocean Sciences will provide funding to continue the BATS program through years
26-30. While continuing the core goals, the research team will address several
new long-term questions that have developed from the previous BATS data. These
questions are related to the: (1) impact of eddies on interannual variability in
winter mixing; (2) detection of climate change signals in surface and deep
waters of the Sargasso; (3) impact of ocean acidification on primary production,
partitioning of freshly produced organic carbon between dissolved and
particulate phases and remineralization of sedimenting carbon; (4) coupling of
particulate and dissolved nitrogen and phosphorus cycles, controlling mechanisms
and their relationships to the canonical Redfield Ratio, and; (5) reconciliation
of integrative geochemical estimates of carbon export and the variety of
observational records of carbon export. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The BATS program has strong and diverse broader impacts, contributing to the
field of ocean sciences by providing high quality ocean observations and data
for empiricists and modelers, and a framework from which researchers can
conceive and test hypotheses. Indeed, a number of focused process-oriented
research programs (e.g., EDDIES, TROPHIC BATS) have spun off from hypotheses
arising from BATS data. BATS and these related programs continue to generate a
large number of well-cited publications that make important contributions to the
field and advance our understanding of the oceans. PIs of the BATS program have
been and continue to be dedicated to the training and mentorship of both
undergraduate and graduate students (including those with direct BATS PIs
supervision and others via ancillary programs). The oceanographic facilities at
BIOS allow the project team to train students and technicians and to collaborate
with other researchers in a manner few other institutions can provide. Through
hands-on laboratory, cruise and data synthesis activities, BATS will continue to
directly aid the U.S. national effort to improve the understanding of the
oceanic carbon cycle and the impact on global climate