* 1258111
* Molecular and coding principles of perceptual learning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* David Blake, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Learning and memory processes in the adult are diverse and rely on different
brain structures. Adult perceptual learning allows an organism to survive by
adapting its responses to salient sensory stimuli in its environment, such as
salient sounds, and relies on intact function of the primary auditory cortex
(A1). Neither the time course, nor the molecular mechanisms underlying this form
of learning are currently known. Previous work supported by NSF showed that,
unlike the current notions of A1 plasticity during auditory perceptual learning,
the early stages are marked with a wide-spread reshaping of A1 with some areas
of decreased, while others of increased responsiveness. Importantly, these
opposing, but concurrently-occurring, changes rely on the learning-induced
synthesis of a protein necessary for synaptic plasticity and learning, Arc. A
primary goal here is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of how Arc interacts
with several other proteins to simultaneously direct these divergent changes.
The hypothesis is that decreased responsiveness is due to interactions with
proteins that enhance endocytosis of receptors that increase synaptic
excitability, while enhancement of responses is due to Arc's interaction with
other proteins leading to dendritic spine reshaping. This idea will be tested by
assessing the relative abundance of these proteins in areas with
electrophysiologically-documented decrease or increase of responsiveness,
respectively. Other predictions of the model will be tested by measuring the
electrophysiological responses across A1 at different stages of learning. The
data will be used to create a computational model of perceptual learning. The
broader impact of this work includes involvement of minority undergraduates from
several disciplines, as well as professional training of postdoctoral fellows.
Developing a working team that includes students from several local universities
will result in developing a public resource, a website with several age-
appropriate sections that introduce cortical plasticity and cortically-supported
learning and memory.