* 1258654
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: Sooting Behavior of Conventional and Renewable Diesel-Fuel Compounds and Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

CBET 1258654&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lisa D. Pfefferle, Yale University; Co-PI:
Charles S. McEnally, Yale University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: Charles Mueller,
Sandia National Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;Collaborator: William Cannella, Chevron
Corporation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop surrogate fuels that
can replicate the sooting characteristics of conventional and alternative diesel
fuels. Surrogate fuels are mixtures with only a few chemical components that
mimic the properties of real fuels that contain thousands of components. They
are necessary to perform computational simulations of diesel engines because any
detailed chemical kinetic mechanism that included all of the significant
components in real fuels would be prohibitively large and render computations
unfeasible. During the project sooting tendencies will be measured in laboratory
burners for individual components representative of diesel fuels. This data will
be used to develop quantitative relationships between fuel structure and soot
production that can be used to estimate sooting tendencies of unmeasured
chemical compounds and aid in the development of less sooting fuels. Sooting
tendencies will also be measured for mixtures to develop and test rules for
predicting the sooting tendencies of mixtures from those of their individual
components. Then sooting tendencies will be measured for real diesel fuels and
surrogate mixtures formulated to have the same sooting tendency. Finally, the
surrogates will be tested in the laboratory burners and in actual diesel
engines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Emissions of carbonaceous soot particles from
diesel engines into the atmosphere directly harm human health; therefore new
engine designs and concepts that improve fuel efficiency are only viable if they
do not increase soot emissions. Computer aided design tools are critical for
optimizing engines to be simultaneously efficient and nonpolluting and this is
not possible using real fuels due to the large number of fuel components. This
research will develop recipes for simple fuel mixtures that mimic soot formation
in engines yet can be easily computed. In addition, the structure property
relationships we develop will be broadly useful for scientists building
surrogates for yet to be developed fuels.