* 1258839
* EAGER: Drastic Enhancement of the Electrocatalytic Activity of Metal Nanoparticles in Oxygen Reduction by Organic Capping Ligands
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 111,480.00

Technical Merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the issues surrounding fossil fuel
energy, it is important to develop viable technologies for the efficient
utilization of reusable and green energy sources. Fuel cells represent a
powerful alternative, representing a unique technology that will make
substantial contributions to our energy needs by converting the chemical energy
stored in small organic molecule fuels into electricity, and more importantly,
exert minimal negative impacts on the environments. Yet, despite tremendous
progress in recent years, there remain several challenges in the wide-spread
commercialization of fuel cells. One of these entails the development of
effective catalysts for both the anodic and cathodic reactions so as to achieve
the current density that is needed for practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the search for effective
electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), prior research has
mostly focused on the structural characteristics of noble metal nanoparticles
(e.g., size, shape, elemental composition, etc.). Professor Shaowei Chen of the
University of California-Santa Cruz, believes there is an alternative catalyst
type that has promise. He believes that ORR may be manipulated and optimized by
the organic capping ligands for the nanoparticles, which have been largely
ignored and unexplored. In fact, conventional&lt;br/&gt;wisdom dictates that
nanoparticle catalysts should be free of organic passivating layers. Chen?s
recent studies show that the nanoparticle electrocatalytic activity may actually
be&lt;br/&gt;drastically enhanced by deliberate chemical functionalization with
selected organic ligands,&lt;br/&gt;despite the fact that part of the
nanoparticle surface is covered with the organic ligands. This EAGER award is to
continue the exploration of this exciting new area of research,
including&lt;br/&gt;further and more detailed studies to establish a fundamental
framework for the largely unknown performance impact of metal nanoparticles
functionalized with metal-carbon covalent linkages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in fuel cell technology are
anticipated to affect many aspects of our lives and to&lt;br/&gt;benefit the
society as a whole. This is a relatively novel approach to prepare metal
nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;stabilized by metal-carbon covalent bonds with unique
aromatic derivatives and to examine&lt;br/&gt;their applications as effective
and viable catalysts for the electroreduction of oxygen, a
critical&lt;br/&gt;process at fuel cell cathode. Improved performance may
ultimately bring fuel cells into practical reality as energy sources. The
research activities will be closely integrated with various educational outreach
programs at the university (e.g., the UC LEADS, ACCESS, and SURF programs) that
target minority, women, and disadvantaged undergraduate students, as well as the
UCSC COSMOS summer school for talented high-school students. These research
internships provide a valuable platform for the students to acquire skills that
are unattainable in a conventional classroom.