* 1258595
* EAGER: Computational Models, Topological Games, and Classical Information
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Michael Mislove, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2015
* USD 292,369.00

Modern computer systems are too complex to be analyzed directly, and often
mathematical models are employed to analyze such computer systems to understand
how well they function and whether they operate correctly. The area of
computational models is devoted to constructing such models, and to their
application to solve problems in computing, such as specifying computational
devices designed to solve specific problems. Quite distinct from this, the area
of Diophantine approximation from number theory studies how well real numbers
can be approximated by rational numbers - ones that can be expressed a quotient
of two integers. Despite dating back to the time of Diophantus of Alexandria,
there are many deep questions here that remain unsolved. Finally, the study of
classical communication channels forms the basis for the area of classical
information theory that plays a fundamental role in many aspects of everyday
life. This project will explore relationships between emerging techniques for
building computational models, and research in classical information and in
Diophantine approximation. These represent very diverse areas of mathematics,
computer science and information theory, and a goal of the project is to develop
links between them that reveal common underlying principles that can be applied
to solve problems in each area. Such principles will lead to methods that can be
used from one area to solve problems in the other areas.

The proposed work spans a number of research areas: domain theory and
computational models; topological games; classical information and families of
classical channels; analysis of complex systems; and applications to Schmidt
games and Diophantine approximation. Recent results on channel capacity that
underpin the work are based on a topological view of channels and their capacity
that offers a unique way to analyze related families of channels. The proposed
analysis of existing approaches to constructing domain models of spaces - the
co-algebraic approach as opposed to one based on Choquet games - will explore
the relationship between these approaches, and will provide insights into their
applicability to new and interesting problems in the range of areas listed
above. Using domain-theoretic approaches to analyze Schmidt games is a novel
idea that should prove useful in understanding these games and how they differ
from ones such as Choquet games.