* 1258679
* Workshop: Improving capacity for game-based research to scale
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Kurt Squire, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 99,704.00

A growing number of educators are looking to game-based learning approaches to
increase interest in and understanding of major science mathematics, engineering
and technology (STEM) concepts. Serious games have demonstrated the capacity to
engage learners in complex domains through role playing and problem solving. A
key hypothesis driving many educators' interest in serious games is that they
might reach broader scale than previous educational innovations because of their
capacity to engage learners, give teachers highly polished learning resources,
and provide parents, teachers, administrators and students tools for assessing
learning. As examples of empirically-tested game-based learning materials
proliferate, the field might benefit by connecting researchers, teachers,
developers and policy makers so as to increase the field's capacity to reach
scale.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop addresses the need to connect a wide
range of experts involved in game development and research to develop and
disseminate best practices. The workshop will also establish a network hub where
educators and developers can find tools for implementing game-based curricula.
Specifically, the project will bring together approximately 100 early
contributors, including researchers, teachers, game designers and publishers, to
inform the next phases of research, development, and production in the field of
games and learning. A closed beta experience will launch in late winter 2013 to
support participants preparing for the workshop followed by a public workshop at
the annual Games+Learning+Society in June 2013. The goal is to build the basis
for a nationwide network of teachers, developers, academics, and industry
leaders. If successful, this model will be held at other campuses, including
Boston / MIT, Arizona State, and Vanderbilt.