* 1258162
* Phylogenomics of Hypocreales: evolution of shifts in fungal ecologies and nutritional modes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Joseph Spatafora, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

Fungi are remarkable for the ecological niches they occupy and the ecological
services they provide in both human-made and natural ecosystems. This project
will investigate the genomic evolution of a large order of fungi, Hypocreales,
which is diverse in both number of species and ecological functions. This
research will involve sequencing of genomes and comparative analyses that focus
on genome scale changes that promote shifts in ecologies (e.g., decomposers vs.
pathogens) and nutritional modes (e.g., plant vs. animal-based carbon sources).
The project is interdisciplinary and collaborative, employing tools from
biological and computational sciences and researchers from three continents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi are promising sources of pharmaceuticals,
alternatives for control of insect pests and bioremediation of contaminated
soils, and essential in the development of biofuels. In order to exploit fungi
for the betterment of society, however, a more robust understanding of patterns
and processes that have led to the diversification of their genomes and
subsequently their metabolism is necessary. To achieve these advancements, more
students and young researchers trained in an interdisciplinary manner are
needed, with the result being a qualified generation of scientists in academia,
industry and government agencies equipped to study biological solutions to the
challenges of the modern World.