* 1258218
* Function and Assembly of the Novel MLT-10 Family of Extracellular Matrix Proteins in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Alison Frand, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Most animals grow by periodically shedding and rebuilding external skeletons
(cuticles). However, the mechanisms by which cuticles are removed and remade
have not been fully characterized in any organism. The molting cycles of
roundworms are particularly interesting, because their skin is composed mostly
of collagen produced by cells similar to human skin cells. Proliferation of
these stem cells is coordinated with the molting cycle. This research focuses on
characterization of the molecular mechanisms that orchestrate these complex
events, using a combination of genetic, biochemical, cell and molecular
biological, and biophysical approaches in the model roundworm Caenorhabditis
elegans. Previous studies revealed a family of extracellular proteins, MLT10,
that are required for proper cuticle formation and this work will follow up to
uncover novel but conserved mechanisms that regulate extracellular matrix and
stem cell dynamics. Similar processes are critical for development, tissue
homeostasis, and wound repair; deregulation of these processes can lead to
disorders of skin and connective tissue.

The anticipated scientific findings will produce new tools that will enable
further studies of the role of extracellular matrix proteins in development. The
activities will also educate and advance a diverse group of young scientists,
including more than 120 students who will participate in an innovative and
effective curriculum on scientific writing. The curriculum and related
activities associated with pedagogical effort will be disseminated widely to
enable faculty at other institutions to implement similar programs.