* 1258730
* Intensive Grantsmanship Workshop (IGW)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Felicia Mensah, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 02/28/2015
* USD 44,936.00

This project from Teachers College, Columbia University brings together a group
of women academicians representing STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) and related fields (e.g. psychology, cognitive development,
physiology) for three days of strategically focused networking, panel
discussions, and paired mentoring. Intellectually, the project supports a
workshop aimed at increasing awareness and providing access to networking and
grantsmanship opportunities to support education research. It seeks to address
why more women, especially African American women, doctoral students, faculty,
and administrators do not apply for grants and also obtain grant award from
funding sources external to colleges and universities. The project explores ways
to mitigate barriers that might interfere with future networking and funding
opportunities. Major topics for the workshop include increasing scholarship,
knowledge about mentorship, funding sources, support at the institutional level
to submit a proposal, collaborators at the university level, funds to travel to
meet with peers and funding agencies in preparation for writing proposals, peer
network at universities to offer support and training in proposal development,
and the lack of publications to increase research
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the broader impact perspective, the
project focuses on ways to help women improve their research by becoming more
knowledgeable about grant funds to support their work. In addition, the standard
to award promotion and tenure to faculty in higher education encompasses
research, teaching, and service. Core to obtaining a tenured faculty appointment
involves the procurement of external funding. In the past, it has been difficult
for females, in particular, African American females to obtain grant funding,
which is fundamental to the career development of faculty. Hence, this workshop
focuses on the big picture regarding women in academia, their need to obtain
funding for their research and scholarship, and their need to connect with other
women in the academy. The workshop builds on existing knowledge and practice
from relevant and prior efforts in the academy and beyond. It uses the combined
strength of women as an effective way to improve research and publishing through
networking and grantsmanship. The outcomes include strengthening the network
between women academicians for support and learning in STEM and related fields,
increasing knowledge about grant funding resources and funding opportunities,
and improving mentoring to facilitate growth personally and professionally
relative to research in education.