* 1258828
* Collaborative Proposal: A New Model For Chemical Ecology: Integrating Chemistry, Genetics and Behavior to Understand the Role of Individual Scent  in a Colonial Nesting Seabird.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Susan Ebeler, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 654,000.00

Personal odors can play an essential role in communication and individual
recognition. Scents make be influenced by genes that are critical for immune
function, including genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). This
study will marry chemical ecology with modern forensic science techniques
establishing the Leach's storm-petrel (Oceanodroma leucorhoa), as a model system
studying what appears to be a critical but little studied aspect of social
interactions in birds.This long-lived, burrow-nesting species has an excellent
sense of smell, making them an ideal model for this investigation. Extensive
field study sites have already been established on Bon Portage Island, Nova
Scotia, Canada, where over 300 breeding pairs have been genotyped for the MHC
class 2B gene. The aim is to characterize the individual odor profiles of these
genotyped birds using state-of-the-art chemical techniques developed for human
scent discrimination. Specific research objectives are a) to test whether
individual birds produce odor signatures related to their MHC-genotype, b) to
determine if birds use MHC-related scent marks to label their home burrows, and
c) to determine whether the scent of an individual bird is an indicator of
individual quality, health and fitness, or plays a role in mate choice
decisions. Showing that any species of bird uses MHC-related odors in mate
choice decisions would represent a paradigm shift in how biologists think about
mate choice decisions in birds, and will provide insights relevant to avian
immunology and health in a wide-ranging species. Just as importantly, many
species of petrels and albatrosses are facing extinction, and understanding the
factors driving mate choice and colony demographics will make a valuable
contribution to comprehensive management plans for endangered species. Published
phenotypic/chemical or genetic data will be deposited in the Dryad Repository
(http://datadryad.org/) or submitted to Genbank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/), and deposited in Merritt Data Repository
(http://www.dataone.org/software-tools/merritt-repository-service).