* 1258439
* EAGER: Identifying Challenges in the Integrated Design of Materials and Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Janet Allen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 12/31/2014
* USD 87,499.00

The research objective of this EArly Concepts Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to develop methods for modeling and design of lamina emergent
mechanisms (LEMs). These special types of compliant mechanisms are fabricated
from planar materials (lamina) but are able to produce motion that emerges out
of the fabrication plane. The research will result in methods which are general
enough to apply across multiple size regimes and that can be exploited in
diverse applications. The research approach progresses from the development of
simple components and basic mechanisms, to the creation of devices capable of
complex motions and sophisticated tasks. LEM components and basic mechanisms
will be designed, fabricated, and tested to validate the models, identify
weaknesses, and demonstrate results. Deliverables include a catalog of
fundamental components and basic mechanisms, modeling and analysis tools,
demonstration and validation via hardware, documentation of research results,
engineering student education, and engineering research experiences for pre-
service teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will provide an opportunity to create compact, cost-effective devices
that are capable of accomplishing sophisticated mechanical tasks. Example
applications include orthopedic implants that have specified motion
characteristics but are small during insertion, and microelectromechanical
systems with precise out-of-plane motion. Devices made possible by the research
will offer the advantages of planar fabrication, a flat initial state, and
monolithic composition. The results will be disseminated to allow the creation
of commercial devices that have increased precision, reduced cost, reduced
weight, and improved recyclability. Graduate and undergraduate engineering
students and pre-service teachers will benefit through classroom instruction and
involvement in the research. Students studying to be 6-12 technology and pre-
engineering teachers will be engaged to provide them firsthand research
experience that they can draw on throughout their teaching careers.