* 1258091
* Pheromonal control of gamete determination and differentiation in Ceratopteris
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Jo Ann Banks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

In animals, the gender of an individual and the gamete it produces is typically
determined by a process that depends on specific chomosomes, such as the X and Y
chromosomes in humans. Very little is known about this process in plants despte
the fact that the production of gametes is essential for plants to reproduce.
This project seeks to discover how plant gender is determined using a species
whose gender is epigenetically determined by a chemical pheromone that is
produced by hermaphroditic individuals and causes its neighbors to become male.
To determine how the presence or absence of the pheromone determines gender type
at the molecular level, all of the genes that are expressed throughout male and
hermaphrodite development will be identified by sequencing expressed genes, and
co-expression networks underlying gender determination and differentiation
identified. Using a simple reverse genetics approach (RNAi), the functions of
transcription factors that change significantly in their expression with respect
to gender will be tested. The discovery of plant gender-determining genes has
important implications in food production, as grain, fruit and seed production
depend on a plant's ability to produce egg and sperm at the right time and
place. The research described will be performed by undergraduate and graduate
students, including members of groups underrepresented in science, providing
them with training in biology, biochemistry, statistics, bioinformatics and
critical thinking.