* 1258154
* ARTS:   Systematics of the darkling beetle genus Eleodes: Integrating morphology, DNA, and biodiversity informatics to resolve a taxonomically impeded genus
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Nico Franz, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Mindell
* 04/30/2015
* USD 458,103.00

Eleodes is a flightless genus of darkling beetles (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae)
endemic to western North America. Commonly called stink beetles, Eleodes are
known for their "headstanding" behavior and the noxious chemicals they eject
when threatened. This project will open the genus to other disciplines by
addressing century-old systematic challenges through a comprehensive
phylogenetic research strategy and an innovative, content management system-
based data accumulation approach. It will create a virtual specimen-based
knowledge environment for Eleodes taxonomy, morphology, and natural history
linking specimens, images, and reference works to associated taxonomic,
phylogenetic, ontologically annotated anatomical and geographic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will strongly advance our understanding of
Eleodes and tenebrionid systematics through focused training of a postdoctoral
scholar, a Ph.D. student, and minimally 8-12 undergraduate students. Virtually
all data generated will be available through the project web portal and
secondarily uploaded to EOL and Morphbank. The scientific community and general
public will be engaged through a synergistic extension of Eleodes specimen data
and images to the "Southwest Collections of Arthropods Network" (SCAN), the
creation of a biodiversity informatics lab module, and by incorporating Eleodes
biology and diversity themes into ASU's outreach program, including the
development of learning applications and implementation of school and museum
activities.