* 1258027
* Collaborative Research: Unique Structural Proteins and Cross-linking Reactions that Control Physical Properties of Insect Exoskeletons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Stevin Gehrke, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 303,977.00

The exoskeleton of insects functions as both skin and supporting skeleton. It is
formed from a material called cuticle, composed of proteins and a carbohydrate
(chitin), and simple organic compounds known as catechols. Despite this limited
compositional palette, cuticle has remarkably diverse properties, ranging from
soft and flexible to hard and rigid. It is quite strong, but it is lightweight
compared with bone of vertebrate animals, because cuticle lacks mineral
components. The mechanical properties of insect exoskeleton have certainly
contributed to the overwhelming success of insects in adapting to nearly every
habitat and in their development of the ability to fly. This proposal describes
experiments to investigate the biochemical compounds and chemical reactions that
form insect cuticle and to understand how these result in cuticular regions with
differing mechanical properties. This interdisciplinary project, involving
biochemists and engineers, makes use of the red flour beetle, Tribolium
castaneum, as a model organism to investigate the relationships of cuticle
protein properties and chemistry with the development of rigid cuticle. The
proposed approaches combine molecular and mechanical analysis to yield advances
in fundamental understanding of cuticle biochemistry and development of
potentially useful new materials based on cuticle chemistry. Broader impacts
resulting from the research will include education and training for
undergraduate and graduate students. Specific efforts at broadening
opportunities for participation in science will include research experiences by
diverse undergraduate students and outreach to middle school and high school
students. Advances in understanding of this critical physiological system in
insects will lead to a deeper knowledge of insect biology will aid in producing
new types of cross-linked biopolymers based on the chemistry of cuticle. This
new class of 'bioinspired' materials has potential technological applications in
medicine, pharmacy and agriculture.