* 1258609
* NSF/DOE Advanced Combustion Engines: Development of a Dynamic Wall Layer Model for LES of Internal Combustion Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Matthias Ihme, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

CBET 1258609&lt;br/&gt;PI (Institution): Ihme (Stanford U), Sicke/Reuss (U
Michigan), Fajardo (W. Mich. U.) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development and
implementation of a physics-based predictive model for near-wall fluid motion
and heat transfer in internal combustion engines provides an enabling
technology. The model, derived from fundamental, high-fidelity simulations and
state-of-the art experiments, leads to new capabilities for the implementation
of lean-burn and low-temperature combustion (LTC) engines. 12% fuel economy
gains over throttled spark-ignition gasoline engines were demonstrated and up to
20% are expected. Operated on Diesel-like fuels, gains for LTC engines are
expected to be in excess of 10%. The near-wall flow is not fundamentally
understood for in-ternal combustion engines, but has leading impact on heat
transfer and affects chemical reactivity near walls. These processes in turn
affect the stability and thus the efficiency of LTC engine op-eration and
pollutant formation. Detailed numerical simulation and high-speed laser imaging
ex-periments will be conducted with the objective of obtaining fundamental
understanding about in-cylinder near-wall structure and developing a wall-
function model for large-eddy simulations. Validation studies in optical engines
will be performed to demonstrate the applicability and per-formance of the model
for a wide range of operating modes and conditions. Integrated into this
research are several collaborative activities with industry and national
laboratories to accelerate progress at both the fundamental as well as the
application end of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work is
integrated into a range of innovative learning and outreach activities that
contribute to recruiting and educating the scientific and engineering work
force. Undergraduate, graduate research assistants, and postdoctoral researchers
are involved at all levels with the pro-ject. Several educational and outreach
activities are integrated into this project, including the re-cruitment of high-
school students through the "Engineering Pipeline" program and opportunities to
participate in internal research exchange programs. These unique learning and
outreach ele-ments are in line with the University of Michigan's College of
Engineering's mission to have at least half of the undergraduate students gain
an international experience as part of their College education. Research data
are disseminated to the public via the Engine Combustion Network. Production and
dissemination of articles, videos, and other media for lay audiences are
facilitated through NSF's Office of Legislative and Public Affairs and venues
such as "Science for Every-one" and "LiveScience.com."