* 1258640
* MOOCs and the Ethnography of Media Socialization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 441,475.00

How is the much-heralded advent of MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) impacting
higher education culturally, socially, and institutionally? To address this
question, investigators Graham Jones and Susan Silbey of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology employ participant observation, interviewing and
discourse analysis to study of the design, implementation, and reception of edX,
one of the world's principal sites for the development of this new educational
technology. This award will support research in three areas. First, the process
of designing of edX's educational platform, particularly as this platform
extends beyond engineering, to social sciences and the humanities. Researchers
will focus on the learning theories, tacit assumptions and value preferences the
designers build into the platform. Second, the computer-mediated communication
(CMC) among the students within edX forums, through which students engage in
collaborative teaching and learning. Researchers will track students' expressed
and implicit goals, commitments, and critical engagement with the course work,
looking for varied patterns of involvement and evaluation. Third, the welter of
competing interpretations online and in print surrounding MOOCs, which reflects
the broader cultural context in which this technology is evolving. Here,
researchers will juxtapose the culturally circulating accounts of this new
educational technology with the experiences of it as displayed by students and
observed by the researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viewing this research as a way
to advance theories of social learning, Jones and Silbey approach MOOCs not only
as a new type of formal education but also, and more importantly, as a practice
of socialization in which knowledge transmission is connected to interactions
through which persons forge both identities and community. From this
perspective, as sites of socialization, MOOCs may have profound consequences for
the way not just students, but also engineers and educators, experience and
shape not only the form of educational communities but also the content of what
is learned and what kind of persons are valued and developed. The researchers
ultimately seek to elaborate a theoretical framework of media socialization,
emphasizing how practices of learning through media and learning to use media
affect how people view themselves and relate to others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
a moment when many people inside and outside the academy are questioning the
value of the historically unique American residential, liberal arts and sciences
model of higher education, Jones and Silbey will produce and publicly
disseminate an empirically grounded understanding of the implications of MOOCs
for individuals, universities, the nation, and the world. The investigators are
particularly eager to help fellow social scientists better understand the
implications of MOOCs for their own fields, and to train undergraduate and
graduate students in ethnographic research on formal and informal socialization
in virtual worlds.