* 1258090
* Identity, function, and transport of lignocellulose-active enzymes in wood-eating (xylotrophic) bivalves (shipworms)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Daniel Distel, Ocean Genome Legacy
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 06/30/2014
* USD 591,000.00

Shipworms are worm-like marine clams that burrow in wood, using wood for both
food and shelter. Because few animals eat wood, there is great interest in those
that can. Previous research in this investigator's laboratory suggested that
shipworms digest wood using a method that is different from any other animal.
Most animals that eat wood, e.g. termites or wood-eating roaches, do so with the
help of enzymes made by bacteria and other microbes that live in their digestive
systems. Shipworms, however, have few bacteria in their digestive systems.
Instead, they rely on bacterial symbionts that live inside the cells of their
gills to produce the digestive enzymes they need. This is unique because no
other known animal relies on intracellular symbionts to produce digestive
enzymes. In this project, the enzymes produced by these bacteria will be
identified in order to characterize their functions, and to determine how these
enzymes are transported from inside the cells of the shipworm's gills to their
digestive system. These enzymes are potentially valuable because they convert
wood, the most abundant biomaterial on earth, into soluble sugars that can be
fermented into renewable biofuels, e.g. ethanol. They may also be used in
production or processing of paper, textiles, detergents, food, animal feed and
waste materials. This project will contribute to Ocean Genome Legacy's ongoing
postdoctoral training and graduate education programs, public outreach for
environmental literacy, and internship programs for undergraduate, high school,
and minority students. The investigators will also work with colleagues in the
Pacific Northwest to develop a STEM education program for Native Alaskan
students and teachers that integrates shipworm biology with traditional Native
Alaskan ecological knowledge and Western science; this program will utilize
educational curricula translated into the Haida language.