* 1258199
* Ecological genomics of ecotypic divergence and incipient speciation in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Matthew Streisfeld, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2018
* USD 675,281.00

Identifying the mechanisms contributing to the formation of new species is
essential for understanding the origins of biological diversity. Speciation, the
biological process of species formation, occurs when barriers to reproduction
evolve between groups. Adaptation to different environments via natural
selection is a pervasive feature of speciation, yet the underlying genetic
changes are poorly understood. This project will investigate the targets of
natural selection that drive the preliminary stages of speciation between
distinct populations of the wildflower Mimulus aurantiacus. Despite adaptive
differences associated with their unique habitats and pollinators, few
additional reproductive barriers have evolved, suggesting that these populations
are at an early stage of speciation. By integrating genomic information with
experiments estimating the strength of natural selection, this project will
provide unprecedented characterization of the roles that ecology and natural
selection play at the beginning of the speciation process.

Mimulus has become a model genus for the study of plant evolutionary ecology,
genomics, and speciation. Consequently, over the past few years, the genomic
resources available in the genus have exploded, the user community has grown,
and the needs for genomic information have become more sophisticated. A major
goal of this project includes development of a key online resource for
exploration, archiving, and sharing of genomic data on natural variation across
Mimulus. These efforts will establish the web infrastructure necessary for
strengthening connections and collaborations worldwide. In addition, this
project will provide integral educational and research opportunities for
students from underrepresented groups, further widening its impact to society.