* 1258714
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: Thermal Barrier Coatings for the LTC Engine - Heat Loss, Combustion, Thermal vs. Catalytic Effects, Emissions, Exhaust Heat
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Eric Jordan, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposed research focuses on elucidating the impact of thermal barrier
coatings (TBC) on the Low Temperature Combustion (LTC) engines, and designing an
engineered coating that will produce the most desirable effects on combustion,
efficiency, and emissions. Autoignition, combustion, and stability in an LTC
engine critically depend on the interplay between the in-cylinder thermal
environment and chemical kinetics. The impact of a thermal barrier on LTC
engines was discovered recently but remains poorly understood. This effort will
generate insight into mechanisms and magnitude of the effects. The research team
will distinguish between the pure thermal and possible catalytic effects of
coatings on thermo-kinetic processes in the cylinder, and quantify the
improvement of engine thermal efficiency, LTC combustion efficiency, reduction
of unburned hydrocarbons (UBHC), and CO emissions. The expected outcomes will
remove some of the remaining obstacles to the practical implementation of LTC
engines and reveal its impact on vehicle fuel economy. In addition to creating
opportunities for PhD students, the research concepts from this project will be
integrated into the courses in the Advanced Powertrain Track at Clemson
University (CU), and incorporated in the unique MS program in Automotive
Engineering that includes design and fabrication of a prototype vehicle. CU will
also utilize outreach programs with a local elementary school and the Southern
Automotive Women?s Forum to encourage young women and men to pursue STEM fields
through immersion in hands-on demonstrations of advanced engine concepts.
Additionally, the team will develop a workshop for the DaVinci Program of
University of Connecticut (the collaborative institution), a flagship activity
that trains inner city teachers in how science and math are applied to
engineering.