* 1258562
* Glial Biology of Learning and Cognition, to be held in Arlington, Virginia, February, 2013
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Beth Stevens, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,999.00

Understanding how learning and memory take place in the brain is one of the
major questions in neuroscience, with important benefits to health and disease,
and practical applications in devising better ways of teaching that are science-
based. Despite decades of research this remains one of the most challenging
questions in brain science. Until recently, all research on learning and memory
at the cellular level was focused on neurons, even though the majority of cells
in the brain are not neurons. These non-neuronal cells, glia, do not generate
electrical impulses, but new research reveals that glia can communicate
chemically and that they can sense and control communication between neurons in
several different ways. Glia are therefore likely to participate in learning and
memory and to provide unique capabilities to information processing that may
resolve some long-standing questions about cognition and learning that have been
elusive. The workshop would synthesize the latest information on glia in
learning and cognition and bring together researchers from traditionally
separate disciplines from across a broad scope that includes cellular, systems-
level, behavioral, and computational neuroscience, to begin to understand how
glia may participate in learning. The two-and-a-half-day workshop would seek to
outline future directions for research on glia in learning, with an emphasis on
identifying how glia may contribute a new direction for research to solve long-
standing problems in the field of learning.

The objectives of this workshop are at the cutting edge of several scientific
disciplines, including cellular neuroscience and the rapidly expanding research
on neuron-glia interactions, human brain imaging during learning, and forging
new directions in neuronal modeling. Broader impacts include: The inclusion of
women scientists and scientists from many nationalities will provide the
opportunity for significant cross-fertilization of ideas between fields and
pioneer new directions of research to explore novel solutions to aspects of
learning that have been difficult to solve from an exclusively neuronal
perspective. The plans for dissemination will make these new findings and new
ideas available to a wide scientific audience through a review article published
in a major scientific journal, a special issue of a journal and a book.