* 1258702
* NSF/DOE Advanced Combustion Engines: Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Investigation of Unsteady Reciprocating Effects on Near-Wall Heat Transfer in Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher White, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 243,557.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1258702 / 1258594 / 1258697&lt;br/&gt;White,
Christopher / Jansons, Marcis / Dubief, Yves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity
to understand and predict heat transfer in internal combustion engines is
critically important for optimizing fuel efficiency, reducing harmful engine-out
emissions, and furthering advanced combustion strategies. This research project
will investigate the effects of rapid transients and reciprocating effects on
heat transfer in engines. The project is motivated by the fact that existing
heat transfer models cannot accurately capture these effects, and in turn cannot
accurately predict heat transfer over a typical drive cycle. The modeling
difficulty is owed to nonlinear interactions between in-cylinder turbulence,
fuel injection, combustion, piston geometry, and piston motion that produce
complex thermal boundary layers along the cylinder walls. The researchers will
use complimentary laboratory and numerical experiments to conduct a systematic
scientific investigation focused on understanding how these nonlinear
interactions affect in-cylinder heat transfer. In parallel to these fundamental
studies, the researchers will develop a novel two-wavelength infrared (IR)
temperature diagnostic capable of acquiring two-dimensional surface temperatures
with very high temporal (kHz) and spatial resolution (&amp;#956;m). This dual-
wavelength IR diagnostic will be used to measure piston surface temperature and
local heat flux in a fired optical engine for varying engine conditions and
combustion modes. The combined objective of these studies is to advance the
fundamental knowledge base of thermal transport in engines and to formulate heat
transfer models that account for the effects of rapid transients and
reciprocating effects in engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
improve upon the robustness of engine heat transfer models so that they can be
used for engineering design. The technological impact is the potential to
optimize engine designs for reduced heat loss, improved thermal efficiency, and
the removal of barriers to practical implementation of low-emission, high
efficiency, low temperature combustion (LTC) engine technologies. The societal
and environmental impacts of improved engine designs and implementation of LTC
engine technologies are improved fuel economy, and a reduction in greenhouse
emissions and atmospheric pollutants. In addition, the project will be used to
attract and train highly qualified undergraduate and graduate students
interested in the fields of energy, combustion, fluid dynamics, and internal
combustion engines. Lastly, the proposed research will be leveraged into
existing K-12 outreach programs by introducing activities focused on project
specific themes, namely transport and internal combustion engines.