* 1258626
* Collaborative Research: NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: Advancing Low Temperature Combustion and Lean Burning Engines for Light- and Heavy-Duty Vehicles with Mi
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Wai Cheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 579,991.00

Abstract #1258653 / Dibble, Robert W. #1258626 / Cheng, Wai K.

The goal of this research project is to help achieve the 54 mile-per-gallon
vehicle mileage target (year 2025) by providing experimental data, simulation
tools and understanding of fundamental phenomena to develop the next generation
of high efficiency engines for vehicles. Our objective is the extension of clean
and efficient low temperature combustion (LTC) technology to operate over the
full load and speed range required of an engine. Two main two technology paths
are explored: 1) partial fuel stratification (PFS) in LTC compression ignition
engines, and 2) microwave assisted spark plugs (µWASP) combined with PFS in
spark-ignited engines. This program has significant collaboration with the
Combustion Research Facility at Sandia National Laboratories, the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Ricardo Inc. ( for automotive testing ), and the Clean Combustion Research
Center of KAUST.

On a fundamental level, this program will provide detailed understanding of the
chemical kinetics that cause pressure-sensitive intermediate temperature heat
release and equivalence ratio sensitivity in gasoline, phenomena that enable
high load boosted LTC with PFS. For the ìWASP technology, this program will
provide understanding of the interactions between the spark discharge, the
microwave field and the stratified mixture in the flame kernel formation
process. Additionally, the fundamental physics behind flame propagation through
a stratified charge will be studied to obtain a comprehensive description of the
PFS ignition process. These scientific insights will be applied, through
fundamentally based phenomenological models, to engines for improving engine
efficiency and lowering emissions.