* 1258767
* Science and Mathematics Scholarship (SAMS) Program to Recruit and Retain High Achieving Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2020
* Joyce Stamm, University of Evansville
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 610,600.00

The University of Evansville Science and Mathematics Scholarship (SAMS) program
provides four-year scholarships to talented and financially needy students
majoring in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, environmental science, mathematics
and physics. The project incorporates multiple student support strategies to
retain students in science and math majors, including new courses, focused
advising and a math and science living/learning environment. One of the new
courses is an interdisciplinary math and science course offered during a summer
bridge program. This hands-on course emphasizes real-life scientific problems
and develops critical thinking through active learning. The second course, a
one-credit college success course that SAMS Scholars take in the first semester,
provides them with study skills and time management tools to help them succeed
in their math and science majors. A team of faculty from each of the represented
departments serves as advisors for the SAMS Scholars. In addition, scholars
receive career advising at a monthly math and science career colloquium, and
informal peer mentoring from upperclass math and science majors. Finally, a
supportive learning community is fostered through a science and math-themed
floor in a residence hall and regular social activities. The SAMS program helps
students make smooth transitions from high school to college and from college to
the workforce or graduate school.