* 1258499
* RUI: Regulation of Water Uptake in Tank Bromeliads
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Gretchen North, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2017
* USD 216,351.00

Tank bromeliads are plants that grow on trees in the forest canopy in the
Neotropics, deriving sustenance from the water and nutrients collected in the
tanks formed at the base of their leaves. In addition to the ecological
importance of tank bromeliads due to the rich communities sustained in and by
the tank water, they are excellent case studies for investigating the role of
environmental variables such as light in governing leaf water uptake. Many
bromeliad species can occur at several positions in the canopy, thus even a
single host tree can provide a range of plants from different light exposures.
The capacity of leaves to transport water, or leaf hydraulic conductance, can
determine a plant's ability to succeed in its environment, and light can
determine that capacity due to long-term effects on leaf anatomy and morphology
and short-term effects on leaf physiology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because tank
bromeliads virtually lack absorptive roots and stems, they also provide
excellent models in which to investigate external and internal regulators of
leaf hydraulic conductance. The relatively simple strap-shape of the leaves as
well as their parallel venation facilitate measurement and modeling of leaf
hydraulic conductance for bromeliads, and their use of tanks as reservoirs
allows manipulation of the water supply to investigate the effects of
environmental and internal regulators. Specifically, light and pH are known to
affect leaf hydraulic conductance at least in part via their effects on
aquaporins, proteins that regulate water movement across membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is truly integrative in that the regulation
of leaf hydraulic conductance will be assessed in the field at the level of
plant responses to light variation within the forest canopy as well as in the
laboratory, using experimental manipulations of light, tank-water pH, and
aquaporin inhibitors. Aquaporin gene expression in leaves from different light
exposures and in different leaf regions will also be measured and compared. For
plants in both field and laboratory, anatomical and morphological traits will be
investigated and incorporated into a model of leaf hydraulic conductance that
will be further informed and tested by microscopic examination of the pathways
indicated by tracer and diagnostic staining. Because the leaves of tank
bromeliads are the organs of both supply and demand, understanding how their
leaf hydraulic conductance is regulated is fundamental to understanding their
ecological function and how they might respond to changes that are rapidly
occurring in tropical forests. The role of tank bromeliads and other plants that
grow in the branches of the tropical tree canopy is predicted to become even
more important as primary forest becomes more fragmented and is replaced by
secondary forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out entirely
by the principal investigator and undergraduate students, both in the field at
La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica and in the laboratory at Occidental
College. A key component of the proposed research is its use of a field station
in Costa Rica, in part because Occidental College's location in Los Angeles
attracts many students with personal and intellectual ties to Latin America. One
major goal of the proposed research is to strengthen those ties and to develop
an international experience for undergraduates that will demonstrate the role of
science in understanding how people and other organisms are linked by global
processes such as water use and changes in forest structure.