* 1258758
* Collaborative Research:   Kin Location, Neighborhood Characteristics, and Residential Migration
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Scott South, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 105,083.00

There is growing consensus that neighborhoods help to shape the well-being of
their residents, affecting educational opportunities, economic outcomes, family
formation decisions, and a range of other behaviors. This observation has
motivated a good deal of research on the factors that affect where people live
and how members of different racial groups and economic classes come to occupy
neighborhoods with very different poverty rates and racial compositions. To
date, most of the research on movement into and out of neighborhoods with
various levels of poverty and different racial composition has focused on the
effects of a narrow set of individual characteristics, largely ignoring the
strong possibility that individuals' residential decisions may be influenced by
their own residential history and the location of their family members. This
project is designed to remedy this neglect, using longitudinal data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) in conjunction with neighborhood-level
data from four decennial U.S. censuses to examine how the location and
characteristics of the neighborhoods inhabited by nuclear and extended family
members (e.g., parents, children, siblings, other relatives) and the
characteristics of the neighborhoods inhabited by individuals earlier in their
lives influence the likelihood of moving between poor and nonpoor neighborhoods
and between neighborhoods of varying racial composition. The project seeks to
answer five main questions: 1) Does the presence of kin in neighborhoods of a
given socioeconomic and racial composition influence the likelihood that
individuals will move out of and into these types of neighborhoods? 2) To what
extent does the association between the characteristics of the neighborhoods
inhabited by kin and individuals' propensity to move from or to those types of
neighborhoods vary by gender, race, socioeconomic status, and life-course
position? 3) Can racial and social class differences in the propensity to move
between poor and nonpoor neighborhoods and between neighborhoods of varying
racial composition be attributed to race and class differences in the types of
neighborhoods inhabited by kin? 4) How does an individual's own residential
history ( the types of neighborhoods they have lived in throughout their lives )
influences their propensity to move between neighborhoods of varying
socioeconomic and racial composition? 5) Do racial and socioeconomic differences
in individuals' neighborhood residential histories help to explain racial and
class differences in the propensity to move out of or into a neighborhood of a
particular socioeconomic or racial composition?

Broader Impacts

The findings of this project promise to enhance our understanding of the
processes through which families and individuals attain residence in
neighborhoods of varying socioeconomic and ethnoracial composition and, in
particular, why low-income and minority families often fail to move to, or
remain in, relatively advantaged neighborhoods even when their socioeconomic
resources would allow them to do so. The project's findings are likely to have
special relevance for housing mobility programs that attempt to facilitate the
migration of poor and/or minority families from disadvantaged inner-city
neighborhoods into more advantaged, often suburban communities. These programs
have met with mixed success, perhaps because low-income and/or minority families
and individuals tend to remain in, or relocate to, largely poor and
predominantly minority neighborhoods in order to provide or to receive social
and economic support from nuclear and extended family members. The inter-
neighborhood migration patterns of poor and minority families may also be
constrained by a housing search process that is often limited to the types of
neighborhoods they have inhabited in the past. Thus, the project holds promise
for advancing our understanding of the types of families and individuals most
likely to be trapped in poor neighborhoods; and hence vulnerable to the
pernicious consequences of "neighborhood effects."