* 1258015
* Roles of miRNAs in Regulating FoxP2 Expression and Song Learning in the Zebra Finch
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* XiaoChing Li, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Taking advantage of the well-documented song behavior and the experimentally
accessible underlying neural circuits in the zebra finch, Taeniopygia guttata,
the goal of this project is to understand the roles of miRNAs in regulating
FOXP2 expression and in vocal learning. The FOXP2 gene encodes a transcription
factor that controls the expression of many downstream genes, which in turn play
important roles in neural circuit development and synaptic plasticity. Mutations
in the human FOXP2 gene cause severe speech and language disorders. Thus studies
of the regulation of the FOXP2 gene provide a novel window into the molecular
mechanisms of language development. Sequence analysis has identified several
miRNAs that target FOXP2 3?-UTR. It is hypothesized that miRNAs regulate FOXP2,
and via FOXP, play a role in vocal development. This hypothesis will be tested
in the zebra finch animal model using a combination of molecular, cellular, and
behavioral approaches. Results of the work will establish a new post-
transcriptional regulatory mechanism for FOXP2 expression. Because both the
FOXP2 gene and miRNAs are highly conserved through evolution, insights gained
from these experiments are highly relevant to understanding the roles of miRNAs
in the development and evolution of human language.

Carrying out the work will provide opportunities to train students in
neuroscience research with a multidisciplinary approach. A combined effort of
teaching, mentoring students, and conducting community outreach activities will
disseminate progress in neuroscience to students, improve scientific literacy
among the public, and nurture the future generation of scientists. Resources
generated by the project, including nucleic acid sequences and constructs and
zebra finch song recordings will be deposited in the songbird community database
for access by other researchers in the songbird field.