* 1258504
* EAGER: Aqueous Phase Catalytic Processing of Lignin to Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Bin Yang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,664.00

Abstract

#1258504 Yang

Lignin is a natural amorphous polymer that acts as the essential glue that gives
plants their structural integrity. It is a main constituent of lignocellulosic
biomass (15-30% by weight, 40% by energy), together with cellulose and
hemicelluloses. The conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to biofuels is
primarily focused on converting cellulose and hemicellulose in feedstocks into
biofuels. These approaches assume that the lignin fraction will be used
primarily for heat and power production. This current vision undervalues
lignin's potential to address this nation's high quality liquid fuel
requirements. Lignin conversion has significant potential as a source for the
sustainable production of fuels and bulk chemicals. Despite the potential, the
conversion of lignin to biofuels has proven to be challenging.

Professor Bin Yang of Washington State University believes the fundamental
hurdles in lignin-to-hydrocarbon catalytic conversion process could be
surmounted if creative manipulation towards lignin reactivity, catalyst
selectivity and enhanced scale of transformation is employed. Many unknowns
remain which lead to Yang's specific objectives for this EAGER proposal:

(1) To improve understanding of lignin chemistry and reactivity (including
chemical properties, solubility, molecular weight, and monolignol composition)
in the depolymerization and hydrodeoxygenation reactions that lead to
hydrocarbons; (2) To establish state-of-the-art NMR techniques (e.g. HR-MAS NMR)
to probe structural features, modification and yields of lignin intermediates
and products when processed under hydrogen and with supported metal and solid
acid catalysts; (3) To understand the reaction chemistry and kinetics of lignin
depolymerization and hydrodeoxygenation to hydrocarbons by screening a wide
range of catalyst systems leading to high yield and oxygen removal.

As an example of the needs for this information, to date, virtually no published
data has been reported on conversion of the lignin fraction left after ethanol
production from lignocellulosics. Co-production of ethanol, diesel and/or jet
fuel utilizing all major components of biomass, including lignin and
carbohydrates, would significantly improve the total carbon use in biomass, and
enhance the overall operational efficiency, carbon conversion rate, economic
viability, and sustainability of biofuels production.

The educational component of the project is to continue development of outreach
programs for university students and the general public, who will become
cognizant of energy use and needs issues. The proposed activities will provide
the foundation on which an integrated program that combines research, education
and outreach focusing on biofuels and chemicals will be developed at Washington
State University.