* 1258203
* Evolutionary Mechanisms Influencing the Spread of Hybridization: Genomics, Fitness, and Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Fred Allendorf, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

The researchers will use new genomic approaches to study hybridization between
native cutthroat trout and introduced rainbow trout in the northern Rocky
Mountains. Their primary goal is to understand how genetic and evolutionary
processes influence hybridization within and among populations. This research
will transform our understanding of the spread of hybridization by combining
laboratory description of genomic variation, study of fitness in the wild, and
description of dispersal rates of native and hybridized individuals in complex
landscapes. This work will test for the presence of certain chromosomal regions
that spread rapidly among populations because of natural selection, and will
also test if increased dispersal by hybrids accelerates the spread of
hybridization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization and species invasions provide
exciting evolutionary experiments because natural selection on novel gene
combinations can be studied in ecological time and in different environments.
Hybridization between native and invasive species is one of the most serious
threats to global biodiversity. The rate of hybridization is increasing with
habitat degradation, translocations, and environmental change. Natural selection
and dispersal by hybrids are thought to play key roles in the spread of
hybridization. However, the mechanisms underlying this dramatic increase in
hybridization and introgression remain unknown. These mechanisms can now be
assessed using the application of thousands of genetic markers to assess the
genomic basis of hybridization, fitness, and dispersal. The researchers have
worked in collaboration for decades with tribal, state, and federal management
agencies to conserve native cutthroat trout and protect them from hybridization
with rainbow trout.