* 1258284
* Computing MATTERS: Towards an International Partnership to Promote Inquiry-Based Science Education Enhanced by Computational Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Robert Panoff, Shodor Education Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2014
* USD 40,000.00

The Shodor Education Foundation, Inc. and its National Computational Science
Institute (NCSI) in partnership with Noyce Program Scholars and Fellows, is
building cultural bridges connecting US and Thailand to promote an international
research and training initiative to improve teacher preparation in mathematics
and science and in the authentic uses of computational and communication
technologies. The introductory (pilot) workshop is exposing teachers in both
cultures to computational thinking, modeling and data analysis. Materials for
the workshop are drawn from the National Science Digital Library (NSDL), in
particular Shodor's extensive Interactivate collection of lessons, discussions,
activities, and supporting materials, all aligned with National Council of
Teacher of Mathematics (NCTM) and Common Core Standards. Given the initiative in
Thailand to give nearly a million tablet computers to students, special focus is
given to Shodor's Interactivate materials, and in particular those that have
been converted to run on mobile platforms. Lessons learned from this initiative
are improving materials in the National Science Digital Library (nsdl.org) and
providing practical lessons conveyed by the Noyce participants and NCSI back to
their US colleagues. This first collaborative step between US and Thai teachers
provides an opportunity for the exchange of ideas and lessons learned in the
future. This international project is jointly funded through the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the EHR/DUE Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship and Fellowship Program.