* 1258720
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: Ignition and Combustion Characteristics of Transportation Fuels under Lean-Burn Conditions for Advanced Engine Concepts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Seong-Young Lee, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 650,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1258720&lt;br/&gt;Lee, Seong-Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use
of dimethyl ether (DME) in the internal combustion engine (ICE) has significant
advantages over gasoline and diesel fuels, potentially yielding very low NOx
emissions and zero particulate matter (PM). One usage is through low-temperature
combustion (LTC) strategies, the focus of which aims to (i) develop a predictive
capability for DME combustion and (ii) develop a high-pressure (&gt;1500 bar)
DME fuel injection system. Fundamental, phenomenological, and quantitative
studies will be carried out over a wide range of pressures and temperatures,
utilizing state-of-the-art experimental facilities along with strong synergistic
theoretical and computational efforts. The outcome will be a comprehensive
characterization of DME high-pressure spray combustion, a determination of
highly dilute DME autoignition (i.e., engine knock) phenomenon as a function of
thermo-chemical and chemical kinetic parameters, development of computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) predictive tools for emissions and combustion efficiency,
and optimization of a high pressure DME fuel system. In this joint effort among
Michigan Technological University, Argonne National Laboratory, Alternative Fuel
Technology, and Navistar, the experimental facilities and expertise of
individual partners will be leveraged. Not only will this collaboration
contribute to the development of an advanced ICE fueled with DME, significant
educational impacts will also result. An integrated educational program provides
research opportunities for students through close collaboration with Argonne
National Laboratory and the industrial partners.