* 1258133
* RUI: The Microbial Mechanisms of Communal Egg-laying in Slender Salamanders (Genus Batrachoseps)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Andrew Zink, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 595,000.00

This research will advance our understanding the relationship between infectious
disease and social behavior. Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a deadly
fungal pathogen has caused the extinction of many amphibian species. This
research will examine how amphibian social behavior spreads this potentially
fatal pathogen by studying the communally nesting of slender salamanders (genus
Batrachoseps), this salamander is the most common vertebrate in California and
recent evidence shows that many populations are infected by the fungal pathogen
Bd.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The investigators will test the
hypothesis that sociality increases Bd transmission by measuring levels of
communal nesting and comparing this with the frequency and degree of infection.
The researchers will also test the hypothesis that longer histories of pathogen
exposure lead to the evolutionary loss of social behavior by reconstructing each
population's history of Bd infection from museum specimens. Understanding this
link between amphibian social behavior and infectious disease will have
important implications for the conservation of endangered amphibians, and may
provide insights into the spread of human disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. San Francisco State University is a large, comprehensive public
university, where 35% of the enrolled undergraduates are under-represented
minorities or from groups under-represented in the sciences. This project will
provide these students with a strong foundation as well as the practical tools
and critical thinking skills that will ready them for life-long learning and
mastering the challenges awaiting them in graduate school and the workforce.
These students will work to include behavioral data in the publically-accessible
AmphibiaWeb database, (http://amphibiaweb.org/), which receives more than 20,000
queries per day. AmhibiaWeb will be used to disseminate the research findings
from this project to both the scientific community and the public, in addition
to the publications and presentations that will be jointly authored by the PIs
and their students.