* 1258866
* I-Corps:  Microcast: Cooperative Networking of Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Athina Markopoulou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

In this project, a group of mobile devices are enabled to perform a common task
(involving acquiring content from each other and/or from a remote server) to
enjoy higher bandwidth and lower delay than each device would be able to achieve
by itself. This is achieved by building a cooperative networking framework that
enables several devices to use all their resources together. Each device can use
simultaneously two network interfaces: one (cellular or WiFi) to connect to a
remote server and another (WiFi or Bluetooth) to connect to the rest of the
group. This framework can: (i) provide a connectivity bundle that multiplies the
bandwidth at each device by a factor on the order of the number of cooperating
phones, (ii) significantly improve the download rate for applications that need
to acquire remote content, such as video streaming, and (iii) support highly
interactive applications, such as multiplayer games. To demonstrate these
capabilities, two prototype applications have been developed; one that supports
HTTP video streaming to a group of users, and another which supports local
multiplayer games. Key components of the system include the following: (i) a
scheduling algorithm for cooperative downloading over all available downlink
connections; (ii) an all-to-all local dissemination scheme for sharing content
among group members; (iii) a way to efficiently exploit overhearing and network
coding on Android phones. The architecture is modular and can be easily
optimized for bandwidth or latency, depending on the
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance cooperation among
mobile devices within proximity of each other. It can not only significantly
improve the user experience when using the Internet and the performance of
existing applications on mobile devices, but can also enable a new class of
collaborative applications. With the proliferation of smartphones and the
unprecedented growth of the mobile service segment, this framework has the
potential to have a significant social and economic impact. Potential
commercialization of these technologies include: standalone apps, providing a
development framework and libraries to software developers, and partnerships
with telecom providers and device manufacturers.