* 1258670
* Lithium Carbenoids and Related Species:  Structure and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lawrence Pratt, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 223,508.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professors
Lawrence M. Pratt, at Fisk University in Nashville TN, and Marcus A. Tius at the
University of Hawaii who will continue their efforts to better understand the
structures and reaction mechanisms of lithium carbenoids. The project will use a
combination of computational quantum chemistry and NMR spectroscopy to determine
the structure of lithium carbenoids in solution, and their tendency to form
mixed aggregates with other lithium compounds. Mixed aggregates are well known
in organolithium chemistry, and they sometimes have dramatic effects on
reactivity and selectivity. The reaction mechanisms studied to date have often
been quite complex, and would be very difficult to elucidate without the use of
computational chemistry. Preliminary work completed during the initial grant
period has shown which computational methods are most appropriate for the
problems in this study. The predictions of the reaction products, obtained from
the calculated mechanisms, will be tested in the laboratory of the Tius
synthetic group. Frequently, two or more reaction mechanisms are operating
concurrently, and changing the reaction conditions may enhance or suppress one
mechanism. This sometimes results in improved reaction selectivity, purer
products, and reductions in the production of toxic wastes. It may also show
that the reagents being investigated are not ideal for a particular reaction,
and may spur the search for alternate synthetic methods.

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in
the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professors Lawrence
M. Pratt, at Fisk University in Nashville TN, and Marcus A. Tius at the
University of Hawaii will contribute to further understanding of lithium
carbenoid reactions that can lead to a wider application in synthetic organic
reactions. Organolithium reagents are ubiquitous in modern synthesis but little
is known about the factors affecting their structure and reactivity. Broader
impacts are in student education and training, with the largest impact on
minority students. Fisk University is a Historically Black College/University
(HBCU), with about 98% African-American and about 70% female students. The
University of Hawaii is a collaborating institution, and is also committed to
the inclusion of minorities in science. Louisiana Tech University is also a
collaborating institution, with a large African-American student population and
some joint faculty appointments with Grambling State University, another HBCU. A
major impact of this research will be to revitalize the graduate (MS) program at
Fisk, which had been hurt by economic conditions in recent years. A goal of this
project is to help those students bridge into a program of their choice,
possibly at one of the several research universities collaborating with
Professor Pratt on this and other projects.