* 1258852
* Collaborative Research: Crude Entanglements: Native Amazonian and Afro-Ecuadorian Experiences with a Post-Neoliberal Oil Complex
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Flora Lu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 93,118.00

Dr. Gabriela Valdivia (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill) and Dr. Flora
Lu (UC Santa Cruz) will collaborate in research to investigate the effects of
regulatory changes on the relationships between government, industry, and
communities. The research will take place in Huaorani communities in the Amazon
region of Ecuador, a major site of seismic exploration and oil extraction, as
well as in the coastal city of Esmeraldas, adjacent to the nation's main oil
refinery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Valdivia and Lu will conduct a combination of
archival, ethnographic, household economic, and survey approaches to
characterize the new regulatory framework; examine who lives in oil communities
and how their daily routines and activities intersect with this extractive
industry; and explore the lived, visceral experience and perceptions of oil,
with attention to gendered and generational dynamics. In collaboration with
Ecuadorian scholars, they will undertake focus groups, key informant interviews,
archival research, participant observation, time allocation studies, household
economic diaries, surveys (on topics including dietary intake, perceived health
and well-being), and participatory mapping and photography in six study
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecuador, like other countries in South
America, has recently sought strategies to reduce its dependency on foreign
direct investment and imported energy. The project contributes significantly to
anthropological and broader social scientific analyses of environmental and
energy policy, and analyses of regulation and public policy. The project will
integrate the material from this research into coursework at both the graduate
and undergraduate level in both the U.S. and Latin America. There are also well
developed plans for the international exchange of experiences, ideas, and
solutions among scientists focused on energy and environmental policy.