* 1258169
* The Evolution of Retinoid Signaling in Deuterostomes: Insights from Hemichordates
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Christopher Lowe, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This project will investigate the role of a small molecule, retinoic acid,
during the embryonic development of a representative of hemichordates; a group
of animals closely related to our own phylum, the chordates. Unlike most other
molecular signaling pathways, it was thought that retinoic acid signaling was a
unique and important innovation of our own phylum. However, recent comparative
genome studies have identified all the main components of the pathway in many
other animal groups, yet there are currently no functional studies outside of
our phylum to determine how this pathway evolved such important roles in
vertebrate development. In this project, the major genes involved in the
synthesis and reception of retinoic acid at the cellular level will be cloned
and investigated and the function(s) manipulated using genetic and developmental
tools. It is anticipated that these experiments will reveal that the retinoic
acid signaling pathway plays multiple roles in defining the major organizational
axes of hemichordate embryos, such as the head to tail or anteroposterior axis,
and the front to back or dorsoventral axis. The retinoic acid pathway plays many
roles in vertebrate biology and yet some of the details of these functions are
poorly understood. These experiments will help clarify how this pathway
functions to define the major animal axes during development in a simple animal
system. Axis development is one of the most fundamental elements to building
animal form and function, and elucidating the mechanistic underpinnings is
essential for a better understanding of how animal body plans are assembled
following fertilization. This project will train students, including members of
groups underrepresented in science, in laboratory research and critical
thinking. It will also support an exhibit at the Monterey Bay Aquarium to
educate the public about marine ecosystems.