* 1258186
* Novel Lessons From Ancient Plants: water transport in the earliest tracheophytes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2018
* Jarmila Pittermann, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2018
* USD 490,000.00

Seedless vascular plants such as ferns and horsetails are among the oldest
lineages in the modern flora and with origins in the Devonian, it is remarkable
that these plants remain competitive in a world dominated by conifers and
angiosperms. Much is known about the physiology of woody plants, but what
explains the continued success of the seedless vascular group? The goal of the
proposed research is to examine the ferns and fern allies through the lens of
physiology, specifically plant water relations. Efficient and resilient water
transport is critical for plant success, but whether water transport played a
role in the evolutionary physiology of seedless vascular flora remains unknown.
The proposed research has several objectives with the overarching goals focusing
on the relationships between species' drought resistance, vascular anatomy,
habitat and life history traits, and how these features bear on the evolution of
early vascular flora. Anatomical and physiological data will be incorporated
into a realistic model of fern water transport, the results of which will be
used to inform a large-scale sampling effort across the well-resolved
evolutionary tree of ferns. This will improve present understanding of the
manner in with which specific traits facilitated deep-time diversification of
the ferns and fern allies. Lastly, this project will apply a recently developed
model of vascular design to seedless vascular plants, and thus complete the
understanding of the selection pressures driving the evolution of transport
networks across all vascular flora. Broader impacts include high school and
undergraduate participation in a conservation based, long-term study of fern
performance in the redwood understory, teaching modules in local under-served
high schools and the mentoring of undergraduate students in the PI's lab.