* 1258082
* Metabolic multitasking: How Ralstonia solanacearum uses nitrate for plant pathogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Caitilyn Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2017
* USD 508,000.00

The pathogenic bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum is very successful in the
vascular tissue of its plant hosts even though this habitat contains few
nutrients and little oxygen. This project's central hypothesis is that R.
solanacearum uses inorganic nitrogen, one of the few abundant nutrients in plant
sap, not just for food but also to generate energy and to sense and manipulate
plant defenses. The investigators will use genetic and biochemical experiments
to identify the specific adaptations that allow this pathogen to use inorganic
nitrogen in multiple ways as it causes plant disease. Expected results include a
better understanding of how R. solanacearum grows at low oxygen levels and a
definition of the role(s) in virulence of nitric oxide, a common biological
signal molecule that also has antimicrobial properties. R. solanacearum is a
widely distributed pathogen with many hosts, so these results are likely to be
relevant to diverse plant-associated microbes. Plant vascular systems are home
to many microbes, ranging from destructive pathogens like R. solanacearum to
valuable mutualists that can increase plant stress tolerance or growth.

This project will generate basic biological knowledge about the biochemical
mechanisms used by plant-inhabiting microbes. In addition, this project will
contribute to the nation's scientific workforce by training a postdoctoral
researcher and a doctoral student in laboratory research, teaching and
mentoring, which are all key skills for future faculty. Three undergraduate
students will also receive independent research experiences in microbiology.