* 1258887
* Decadal and multi-decadal ocean memory in the eddying regime
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Paola Cessi, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 858,707.00

Climate predictions on decadal scales have proven elusive. On these time-scales,
the natural chaotic variability of the climate system dominates over the more
predictable trends due to anthropogenic climate forcing. The differences among
coupled general circulation models results are discouraging, and point to a lack
of convergence in spatial resolution and to inadequate physical
parameterizations. The difficulty is compounded by the short duration of
observational records of the climate system, particularly those of the ocean and
cryospherewhich hinders robust statistical analysis on decadal time scales.

A leading candidate for pockets of predictability in selected regions resides in
the memory intrinsic in the slow, almost adiabatic evolution of the ocean below
the mixed layer. The periodic reemergence of oceanic temperature anomalies in
winter is a potential source of predictability on scales longer than one year.
In order for this mechanism to provide robust interaction with the atmosphere,
ocean temperature anomalies must survive the seasonal cycling and the eddy
stirring on isopycnals. It is conjectured that temperature perturbations on
scales larger than the eddy size survive isopycnal eddy stirring. The threshold
amplitude and duration (or persistence) of perturbation that can withstand the
seasonal cycling must be determined.

Intellectual Merit: This project will identify the regions in the Atlantic Ocean
that can enhance decadal predictability in the extra-tropics. The focus on
adiabatic subsurface flow in the eddying regime will complement the traditional
approach of studying diffusive, highly damped oceanic dynamics, and will
identify the most robust oceanic physical processes for prediction at decadal
scales. The Atlantic Ocean is chosen because in this region the natural time
scales are decadal, through the wind-gyres dynamics, and multi-decadal, through
the pole-to-pole overturning circulation. It is essential to work in the eddying
regime, because mesoscale eddies determine the sub-thermocline oceanic
stratification and thus the oceanic heat transport. Furthermore, at high
resolution, damping is reduced allowing large regional gradients and longer
duration of influence: both are necessary elements for robust atmospheric
imprinting. The approach is to use several ocean models spanning a range of
complexities: coarse resolution forward and adjoint models both with
parameterized baroclinic eddies, and a model at eddy-resolution.

Broader Impacts: The economical and social benefits of climate information for
periods longer than a season and regions beyond the tropics cannot be
overstated. Mid- and high-latitude ocean processes have the potential to provide
skill to decadal forecasts, and they are the focus of this proposal. A graduate
student and an early-career scientist will enrich their knowledge in physical
oceanography, climate dynamics and the scientific method, and be trained in
mathematics, numerical modeling and modern scientific computations. A middle and
high school teacher workshop will contribute to informing the new generation of
citizens on the achievements, limitations and future prospects of climate
science.