* 1258185
* Comparative Biogeography of the Lesser Sunda Islands of Indonesia: Diversification Across a Wallacean Two-Way Filter Barrier
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Jimmy McGuire, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 495,000.00

The Lesser Sunda Archipelago occurs as a double arc of islands extending between
Java and Bali in the west and New Guinea in the east. This is one of the most
geologically active and tectonically complex regions in the world. The Lesser
Sundas may act as "stepping stones" between the Sunda Shelf (Malay Peninsula,
Borneo, Sumatra, Java, and Bali) and Sahul Shelf (New Guinea, Australia),
thereby forming a two-way filter for organisms dispersing between two of the
world's great biogeographical realms, Asia and Australo-Papua. This study
investigates speciation and biogeography of this region by applying phylogenetic
and biogeographic methodologies, along with coalescent-based population genetic
approaches. The study is comparative, investigating 12 amphibian and reptile
species complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel to this program is the development
of 200 nuclear DNA loci for each focal taxon using a bait-capture approach that
harnesses the power of Next-Gen DNA sequencing. Loci will be analyzed using
phylogenetic and population genetic methods to evaluate broad biogeographic
patterns across SE Asia, patterns of diversification thoughout the Lesser
Sundas, gene flow at lineage boundaries, and to estimate divergence times for
speciation events within the archipelago. Results will inform Indonesian
agencies tasked with protecting areas of endemism in this Global Conservation
hotspot.