* 1258688
* NSF/DOE Advanced Combustion Engines - Tailoring Catalyst Composition and Architecture for Conversion of Pollutants from Low Temperature Diesel Combustion Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Harold, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;#1258688&lt;br/&gt;Epling,
William&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although diesel engines are more fuel efficient
than their gasoline counterparts, increases in fuel economy are still needed.
Coincidentally, environmental policies now require significant decreases in
tailpipe NOx, HC, CO, CO2 and PM emissions from diesel engines. To meet the fuel
economy demand, low temperature combustion (LTC) engines have been developed.
Although the relatively low temperature of conventional diesel engine exhaust is
already a challenge for emissions control, especially during cold start and
under idling conditions, low temperature combustion engines have 40 to 70C lower
exhaust temperatures which means lower catalyst activity. These advanced
combustion engines produce lower NOx and particulate matter (soot) emissions
than current diesel engine technologies, but emit higher levels of other
pollutants, specifically CO and hydrocarbons (HCs). The lower temperature
exhaust combined with higher levels of CO and HCs are especially problematic. As
a result, the LTC engine may have better fuel economy, but produce significantly
higher emissions, as today?s catalytic converter technology is inefficient at
such low temperatures. A solution is clearly a more active catalyst technology.
This is simple to state, yet difficult to achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
approach to achieving catalyst activity control has been proposed in response to
the joint National Science Foundation and Department of Energy solicitation on
Advanced Combustion Engines. The joint Agency award is made through the NSF
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division and its
Catalysis &amp; Biocatalysis Program to Professors William Epling, Michael P.
Harold, Dan Luss, Lars Grabow, and Vemuri Balakotaiah from the University of
Houston (UH) and James Parks from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). The
team will use their extensive background knowledge in this area to tailor design
catalysts, specifically by optimizing the catalyst composition along the length
and diameter of the catalytic converter to take advantage of pollutant
concentration and temperature profiles that exist under normal operation. This
will ultimately lead to lower temperatures required to achieve high pollutant
conversions. Understanding and exploiting the temperature and concentration
profiles is a technique still in its infancy, and this novel approach can
enhance efficiency for not only exhaust emissions catalysts, but for virtually
all catalytic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team from UH and ORNL
is uniquely poised to meet the challenge, through research spanning the
molecular to engine level, and with expertise in engine exhaust emissions
catalyst synthesis and characterization, reaction modeling and engineering, and
combustion and vehicle testing, in state-of-the-art facilities spanning high
performance computer clusters, advanced catalyst characterization, bench-scale
catalytic reactors and fully-instrumented engines. By simulating the reactions
at the molecular level, novel material combinations will be discovered. Lab-
scale studies will allow measurement of gas concentration and temperature
profiles along the catalyst bed. These measurements will be used to build a
computer model of the system, which will in turn be used to predict the optimal
catalyst composition along the bed. These predictions will be used to synthesize
new catalyst designs to be tested at the lab and engine scale. The results will
ultimately be shared with major catalyst manufacturers for their review.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major emphasis of the proposed research is the education
and training of graduate and undergraduate students. The students will be using
advanced theoretical, computational and experimental tools, training them to
become capable chemical engineering researchers. The research will provide the
students with a perspective in applying engineering tools to solve environmental
problems. The students will also participate in research at the UH Texas Center
for Emissions and Fuel Research, where they will have the opportunity to work
alongside engineers and industrial collaborators who are developing and testing
new technologies on full-scale engines. This project will include junior-level
undergraduate students, with targeted recruiting of underrepresented groups.
Each undergraduate researcher will be assigned an individual project that is
appropriate for their skill level and knowledge. Each will have a graduate
student mentor to assist with supervision and advising, also providing the
graduate student with supervisory skills training. Ultimately, it will provide
graduate students with training for industrial and academic careers and provide
undergraduate students with research experience and motivate them to pursue
graduate studies. The data will also be posted on the Cross-Cut Lean Exhaust
Emissions Reduction Simulations (CLEERS) group website database, accessed by
industry, academic and national lab colleagues to better understand new catalyst
technologies and develop and tune in-house models.