* 1258336
* G8: Sustainable Manufacturing of Solution-Processed Devices on Flexible Substrates Using Nanohybrid Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* James Watkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 219,863.00

This NSF award to University of Massachusetts Amherst funds U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by the G8 Research Councils
Initiative ?Structural Bamboo Products.? This is a pilot collaboration among the
U.S. National Science Foundation, the Canadian National Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC), the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the
German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic Research
(RFBR),and the United Kingdom Research Councils (RCUK), supporting collaborative
research projects selected on a competitive basis that are comprised of
researchers from at least three of the partner countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-national collaboration--Methods for Materials-
efficient Manufacturing (M3)-- will perform research on polymer-nanoparticle
hybrid materials for sustainable production of advanced technology devices. The
M3 team includes the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Rutgers University
(U.S.), Tohoku University and the University of Tokyo (Japan), and Institut de
Chimie de la Matière condensée de Bordeaux and the UMR CNRS Environnement,
Ville, Société (France). The M3 research program focuses on solution-based
processing of devices, device layers, components and functional materials on a
roll-to-roll production platform, in which hybrid materials containing both
polymers and nanoparticles are used to generate functional devices on flexible
substrates. One technical goal for the project is development of solution-
coatable high dielectric constant device layers comprised of
polymer/nanoparticle composites; these layers are the active components of
working devices, and progress in this field will advance efficient roll-to-roll
flexible device production. A second technical goal is the use of
polymer/nanoparticle solutions to form highly transparent emissive nanocomposite
films containing optically active nanoparticles, including rare-earth dopes
phosphors, as the functional component. U.S. research activities focus on
developing the polymer hybrid materials and roll-to-roll processing methods
(UMass Amherst), and synthesizing and characterizing the optically active
composites (Rutgers). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this multinational
research project will lead to more materials-efficient and sustainable
manufacturing of materials and devices for applications such as energy
conversion and storage, flexible electronics and displays, and optoelectronics.
Compared to conventional batch vacuum and deposition processes, the solution-
based roll-to-roll process can afford lower cost, less waste and significantly
lower energy inputs. When combined with innovations in the materials used in the
coating process for device fabrication, it is expected that the resultant
process will involve fewer steps, no batch changes, commodity-priced materials,
lower process temperatures, and drastically lower water usage, thereby reducing
direct energy consumption.