* 1258466
* EAGER: Instrumentation and Modeling of Seismic Isolation in Aftershocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Henri Gavin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2015
* USD 169,910.00

The research objective of this project is to measure the long-term seismic
responses of the base-isolated Christchurch Women's Hospital, located in
Christchurch, New Zealand, and to use these measurements, along with
computational models, to assess the relative effects of soil-foundation-
structure interactions with liquefying soil, for interactions between adjacent
buildings, and for interactions across the isolation interface. Nine networked
triaxial accelerometers and three displacement sensors, installed at three
levels within the structure, will allow for remote monitoring of aftershock
responses and rapid data processing. The database of high fidelity measurements
from this building will be combined with detailed computer simulations of the
structure, isolation system, foundation, and supporting soft soil. The project
team, including researchers in structural and geotechnical engineering at the
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, engineers from firms in New
Zealand conducting geotechnical field investigations at the building site, and
hospital staff, will collaborate on the deployment and remote monitoring of the
instrumentation, the development and application of modern system identification
techniques to the data, and the development of nonlinear numerical models to
examine the processes governing the response of this
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibration measurements obtained in situ from
buildings during actual earthquakes are invaluable in assessing and improving
the performance of earthquake protection systems. Following the large
earthquakes of 2010 and 2011, Christchurch has experienced, and continues to
withstand, hundreds of earthquake aftershocks per year. This project seizes the
unique opportunity to capture perishable data from the seismically-isolated
Christchurch Women's Hospital, a building designed to be particularly
earthquake-resistant. While this facility is providing uninterrupted service
throughout this sequence of earthquakes, some aspects of the dynamic response of
this structure are unanticipated. By combining measurement and analysis,
researchers will identify the aspects of this structure leading to the measured
and observed motions. These results will bear on the design of new base-isolated
structures on soft soils in Christchurch, New Zealand and in other seismic
regions worldwide. Knowledge gained from this project will contribute to best
practices for the implementation of seismic isolation systems. Data obtained
from this project will be archived and made publicly available in the NEEShub
Project Warehouse (http://nees.org/warehouse).