* 1258916
* International Workshop on Stem Cell Differentiation: the Influence of Biomaterials and Biomechanics, Shanghai, China, March 13-15, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Hsin-Chiao Ou-Yang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 10/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

1258916 Ou-Yang

Intellectual Merits:

The objective of this proposal is to support a 3-day international workshop on
stem cells in Shanghai, China during March 13th to 15th of 2013, entitled: Stem
cell differentiation: The influence of biomaterials and biomechanics. The
successful differentiation and maturation of stem cells is critical to many
fields of basic and applied research, including stem cell biology, cell-based
therapeutics and tissue engineering.

There have been a variety of methods developed to modulate stem cell fate,
including biochemical stimulation, biomechanical perturbation, and biomaterial
modulation. These studies have revealed that the structure, development, and
function of mammalian stem cells are significantly influenced by a wide variety
of both extracellular and intracellular factors. In fact, the list of potential
modulating factors is so broad that the research teams working in individual
areas only rarely interact during scientific conferences. Therefore, this
international workshop is proposed with the goal of integrating research groups
working on theory, experimentation, and clinical translation of stem cell
differentiation. This type of workshop will serve to present novel, current
research and seed new ideas and collaborations to investigate the following:

(i) How stem cell division is governed by the dynamic properties of individual
molecules during mitosis, motility, and cell polarization. (ii) How these
processes can be further enhanced by biomaterial design and biomechanical
perturbation. (iii) How the current research in stem cell differentiation could
be translated into clinical applications. (iv) Contrast cultural and
governmental attitudes toward stem cell research and the impact on government
funding

Broader Impact:

The conference will bring together a group of about 75 international researchers
and graduate students from the US, Europe and South East Asia to China that have
an interest, exposure and/or training in interdisciplinary research but who are
not necessarily experts in multiples areas or techniques of stem cells. The
conference grant will support 15 investigators, including junior faculty
members, and provide travel awards to support approximately 10 graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows from the US to participate the workshop. The workshop
will be organized into morning and afternoon sessions with invited speakers who
are experts in cell biology, biophysics, biochemistry, microscopy, genetics and
theoretical modeling. The goal is to have more than 30% of women invited
speakers and participants. Applicants who are minorities and/or persons with
disabilities will be selected for these travel awards. This conference will
fulfill an important goal of encouraging international student education by
facilitating interactions of graduate students from diverse areas with each
other and serve as a platform to highlight undergraduate research collaborations
resulting from REU/RET programs. The organizers plan to publish a report
summarizing the novel ideas and collaborations that developed during the
meeting.