* 1258696
* G8 Initiative: SmartCoat: Multiscale Smart Coatings with Sustained Anticorrosive Action
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Michael McShane, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This NSF award funds U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by the G8 Research Councils Initiative "Structural Bamboo Products."
This is a pilot collaboration among the U.S. National Science Foundation, the
Canadian National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the French
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), the German Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS), the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR),and the United Kingdom
Research Councils (RCUK), supporting collaborative research projects selected on
a competitive basis that are comprised of researchers from at least three of the
partner countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research award provides funding
for the development of materials and techniques to produce non-toxic,
biocompatible, composite materials that release environmentally-friendly and
application-specific anticorrosion, antimicrobial, and antifouling agents upon
demand and in a sustained fashion. Three types of non-toxic multiscale
micro/nano containers will be investigated so that application-specific
solutions with multiple levels of protection can be offered. The first level of
protection will be provided by the incorporation of nanotraps (nanoparticles
that absorb aggressive/corrosive species). The second level will trigger the
release of polymerizable precursors entrapped in nanocapsules. The highest level
of protection will be based on encapsulation of chemical and biological
corrosion inhibitors acting on demand to suppress degradation in open defects.
The research program includes the synergistic cooperation between experiments
and computational modeling, making it possible to fine-tune and optimize the
multi-scale container systems to specific design and performance targets. The
composed containers will be incorporated into materials already existing to
protect civil and industrial infrastructure (e.g., paints, varnishes, waxes or
other coatings).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will lead to improvements in the operating lifetime of industrial
materials. The primary goal of this work is to develop generalized methods and
design criteria for encapsulation of anticorrosion, antimicrobial, or self-
healing agents and methods to apply them in coatings that enable a release upon
demand in response to a defined trigger. These design criteria may include
solvents or other environmental conditions maximizing efficiency of
encapsulation, minimizing the production time, minimizing the energy required
for the process, minimizing the response time of the stimulated release, or
maximizing the stability of the finalized coatings. Determining the process
parameters to achieve these objectives will help to reduce the cost and improve
the performance of the coatings. The work will also contribute to the basic
understanding of encapsulation and responsive materials. Ultimately, sustained
protection of materials from chemical and biological degradation (corrosion) and
mechanical destruction using these materials will have tremendous economic and
social benefits.