* 1258646
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines: A Universal Combustion Model to Predict Premixed and Non-premixed Turbulent Flames in Compression Ignition Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Tianfeng Lu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1258646&lt;br/&gt;Lu, Tianfeng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research seeks to develop a universal turbulent combustion model that
is applicable to mixed regimes of combustion, including premixed and non-
premixed flames with limit phenomena, including local ignition and extinction,
under IC engine conditions. The model is based on the chemical explosive mode
analysis (CEMA), which can identify local limit phenomena and elementary
flamelets, and will be validated against high-fidelity direct numerical
simulations (DNS). The universal combustion model is capable of eliminating the
need for empirical identification of local premixed and non-premixed conditions
in practical engine simulations using large eddy simulations (LES) and Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) simulations. The low-cost and reliable numerical
simulations lead to a predictive tool for engine combustion, and expedite the
design of advance IC engines with improved fuel efficiency and reduced
emissions. The collaboration among University of Connecticut, Sandia National
Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory is expected to bridge the needs of
fundamental combustion research and practical engine simulations and to create
rich opportunities for postdoctoral mentoring and graduate education. Research
opportunities will also be created through UConn?s outreach programs for
undergraduate and high school teachers. The PIs will collaborate with major CFD
software companies to incorporate the new combustion model into commercial
software and thus benefit the engine community at large.