* 1258217
* Courtship Negotiation in a Life-history Context: Interaction between on- and off-lek Tactics in Sage-grouse
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Alan Krakauer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 02/28/2017
* USD 470,000.00

Buyers and sellers negotiating in a market face a series of stages from partner
choice to information gathering to haggling, etc., with the optimal decisions at
each stage depending on both players' bargaining positions. These bargaining
positions will depend on the players' assets (income and capital) and outside
options for alternative buyers and sellers. Animals face similar decisions
regarding courtship, including how much energy to acquire, who to court, how
much information to gather, when to give up, etc. In the mating market, males
and females haggle during courtship, with their bargaining positions determined
by their assets (foraging success and body condition) as well as the number of
alternative partners for each. Thus economic models of negotiation in a market
provide a framework for viewing courtship as a process where males and females
can use tactics to improve their negotiating outcome, using the resources they
have available. This project explores this framework using greater sage-grouse
(Centrocercus urophasianus) as a model species. New technology will allow
experimental study of courtship and detailed observation of foraging behaviors
in the wild, with minimal disturbance. Methods include presentations of
interactive female robots, next-generation GPS loggers and accelerometers to
measure off-lek foraging behaviors, as well as bioanalytical assays of the
nutrition and toxicity of sagebrush that grouse prefer to consume. We expect to
show that success in courtship, as in business, requires income and capital as
well as skilled negotiation. Sage-grouse are a candidate species for listing as
endangered. The PIs will conduct multimedia presentations on sage-grouse ecology
and conservation for the public, and develop course materials and presentations
for primary schools, tribal colleges and universities in sage-grouse habitat.
Research by PIs will continue to directly inform sage-grouse conservation
efforts. In addition, the PIs will continue to provide research opportunities
for students (&gt;175 since 2006), including many from under-represented groups.