* 1258890
* I-Corps:  Game Controllers with Integrated Skin Stretch Feedback
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* William Provancher, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project will apply touch feedback technology (skin and stretch feedback)
for use in a game controller and will result in a refined game controller with
integral skin stretch feedback. Tactile interaction game effects that can be
portrayed on this game controller will be integrated with a commercial video
game to provide a demonstration of this technology. It is believed that this
will lead to both improved game immersion and performance. Performance gains are
expected to be in the form of faster completion times, improved spatial
awareness and tracking capability, and reduced cognitive load of the user.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The game controller with embedded skin stretch feedback
has the potential to change the gaming world as well as to help this technology
proliferate into other applications. The tactile effects portrayed in game play
can be refined and applied to any number of applications that can benefit from
an additional modality of communicated information. These applications include:
mobile navigation in cars, airplanes, helicopters; military applications for
improved control of mobile robots or unmanned aerial/marine/ground vehicles; and
medical applications such as robotic surgery or rehabilitation; or providing
guidance to the blind. Since the game controller also has great appeal to young
adults, and to the public in general, it had been and will continue to be used
for educational activities. The controller can serve as a platform to explain
the importance of having a strong technical background in engineering and
computer science, and shows that careers in engineering can be rewarding.