* 1258425
* IGERT-CIF21: Computation-Enabled Design and Manufacturing of High Performance Materials
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2019
* Hongyuan Zha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,800,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
prepares Ph.D. students at the Georgia Institute of Technology with the tools to
improve the efficiency, design, and manufacturing of new materials. While
providing students with interdisciplinary training in computing, mathematics,
and material sciences, the program promotes entrepreneurial approaches to
developing new materials into products for the global
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goal of this training
program is to produce scientists and engineers who will develop and use data
analytics, modeling, and simulation methods to advance the fields of materials
design and manufacturing. Trainees will quantify the microstructures that
comprise materials and will develop algorithms and software to represent and
transform these microstructures. Additionally, trainees will explore application
challenges such as creating light-weight materials for energy-efficient vehicles
and accelerating the development of new technologies such as additive
manufacturing. Through internships in industry and a curriculum that combines
business with materials science, mathematics and computing, trainees learn how
to apply their research to commercial product
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By increasing the efficiency
of materials development and manufacturing, this program contributes to
America's competitiveness in an increasingly globalized marketplace and
contributes to the creation of new and sustainable materials and technologies.
Moreover, this traineeship program helps students develop the skills and tools
needed to pursue careers at the intersection of materials science, mathematics
and computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.