* 1258017
* Streams in urbanizing landscapes:   from syndrome diagnosis to watershed prescription
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Dean Urban, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2018
* USD 560,000.00

This project will examine how variation in the size, distribution and
connectivity of developed land within urbanizing landscapes influences the
magnitude and timing of hydrologic and chemical impacts to receiving streams.
Ecologists studying altered landscapes tend to focus on the extreme endpoints of
land cover gradients, yet the vast majority of watersheds within the city limits
of mid-size cities in the southeastern United States have only 25-35% of their
surfaces in pavements, roofs, lawns and roads. Within these watersheds, the
size, proximity and connectivity of developed surfaces relative to receiving
streams varies tremendously. This project seeks to answer how the arrangement of
impervious surfaces exacerbates or mitigates the effects of developed surface
area. Researchers will compare pollutant loads for streams draining watersheds
with similar levels of development but with very different development
configurations. New metrics for quantifying land use change will be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new insights into the way urban
communities are reconfiguring and reconnecting their watersheds in ways that
impact the supply and quality of water resources. The research will be conducted
in collaboration with municipal, county and state officials engaged in ongoing
discussions about water resources in the region. Affiliated teaching fellows
will convert the analyses and results generated here into widely distributed
curriculum modules that will allow high school students from throughout the
state to learn about urban ecosystems and about how what we do on the landscape
surface affects the quality of our water supplies.