* 1258635
* Collaborative Research: NSF/DOE Advanced Combustion Engines: Radiation Heat Transfer and Turbulent Fluctuations in IC Engines - Toward Predictive Models to Enable High Efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Modest, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 236,500.00

CBET-1258613&lt;br/&gt;Daniel C. Haworth&lt;br/&gt;The Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;Michael F. Modest&lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Merced&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiation heat transfer is important in most
combustion systems, by virtue of their high temperatures. In practical
applications, combustion usually occurs in a turbulent flow environment, where
turbulent fluctuations in composition and temperature can significantly alter
the radiative transfer rates. The importance of these ?turbulence-radiation
interactions? (TRI) is increasingly being recognized. Computational models that
neglect radiation and/or TRI, or that treat them in an over-simplified manner,
can give inaccurate predictions of important quantities including heat transfer
rates, temperatures, and pollutant emissions. Radiation is known to be
responsible for up to half of the in-cylinder heat losses during the combustion
event in compression-ignition internal combustion engines. Accurate
determination of radiative transfer rates is exceedingly difficult, requiring
the solution to a five-dimensional radiative transfer equation, and further
exacerbated by strong spectral variations of radiative properties. The problem
reaches another level of difficulty when interactions with turbulence are
considered. Consequently, radiation and TRI in engines have received little
attention to date. The purpose of this research project is to quantify the
extent to which radiation and TRI influence the efficiency and emissions
characteristics of compression-ignition engines, and to develop predictive
computational models that can be used for engine combustion system development
and design. Next-generation high-efficiency engines are expected to function
close to the limits of stable operation, where even small perturbations to the
energy balance can have a large influence on system behavior. It is expected
that radiation and TRI may be particularly important for such engines. To this
end, advanced multiphase spectral radiation models and radiative transfer
equation solution methods will be extended to the highly transient, high-
pressure combustion environments that are representative of current and next-
generation compression-ignition engines. The models will be exercised to
establish conditions where radiation and/or TRI are important, and where they
may safely be neglected. Outcomes of the proposed project will include new
physical models and numerical strategies for radiative transfer in high-pressure
multiphase systems, new physical insight into radiation and TRI in combustion
environments of practical interest, and validated models that have been
connected to multiple underlying computational fluid dynamics
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy conversion involving turbulent combustion
processes will remain important in global propulsion and power generation
applications for the foreseeable future. This includes road vehicles, where
ambitious near-term engine efficiency targets have been established that have
the potential to significantly reduce energy and fossil fuel consumption.
Radiation heat transfer is important in most combustion systems, but has
received relatively little attention because of its extreme complexity. This
project will provide advanced radiation models that will be part of the
predictive computational tools that are required to develop high-efficiency
engines. The physical insight and models that are developed will be relevant for
other advanced combustion systems, including gas-turbine combustors.