* 1258935
* Creating Opportunities & Access in Science and Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Andrew Mehl, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 613,846.00

The Knox College S-STEM COAST program (Creating Opportunities and Access in
Science and Technology) increases the number of academically talented students
with financial need who complete STEM degrees and matriculate into STEM graduate
degree programs and careers. This project targets first-year, full-time students
with financial need who have demonstrated motivation and aptitude to pursue STEM
degrees, including first-generation students and students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. This project targets candidates and recruits
them into introductory STEM coursework, providing complementary support services
designed to mitigate the frustrations that can deter otherwise qualified
students from persisting in STEM majors. The project also leverages a natural
affinity between all Biology, Chemistry, and Biochemistry students who share
common degree requirements.

The Intellectual Merit derives from a strong network of support services and
resources for students that will be repurposed, tailored, and marketed to target
academically talented students with financial need who have strong STEM
potential. This S-STEM project builds on benchmark studies about student
persistence and best practices in STEM service provision and establishes
programmatic guidelines and structures based on extensive institutional data and
assessment. The construction of a learning community ensures that COAST
Candidate outcomes improve as measured by successful completion of STEM
coursework, declared STEM majors, and persistence to graduation.

The Broader Impacts derive from the evaluation plan that statistically assesses
program outcomes and builds upon what is known about STEM student success by
testing the conclusions of key studies within the context of this project.
Dissemination efforts utilize electronic and web-based media, presentations and
publications to ensure that STEM educators have direct access to marketing
materials, assessment rubrics and tools, raw and analyzed data, and evaluation
results. In this way, this project contributes to the understanding among the
STEM education community of how to support and increase the number of students,
particularly those from underserved populations, earning STEM degrees and
matriculating into graduate degree programs and careers in STEM fields.