* 1258070
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Pathogen-mediated negative feedbacks determine tropical tree species abundance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Stefan Schnitzer, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 246,590.00

Ecologists have long been puzzled about why there are so many species of trees
in tropical forests; the answer is not obvious. Recent evidence suggests that
disease microbes hidden in the soil may play an important role in determining
how many species can grow in a given area. Rigorous tests of this hypothesis are
lacking, though. This project employs a combination of experiments, plant
pathology, and cutting-edge genetic approaches to test whether interactions
between trees and disease agents in the soil determine tree species composition
in tropical forests of Panama. The study is unusual in the amount of detailed
data collected on distributions, identities, and host specificity of many types
of largely unknown pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in species
composition of soil pathogens as a result of human-caused disturbances and
agricultural practices are well documented. However, the impact of such changes
on land restoration is poorly understood. This study will provide critical
insights to scientists as they search for more effective conservation and
reforestation techniques. Because this project is highly collaborative, it will
also provide broad training to U.S. and Latin American students in the ecology
of plants and microbes. Finally, the lead scientists will work with the Missouri
Botanical Garden to publically demonstrate the importance of soil microbes to
the health and sustainability of both natural and agricultural plant
communities.