* 1258331
* EAGER: Design, Development and Standardization of a New Hands-On Lab Component for use in Wireless Information Systems Courses, based on the GENI Wireless Research Facilities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Thanasis Korakis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 12/31/2014
* USD 137,995.00

This project will develop a series of lab exercises comprising a senior-level
undergraduate or introductory graduate lab course on fundamental design issues
of wireless networks and technologies. Over the course of this lab sequence,
students will practice designing, implementing and running wireless experiments
using the GENI wireless testbed infrastructure. These labs enable student to
learn wireless networks protocols and technologies by working with real systems
and evaluating wireless schemes in real conditions, instead of relying on the
'protected' environment of software simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
building protocols on a real platform, students will understand the challenges
in the design of wireless systems and the approaches and techniques that are
used today, and will become familiar with open research issues in the wireless
field. They will learn how to resolve realistic issues and how to design
algorithms that work in practical situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome
of the project will be a set of materials (including a lab manual, disk images,
experiment scripts, software, and slides) that can be used by academic
institutions throughout the US, together with the integrated GENI wireless
facilities, to supplement traditional courses on wireless networks with a hands-
on lab component. All data generated as part of the proposed effort will be
electronically disseminated using the portal of the WiTEST Lab in NYU-Poly and
on the GENI.net website. Developed software and results of the lab development
will be made available in the open-source format and will be free for academic
use. Educational materials will be announced on the web site and will be shared
with academic colleagues upon request.