* 1258616
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The Making of Urban Spaces and the European Vision of Development in Post-Socialist Romania
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Lavrentia Karamaniola, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,200.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Lavrentia Karamaniola, supervised by Dr.
Alaina Lemon, will undertake socio-ecological research on the growing worldwide
phenomenon of urban centers being shared with very large numbers of stray
animals. Today, more than half of the world's population lives in cities, and
the existence of stray animals and the threats that they produce to public
safety figure significantly into urban understandings of ecology. Stray animals
are viewed simultaneously as both a result of urban development, as well as an
impediment to the socioeconomic development in the expanding urban spaces.
Understanding how growth changes the ways that people inhabit urban space is of
critical importance to solving many social and economic problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karamaniola's research will be undertaken in the Romanian
capital of Bucharest, currently home to almost 2 million people. She will employ
a range of social science methodologies to collect data. The growth of the stray
animal population in Bucharest is alleged to be a direct result of twentieth
century urban renewal projects. Therefore, the researcher will commence with an
investigation of Bucharest's spatial history in a context of a changing
political economy. She will collect historical information in three different
archives, and she will conduct interviews with architects, urban planners and
members of the Municipal Board. To investigate contemporary urban social
relations, Karamaniola will carry out ethnographic research among employees and
citizen volunteers in a non-governmental organization that works with urban
animals and do participant observation in urban neighborhoods. Interviews will
also be used to investigate the symbolic tension between an urban ecology full
of marginal animals and national aspirations for post-socialist economic and
social development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it
will contribute to new social science theory of cities. Findings will also
contribute insights into socialist and post-socialist history, as experienced
through the transformations of urban centers. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.