* 1258305
* EAGER:  Toward Automatic Generation of Challenge-Driven Interactive Narratives
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Noah Wardrip-Fruin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2014
* USD 151,044.00

This project will conduct the first exploration of a computational system that
co-generates intertwined narrative and gameplay progressions. The system will
utilize a novel representation called ludo-narrative units (LNUs), representing
combinations of narrative, gameplay challenges, and choices. Utilizing audience
experience models taking into account phenomena such as player agency, narrative
comprehension, and gameplay learning objectives, the system will reason about
progressions of narrative choices, narrative exposition, and gameplay
challenges, and can dynamically reshape content to match designated goals and
audience context. To accomplish this, the project will build an artificial
intelligence director to construct interactive scenarios for audiences during
their engagement with a game-based narrative.

The dynamic construction of scenarios from a pool of authored LNUs would already
comprise more flexibility than currently appears in state-of-the-art scenario
driven games and other popular interactive narratives, since LNUs can be
selected in multiple orders in response to audience activity. But the envisioned
system will provide further flexibility and customization through modification
of LNU content using story generation technology. Specifically, it will use a
story-planning system based on imaginative recall to dynamically provide this
content. Further, global narrative and gameplay structure will be provided by
using a constraint-solving algorithm to create full experiences satisfying the
various system goals, written using answer set programming techniques. This
enables the crucial flexibility that allows the system to reason over an
arbitrary number of domains without locking it into pre-planned interfaces and
infrastructure.

A high-level impact of this research will be contributing to a deeper
understanding of these scenarios, as it defines them with the level of rigor
required for generation. At a more technical level, the research will produce
the first system that generates mixed interactive narrative and gameplay guided
by shared experience goals. One of the high-level motivations for pursuing this
work is that it has potentially profound impact for education, allowing next-
generation educational software to benefit from the motivating power of
scenarios and to be generated specifically for the learning profile, goals, and
progress of particular learners. It is also potentially the case that
experiences generated in this manner, and based on these models, could more
effectively reach audiences that have grown up with games as a primary media
form.