* 1258225
* Testing the ecological and physiological constraints to reproductive success in geothermal byrophytes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Sarah Eppley, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2017
* USD 419,922.00

Sexual reproduction is the primary mode of reproduction for the majority of
Earth's macroscopic life, yet, our ability to predict how environmental stress
influences patterns of sexual reproduction is surprisingly limited. As on-going
global change is predicted to have large-scale effects on species distributions
and on stress responses of organisms, understanding the mechanisms linking
environmental stress to sexual reproduction will be critical to making informed
predictions about the biology of future environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the investigators will study the physiological mechanisms linking
environmental stress and sexual reproduction in one of Earth's most ancient,
widespread, and successful group of plants, the mosses. Field studies will be
performed primarily at geothermal fields in Lassen Volcanic National Park, CA
and molecular, physiological, and biochemical methods will be used to bridge our
understanding of how environmental stress, as well as interactions with other
organisms, impacts reproductive success. The investigators will test a series of
hypotheses aimed at developing an understanding of the mechanisms that both
enable and constrain sexual reproduction in stressful environments and how
abiotic and biotic factors interact to impact these mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include, 1) determining how environmental
stress impacts sexual reproduction in one of Earth's most widespread plant
species; 2) determining the different physiological mechanisms that male and
female plants use to cope with environmental stress and ensure sexual
reproduction; and 3) developing an understanding of how patterns of sexual
reproduction are influenced by interactions with microbial partners. An
increased understanding of how environmental stress impacts sexual reproduction
will be key to making informed predictions about how Earth's biotic systems will
cope and respond to the increasing stress of our changing globe. Educational
broader impacts include training exceptional undergraduate and graduate
students, especially women and underrepresented groups, for careers in research
and innovation, and development of new courses designed to fully engage
undergraduates in critical thinking, statistical reasoning, and writing and
communicating science.