* 1258398
* EAGER: Extended Particles in Turbulent Flow: A Grand Computational Challenge
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Andrea Prosperetti, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2013
* USD 60,000.00

1258398 PI: Prosperetti

This project is concerned with the development of a flexible and accurate
numerical method, named Physalis, for the simulation of particulate flows. The
work to date has shown that this method has significant advantages over the
other methods used at present such as the lattice-Boltzmann method and the
immersed-boundary methods in that the method permits the exact satisfaction of
the no-slip condition on each particle and that each particle is represented in
a spectrally convergent fashion. This permits simulations involving 1000
particles with sufficiently high accuracy for particle Reynolds numbers up to
about 100. The objective of the work proposed here is to port the existing code
to GPU-based computers with the goal of attaining speed up of at least two
orders of magnitude. The project will explore novel approaches to the
parallelization of the code and memory management to achieve this speed up. The
code thus developed will be made available to the research community through the
PIs web.

Natural processes and contemporary technology offer a wealth of instances in
which solid particles are transported by fluid flows: marine sediments, gravity
currents, fluidized bed combustors, catalytic oil cracking and chemical looping
combustors are just a few examples among many. A reliable theoretical
understanding of these systems is essential for a variety of reasons ranging
from the modeling of environmental flows to carbon sequestration, to the
development of new or scaled-up designs without expensive preliminary
experimentation and many others. Sophisticated numerical methods and state-of-
the-art computational hardware to be employed in this project will be useful in
advancing the understanding of particulate systems.