* 1258315
* EAGER: US Ignite: In-Home Monitoring in Support of Caregivers for Patients with Dementia
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* James Sterbenz, University of Kansas Medical Center Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2015
* USD 299,992.00

This project develops, integrates, and tests advanced video and networking
technologies to support family caregivers in managing behavioral symptoms of
individuals with dementia, a growing public health problem that adds to
caregiver stress, increases morbidity and mortality, and accelerates nursing
home placement. The project builds upon a recent University of Kansas Medical
Center (KUMC) clinical pilot study that tested the application of video
monitoring in the home to support family caregivers of persons with Alzheimer's
disease who exhibited disruptive behaviors. The proposed project focuses on
expanding the in-home technological tools available to strengthen the linkage
between patients and caregivers with their healthcare team via multi-camera
full-motion/high definition video monitoring. The proposed work will exploit the
capabilities of GENI, in general, and the KU GpENI and KanREN-GENI projects in
particular to help meet the goals of the US Ignite program, and explore the
benefits of flexible networking to exploit high-bandwidth access to support
family caregivers. Additionally, Google's deployment this year of a 1 Gpbs fiber
network throughout Kansas City provides the ideal environment for measuring the
impact that ultra-high speed networking to the home will have on health care.
Captured video will be streamed and stored on secure cloud-based servers. Upon
notification and authorization by caregivers, the videos can be made accessible
for viewing by clinical experts from web-enabled devices for the purpose of
providing feedback to the caregivers in the home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The technology platform will be applicable to a broad range of
both physical and behavioral illnesses/conditions and caregiver/parental
situations with the subsequent result being: 1) improvement in care/treatment
within home-based settings; 2) avoidance or reduction of nursing home
placements, hospital admissions/readmissions or other institutionalizations; 3)
improvement in the quality of life of caregivers; and 4) overall reduced costs
for the health care system. Potential applications for this monitoring platform
may also be extendable to care settings outside the home. The project will also
catalyze multidisciplinary research and education between electrical
engineering/computer science, medical informatics, nursing, and other health
professions and support the training of graduate students.