* 1258581
* NSF/DOE Partnership on Advanced Combustion Engines- Modeling and Experimental Studies of Controllable Cavity Turbulent Jet Ignition Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tonghun Lee, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,300,000.00

Abstract #1258581 Toulson, Elisa

The United States' increasingly stringent fuel economy standards require the
development of new more fuel efficient combustion technologies as large gains
with conventional spark ignition combustion decline. Turbulent jet ignition
enables a near 20% peak thermal efficiency improvement relative to spark
ignition combustion, resulting in both lower fuel consumption and CO2 emissions.
This research aims to examine fundamental aspects of the turbulent jet ignition
(TJI) process, which utilizes pre-chamber combustion initiation. The TJI concept
involves the use of a chemically active, turbulent jet to initiate combustion in
lean or dilute mixtures. The large number of distributed ignition sites provided
by the turbulent jet enable short combustion durations even in the traditionally
slow burning mixtures that occur with low temperature combustion (LTC). The
objectives of the proposed research are 1) to experimentally examining the
active radicals generated in the TJI process through both rapid compression
machine and optically accessible engine experiments, 2) to develop a new LES
modeling technique to model the TJI system, as both turbulence and active
species from the pre-chamber play a role in TJI combustion and 3) to
experimentally examine the controllable cavity TJI system?s performance and
efficiency in metal engine tests.