* 1258175
* Chemical and Genetic Dissection of Abscisic Acid Receptor Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Sean Cutler, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2017
* USD 644,686.00

The recent 2012 drought was the most severe drought in the last half-decade and
has had global economic consequences. The lack of sufficient water during a
growth season is one of a number of adverse environmental conditions called
abiotic stresses; other abiotic stresses include high soil salinity, early
freezes and flooding, to name a few. Given their devastating consequences, there
is broad interest in understanding the internal mechanism that plants use to
cope with abiotic stresses so that these protective mechanisms can be harnessed
to improve crop yield under adverse growth conditions. The PI's research focuses
on the key orchestrator of abiotic stress responses, a hormone called Abscisic
acid (ABA). ABA levels rise under stressful conditions and trigger physiological
changes that help a plant endure the bad times. It is widely believed that this
hormone and the specific set of proteins it uses for acclimating to abiotic
stressors can be harnessed to improve agriculture so that farmers can capture
some of the yield that is lost every year to adverse weather events such as
drought. In prior NSF funded research the PI identified a new family of
receptors for ABA. Receptors are the first proteins that perceive and transmit
information about changing ABA levels and external stress and are critical
intermediaries in a plant's response to abiotic stress. In the current project,
the PI's laboratory is dissecting the function of the newly discovered receptor
family using a combination of genetic, biochemical and chemical approaches with
the goal of establishing which of the many receptors are most important for
abiotic stress tolerance. The broader impacts of this effort will be graduate
and postdoctoral training as well as new biotechnological strategies for
manipulating plant stress responses, which will ultimately strengthen U.S.
agriculture.