* 1258126
* Analysis of the Vernalization Regulatory Network in the Model Grass Brachypodium distachyon
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Richard Amasino, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2019
* USD 664,109.00

The timing of flowering is critical for plant survival, and in agricultural
settings proper timing of flowering is critical for maximal yield. In many plant
species, flowering occurs at a particular time of year in response to the
sensing of seasonal cues such as changes in the length of day and temperature.
This project is designed to further our understanding of how the timing of
flowering is regulated by environmental cues at a molecular level in the
grasses. Despite the fact that grasses include important food crops such as
wheat, rice and corn and potential bioenergy crops such as switchgrass, sorghum
and miscanthus, little is known about how flowering is regulated at a molecular
level in the grasses. This project will employ Brachypodium distachyon as a
model because this grass species exhibits a large range of natural variation in
flowering behavior that is genetically tractable, and it is straightforward to
identify the genes responsible for genetic differences in flowering among
different Brachypodium varieties. Understanding achieved by this project has the
potential to inform research designed to improve the productivity of food and
bioenergy crops. This project will result in the training of graduate students
and postdocs for independent careers in science, and will provide undergraduates
with an opportunity to learn about research in genetics, molecular biology and
plant biology. Students and postdocs working on this project are also encouraged
to contribute to our efforts to bring understanding of plant biology into K-12
classrooms.