* 1258103
* Collaborative Research: The role of host nutrient carriers in pathogen susceptibility
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Bing Yang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2017
* USD 461,814.00

Bacterial and fungal pathogens inflict major crop losses. The bacterium
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), the causal agent for bacterial blight of
rice, affects yield stability with losses up to 60% in the developing world.
Three groups with complementary expertise have identified a fundamental
mechanism for plant disease susceptibility involving Xoo-induced expression of
sugar transporters known as SWEETs. SWEETs are involved in the translocation of
sugars from photosynthetic leaves to roots, pollen, and seeds in uninfected
plants. Xoo directly induces SWEET gene expression using TAL (transcription
factor-like) effector proteins, which are injected from bacterium into leaf
cells. The team has also shown that genetic alterations affecting TAL effector
function through genomic editing of the target sequence in the host can be used
to engineer pathogen resistance. The team hypothesizes that growth of the
pathogen depends critically on nutrient supply from the host, and that Xoo
specifically targets sugar release from leaf cells for supplying carbon and
energy to the pathogen. They also hypothesize that this mechanism is relevant
for other host/pathogen systems. This work lays the basis for engineering robust
and broad disease resistance by targeting SWEETs encoded by a family of ~20
genes in rice and other crops. The results are expected to provide insight into
durable and broad resistance and have global impacts on the environment and
quality of life.

The insights gained from this project are relevant to engineering pathogen
resistance in rice, but due to the fundamental nature of the mechanism the
research may have impact in other crops. The project will provide training for
high-school, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdocs with an emphasis
on minorities at the interface between organismal interactions, cell biology and
nutrition physiology. The work will enhance the educational environments at ISU,
KSU, and the Carnegie Institution. The project will provide undergraduates with
valuable experience in the latest tools of genetic analysis and engineering.