* 1258463
* Workshop on Frontiers in Bioengineering Research, February 25-26, 2013, Atlanta, GA
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Gang Bao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

1258463 Bao

Intellectual Merit Bioengineering is an interdisciplinary field that integrates
engineering and life sciences to advance human health and well-being, and solve
other real-world problems. With recent advances in bioengineering and biomedical
research, especially in cellular and molecular bioengineering, biological and
medical imaging, biomaterials and nanomedicine, a significant amount of cutting
edge research has been performed over the last ten years, which has generated,
and will continue to generate a large impact to improving human health and
promoting environmental sustainability. However, the field of bioengineering is
also facing significant challenges. To further develop this field, it is
important to examine the current status of bioengineering research, discuss
major issues and challenges in this interdisciplinary field, and identify future
research directions that will significantly benefit our society.

To meet this critical need, the PI and co-PI, Drs. Gang Bao and Robert Nerem
have been organizing an NSF-sponsored Workshop titled, Workshop on Frontiers in
Bioengineering Research, to be held February 25-26, 2013 in Atlanta, GA. This
2-day workshop will consist of three sessions: (1) Biological and Medical
Imaging; (2) Bio-materials and Application; (3) Cellular and Molecular
Bioengineering. For each session, we have identified invited speakers and a
session chair. The specific objectives of this Workshop are: (1) to bring
together leaders of bioengineering to showcase the cutting-edge research in the
field, (2) to discuss the critical issues and challenges in further developing
this field, and (3) to identify future research directions in bioengineering.
Efforts will be made to recruit female and minority speakers and attendees, as
well as attracting young faculty members to the Workshop. It is expected that
this Workshop will help develop novel ideas and transformative research projects
that integrate engineering and life sciences, address fundamental biological
issues, and solve biomedical problems that significantly improve human health.

In order to achieve the goals of the Workshop, outstanding leaders of
bioengineering will be invited as keynote speakers or session chairs. This NSF
Conference Grant will cover their travel expanses and part of other Workshop
expenses. The presentations and discussions at the Workshop will be summarized
in a report to NSF. To help disseminate the outcomes of the Workshop, Annals of
Biomedical Engineering plans to publish a special issue that may include a
position paper on future directions of bioengineering based on the discussions
at the Workshop, and review articles in selected areas of bioengineering. The
Workshop presentations and reports will also be disseminated at the web site:
http://ibb.gatech.edu/frontiers

Broader Impact The intellectual merit of the proposed workshop is the
stimulation of creative, original, and potentially transformative new ideas and
concepts and the identification of future directions in bioengineering, thus
generating a broader impact to the fields of bioengineering, biotechnology,
biology and medicine. The discussions at this workshop will advance our
understanding of the underlying scientific and technological issues and
challenges in further developing bioengineering, and facilitate
interdisciplinary studies that may lead to a broader range of applications of
bioengineering to biology and medicine, from advanced bio-imaging technologies
and methods for medical applications, to new biomaterials for regenerative
medicine, to new devices using living cells as an engine, to new nanomedicine
approaches for diagnosing and treating human diseases. By having female and
minority speakers as the Workshop as role models, this Workshop will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups. This workshop will also stimulate
translational research and innovation, and inspire and help train the young
future leaders of bioengineering. The results of the workshop will be
disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding and
impact.