* 1258417
* Scholarships for Engineering Students in the East Tennessee Demographic Region
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Brian Edwards, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2018
* USD 606,800.00

Current projections indicate that the demand for U.S. graduates in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields in the upcoming decades
exceeds the supply, more U.S. graduates need to be produced in these fields. In
addition, diversity is one of the keys to national success in the technological
workforce, since the protocols of today require teams with members having
diverse viewpoints and backgrounds to perform the demanding and complex
engineering tasks required in global capital markets. This project is addressing
these issues by creating a systematic, goal-oriented program aimed directly at
increasing the number, and also the diversity, of majors in the College of
Engineering at the university. The STEM industries being targeted are those
which are well represented within the less technologically advanced southeastern
region of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Scholarships are being provided to well-qualified, financially needy
students from all demographic groups to pursue B.S. degrees in Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, Computer Engineering, and
Materials Science and Engineering. Scholarship students who would not otherwise
be able to afford a university education are recrutied and selected, with a
focus on increasing the diversity of the national pool of engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific program goals are to: &lt;br/&gt;a) provide
at least 80% of the necessary financial support for at least 30 students from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;b) provide these students with a rich educational
opportunity, through academic, research, and industrial co-op experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;c) retain at least 95% of these students until degree attainment.
&lt;br/&gt;d) place at least 20% of these students into internationally
recognized, top-tier graduate programs in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;e) place
the remainder of these students into industrial positions, particularly within
the southeastern region of the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;f) catalyze an immediate and
long-term expansion in the diversity of the engineering workforce in the
targeted industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
primary broader impact is a diversification of the technological workforce in
U.S. industries, with particularly emphasis on those located within the
economically depressed southeastern region of the nation. This is leading to an
engineering community that is better able to introduce innovative ideas,
designs, and products that allow U.S. industries to compete effectively in the
ever-changing global marketplace of the present and future. A secondary broader
impact is to place graduating students into international corporations within
the southeastern region of the nation, wherein they can quickly rise to
positions in which their own diverse viewpoints can positively impact those
corporations. Another broader impact of the program is to develop and improve a
model for diversifying STEM education that can be replicated at universities
throughout the southeastern region of the U.S., and to disseminate the results
of this effort through appropriate venues.