* 1258446
* EAGER: Promoting algebra learning through an accessible expression system for students with visual impairments and blindness
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Erica Slate, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 11/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The long-term goal of the PIs for this project is to transform the enterprise of
STEM education for blind students and those with visual impairments by creating
a fully accessible teaching platform that acknowledges their special needs.
Learning of mathematics for students with visual impairments and blindness,
including algebra, is especially difficult, as it requires finding and
describing patterns, making generalizations about numbers, and using symbols and
models to represent patterns. Rather than relying on visual cues, students with
visual impairments must compensate using other senses and cognitive abilities to
understand and apply concepts that typical students merely observe. This EAGER
project is designed to lay the groundwork for investigating in real-world
classroom settings which kinds of auditory and tactile representations will
promote conceptual learning in mathematics. The PIs are designing and refining a
platform that allows audio and other interactions, both for communicating with
the learner and for the learner to use to express him/herself. The platform
makes math materials accessible to the visually impaired and gives them ways of
expressing their math understanding. The functionality built into the platform
also allows interactions between visually-impaired students and remote math
teachers who specialize in teaching math to those who are blind and visually
impaired. Research explores the impact on the learning of algebra when students
are provided output and input of math auditorily via a computer as compared to
traditional methods of interaction and explores, as well, the affordances and
weaknesses of different input and output modalities. This will provide a
baseline of difficulties in grasping math concepts that still remain; the
intention is that research on explicitly promoting learning will come
after.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning of mathematics for students with
visual impairments and blindness is especially difficult. For most students with
visual impairments, the primary issues with learning mathematics, particularly
advanced mathematics, is due to the highly visual nature of the curriculum.
Algebra, a gateway course to other STEM disciplines, is particularly visual.
Therefore, many capable students with visual impairments are never afforded the
opportunity to complete advanced mathematics courses such as algebra, thus
impeding their prospects for success in STEM-related fields. This project
addresses first steps in ameliorating these problems, putting in place input and
output technologies that give visually impaired students better access to the
concepts of math and identifying which difficulties in learning the concepts of
mathematics remain. This work has potential to inform on ways to help those with
visual impairments more easily learn mathematics; its findings may also uncover
new ways of helping those without impairments but who find the abstractions of
mathematics difficult alternative means of learning mathematics more easily.
This project represents work in its early states on an untested but potentially
transformative idea and is likely to catalyze rapid and innovative advances in
the development of technologies for helping the blind and visually impaired
better grasp abstract mathematical concepts.