* 1258965
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Testing for archaic hominid introgression in Eritrean and Yemeni modern human genomes
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Deven Vyas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2017
* USD 26,135.00

There is strong consensus among scientists that modern humans evolved in Africa
and then dispersed throughout Europe and Asia around 60 thousand years ago.
Until recently, this process was thought to have occurred without any genetic
input from Neanderthals or other archaic humans. In contrast, recent research in
anthropological genetics has suggested there were minor levels of genetic
interbreeding with Neanderthals and the newly described "Denisovans" from
Denisova cave in Siberia. These arguments are based on comparisons of the draft
Neanderthal genome to a number of human whole genomes sequences; however, none
of the whole human genomes came from the Horn of Africa or southern Arabia,
which are regions critical to studies of the first human dispersals out of
Africa. It also has been questioned whether the evidence for Neanderthal
interbreeding could instead be an artifact of the ancestral human population not
randomly breeding (i.e., reflective of genetic structure in the ancient African
population). Using whole genome sequences from Eritrea and Yemen, doctoral
student Deven Vyas (University of Florida), under the guidance of Dr. Connie
Mulligan, will test the contrasting hypotheses of genetic interbreeding with
archaic humans versus ancient population structure in Africa. The latest next-
generation sequencing technologies will be utilized to generate whole human
genome sequences, and newly developed analytical methods will statistically test
support for the two competing hypotheses. The data have significant implications
for our understanding of the evolutionary history of humans and our knowledge of
the populations and processes that contributed to the modern human gene pool.
These novel genetic data from Eritrean and Yemeni individuals will be publicly
available to researchers all over the world, facilitating future research. In
addition, undergraduate students interested in scientific research will be
assisting in this project, continuing the strong tradition of mentoring and
training undergraduates to conduct scientific research in the Department of
Anthropology's Human Genetics Laboratory at the University of Florida, directed
by Dr. Mulligan.