* 1258389
* Student Travel Support for mHealthSys 2012
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

This award supports travel of eligible graduate students from US institutions of
higher learning to the second International workshop on mobile systems,
applications, and services for healthcare, (mHealthSys 2012). Grant recipients
will be required to attend the workshop and participate in a special session to
discuss their experience. Recent advances in technology such as miniaturization
of sensing and computing devices, new bio sensing modalities (e.g. respiration,
SpO2), increasing use of mobile phone sensors for health care, and wireless
integration of wearable sensors with smart phones are accelerating the
deployment of mobile systems for healthcare. The goal of the grants is to
encourage research interest and involvement of students who are not well-funded,
under-represented, or otherwise not likely to be able to attend high-profile
conferences in the field.

By financially facilitating attendance and generating discussion, the grant will
encourage such students to become active in the latest research directions in
this important field. The mHealthSys conference will take place in Toronto,
Canada, in November 2012. mHealthSys will explore, encourage, and accelerate
advances in wearable sensing, mobile phone sensing, algorithms, applications,
and services that aim to deliver healthcare in the unconstrained mobile
environment of individuals. The mHealthSys 2012 workshop we will bring together
a group of international researchers with expertise in mobile systems, sensor
systems, and medical informatics to push the state of the art of research at the
intersection of mobile systems, sensor systems, and healthcare.