* 1258891
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Scientific Collaboration in Time
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Carl Lagoze, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 170,338.00

This project explores an innovative interdisciplinary approach for studying the
dynamics of scientific collaboration. Over the last decade, science policy has
increasingly focused on the benefits of knowledge sharing, openness, and
collaboration, a policy theme that has motivated a number of large recent
investments by the NSF and other funding agencies in cyberinfrastructure
development and deployment. The success of these investments however depends on
attention to field-specific practices and cultures that may influence or even
block adoption of cyberinfrastructure. This exploratory project sets out to
advance a new interdisciplinary methodology that integrates ethnographic field
studies with the analysis of large-scale publication networks to strengthen the
empirical basis for understanding field differences in scientific collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologically, this project offers an innovative
integration of quantitative network analysis of large publication networks with
qualitative ethnographic field studies. Theoretically and substantively, it
illustrates on the multi-level temporal dynamics that shape, and sometimes
frustrate, efforts at scientific collaboration and innovation. The methodology
developed in this project supports field-level comparisons of scientific
communities and fills a critical gap in the research capabilities of
scientometrics, innovation studies, and science policy, which are too often
split between macro-scale (countries, disciplines, journals) or micro-scale
(individuals, specific research localities) analyses, neglecting meso-scale
dynamics that are formative to the shape and outcome of scientific knowledge
production within and across fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project investigates the addition of a temporal dimension to a network
ethnographic approach to study and compare temporal dimensions of scientific
collaboration across research fields. The test cases are provided by two
research fields (in ecology and at the boundary between physics and chemistry)
that exhibit significant variation in the temporal rhythms that underlie the
structure of short- and long-term collaborations within a research group and
between this group and its collaborators. Adding temporality to the analysis
increases the resolution of collective structures in publication networks to
support the strategic sampling of ethnographic field sites; enables the study of
the emergence and evolution of collaborative structures at the team, sub-
community, and field level and the detection of field-specific historical
trends; and supports the search for field differences in the timing and rhythms
of collaborative activities. This EAGER projects serves to explore and test the
suitability of a network-analytic approach to capture scientific collaboration
dynamics at various scales before deploying it in larger-scale empirical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through strengthening the
empirical base to inform science and innovation policy and to guide investment
decisions, this exploratory project develops a methodological approach with a
wide re-use potential for the comparative study of collaboration dynamics in
scientific communities. Understanding the field-specific dynamics, tensions, and
challenges of collaboration practices and their evolution over time is critical
when the potential benefit and impact of policy and socio-technical
interventions (such as cyberinfrastructure, data sharing mandates, and new
incentive schemes), and, by improving metrics to quantify the impacts of these
investments, complements existing investments and informs future investments in
these specific areas.&lt;br/&gt;