* 1258078
* Systematic study of cryptic genetic variation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Siegal, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

Some genetic differences cause differences in observable traits. For example,
differences in genes controlling eye-pigment production lead to differences in
eye color. Other genetic differences have no consequence, because they do not
affect any biological process in any meaningful way. A third type of genetic
difference, called cryptic genetic variation, is the focus of this project. A
cryptic genetic variant is inconsequential under normal circumstances, but
causes an observable difference under altered circumstances, such as when the
environment dramatically changes. Cryptic genetic variation has not been well
studied, but it has been proposed to be important in the adaptation of organisms
to environmental stress and climate change. The aim of this project is to gain a
better understanding of cryptic genetic variation, by studying it in a more
systematic, quantitative way than has been done before. The project will use the
fly Drosophila melanogaster, the study of which has advanced genetics research
for over 100 years. Cryptic genetic variation will be revealed in a diverse
collection of flies, and the induced variation in the shapes, sizes and numbers
of relevant body parts will be quantified. The underlying cause of the induced
variation will be investigated by using a powerful technology to measure, in
sets of different flies, the activities of thousands of genes. The expected
outcome of the project is an increased understanding of both the extent of
cryptic genetic variation and the molecular processes that convert
inconsequential genetic variants into ones that cause individuals to appear
different. The project will also contribute to the training of young scientists
in several ways. The PI is Director of Undergraduate studies for Biology at New
York University and is actively involved in placing undergraduate students in
research laboratories, including members of groups underrepresented in science.
In addition, the PI participates in an Open Education Project, and his lectures
on Genomes and Diversity for non-science majors are freely available online.
Finally, the PI will participate in public outreach efforts to highlight the
relevance of cryptic genetic variation to climate change, in part through an
online module on these topics.