* 1258577
* EAGER: Collaborative: Process-Based Technology to Support Comparison and Evaluation of the Security of Elections
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Matt Bishop, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Shands
* 09/30/2014
* USD 75,000.00

This project explores process composition tools as applied to elections,
concentrating particularly on mail-in and Internet voting. This includes
exploration of how to compose systems from pre-analyzed process components, how
to analyze the vulnerability of these systems to attacks, and how to guarantee
that important security properties are ensured for the resulting composed
system. The underlying processes represent aspects of national and local
elections, their composition produces an election process, and analysis of the
composition gives insight into potential errors or attacks on the election.

Elections are human-intensive processes, processes that directly involve humans
in important decision-making and coordination activities, including their
interactions with hardware and software components. Providing an approach for
formally reasoning about human participation extends current security work. The
project also breaks new ground by exploring process-based approaches for
modeling and defending against attacks.

The project works closely with government agencies at both the national and
local levels to provide in-depth realistic evaluation of results.

Election officials in the U.S. can directly employ the results of this work to
make U.S. election processes more verifiably secure, simpler, and easier to
change as new technologies, laws, and regulations are imposed. Moreover the
technologies developed in this project can be used in most human-intensive
processes that have critical security concerns.