* 1258507
* IGERT-CIF21: Interdisciplinary Graduate Education Research and Training in Network Science
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,799,907.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
provides Ph.D. students at the University of California at Santa Barbara with
the skills to design more efficient and robust empirical networks based on their
analyses of large data sets derived from existing networks. By training students
to examine multiple types of networks, such as genetic, economic, and social
networks, this program aims to advance the field of Network Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This traineeship program is a
collaboration among seven graduate departments (Computer Science, Communication,
Ecology, Evolution &amp; Marine Biology, Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering,
Geography, Mechanical Engineering, and Sociology), which will enable trainees to
learn computational methods to engineer, control, measure, and predict the
dynamics of large networks. Through the program?s Network Science Laboratory,
trainees will participate in team-based modules and obtain hands-on experience
with software, empirical data sets, and interdisciplinary science. Additionally,
trainees will participate in weekly seminars, summer internships, workshops, and
an innovation program focused on problem solving and creative
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By providing students with
interdisciplinary training in Network Science, this program will advance the
emerging field of Network Science and will serve as a model for similar academic
programs across the nation. Moreover, this program aims to recruit, retain, and
mentor 70% women and underrepresented minority students from University of
California at Santa Barbara undergraduates as well as students from four partner
institutions: California State University at San Bernardino, California State
University at Los Angeles, University of California at Merced, and University of
New Mexico, all of which are Hispanic Serving Institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.