* 1258823
* SAVI: Collaborative Research: Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic--the Irminger and Iceland Basins
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Fiammetta Straneo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,717,869.00

This project is one of two components of a US-led international program,
Overturning in the Sub-polar North Atlantic (OSNAP), designed to provide a
continuous record of the full-water column, trans-basin fluxes of heat, mass and
freshwater in the subpolar North Atlantic. The OSNAP observing system consists
of two legs: one extending from southern Labrador to the southwestern tip of
Greenland across the mouth of the Labrador Sea (OSNAP West), and the second from
the southeastern tip of Greenland to Scotland (OSNAP East). The observing system
also includes subsurface floats (OSNAP Floats) in order to trace the pathways of
overflow waters in the basin and to assess the connectivity of currents crossing
the OSNAP line. The location of the OSNAP East and West legs purposefully melds
with a number of long-term observational efforts in the North Atlantic: the
Canadian repeat hydrography program in the Labrador Sea; the German Labrador Sea
western boundary array at 53°N; the global Ocean Observatories Initiative node
to be placed in the southwestern Irminger Sea; the repeat hydrographic sections
across the Irminger and Iceland basins; and the Ellett line in the Rockall
region. Substantial international collaboration has been garnered for OSNAP,
including measurement contributions from the UK, Germany, the Netherlands and
Canada. Importantly, this proposed observing system, in conjunction with the
RAPID/MOCHA array at 26°N and the European Union NACLIM program at Nordic Seas
overflows, will provide the first comprehensive three-dimensional measure of the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and provide a means to
evaluate inter-gyre connectivity in the North Atlantic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will implement the eastern
section of OSNAP in partnership with the U.K. and the Netherlands. Measurements
along the composite trans-basin section will consist of a mix of moorings and
gliders that will allow for the measure of the net overturning rate in the
eastern North Atlantic sub-polar gyre resulting from the Denmark Strait and
Iceland-Scotland overflows, the subsequent entrainment into these overflows, the
net inflow of subtropical waters across the OSNAP East line, the local (i..e.,
within the Irminger and Iceland basins) transformation of subtropical waters,
and the freshwater transport from the Arctic into the Irminger basin via the
East Greenland Current.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: For decades
oceanographers have understood the AMOC to be highly susceptible to changes in
the production of NADW. However, a number of recent observational and modeling
studies have called into question this supposition, as more has been learned
about the role of wind forcing in AMOC variability. Thus, the overall goal of
this project is to establish an observing system that will determine the role
that intermediate and deep water mass formation and basin-scale wind forcing
play in the overturning and associated poleward heat transport, assessments that
currently have only been theorized and modeled, but not
observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In January of 2007, the US Joint
Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology identified the study of the AMOC as
one of four near-term priorities in the US Ocean Research Priorities Plan. This
proposed work directly addresses that priority via a design of an AMOC observing
system in the sub-polar North Atlantic. While a primary motivation for studying
AMOC variability comes from its potential impact on the climate system,
additional motivation for the measure of the heat, mass and freshwater fluxes in
the sub-polar North Atlantic arises from their potential impact on marine
biogeochemistry and the cryosphere. There is growing evidence that the ocean has
played (and is playing) a role in the reduction of Arctic sea ice and in mass
loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet - both of which have been attributed to
changes in the poleward heat transport by the ocean. Also, the ocean plays an
essential role in the carbon cycle by moderating increasing atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide through the sequestration of anthropogenic
carbon in the deep ocean. Variability in the AMOC is expected to impact this
sequestration. Broader impacts also include the training of five graduate
students in seagoing operations and in the processing and analysis of
observational data. The graduate students will have an opportunity to
collaborate with their international counterparts through virtual meetings and
in-person visits and will be mentored by multiple advisors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research award includes support for a Science Across
Virtual Institutes (SAVI) component that is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International and Integrative Activities.