* 1258062
* How Environment, Physiology and Life History Interact to Determine Pattern in Animal Migration
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Stephen Blake, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 614,960.00

Animal migration is perhaps the most spectacular ecological phenomenon on Earth.
Be it tiny Arctic terns navigating annually between the poles, or millions of
wildebeest doggedly traversing the Serengeti plains of Africa, migration
captures the imagination of people like few other biological events. Yet despite
its ecological importance and cultural significance, the science of migration
remains poorly understood. Even basic questions about why, when, where, who and
how animals migrate are largely unanswered. Why, for example, would a 600 pound
giant tortoise -- a large reptile that can easily survive for a year or more
without food or water -- migrate seasonally up and down the lava strewn volcanic
slopes of the Galapagos Islands? Why is it that only adults migrate? And why do
tortoises on some islands barely move at all? Giant tortoises represent a
tractable "model" for understanding animal migration because many distinct
species have evolved under very different environmental conditions within a
small geographical area. In this project, a suite of research methods, including
GPS telemetry of both young and adults will be used to track Galapagos tortoise
movements. Tortoise health, including exposure to infectious diseases, parasite
infection and stress levels, will be studied through blood and dung samples,
while traditional field work will measure reproductive success of migratory
versus non-migratory individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will answer
some of the fundamental questions underpinning movement ecology in all animals,
not just giant tortoises. In a world that is rapidly changing due to human
activities, understanding animal migration is key to predicting which animals
will be most affected and devising management plans for them. Because migratory
animals can be important vectors of diseases that impact humans and agriculture,
the significance of this work extends beyond wildlife. Finally, all results will
be packaged into an exciting outreach program with the aim of inspiring and
educating children in both Galapagos and the USA toward a stronger appreciation
of ecological sciences and strategies of conservation.