* 1258323
* CAREER:  Optimization of Screening and Treatment Delivery Systems for Chronic Diseases
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/30/2012,12/31/2014
* Brian Denton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 12/31/2014
* USD 314,474.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop new operations research (OR) models and methods to advance the
science of health care delivery for life-threatening chronic diseases such as
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Recent advances in medical
treatment have resulted in a longer lifespan for many Americans. At the same
time the patient population is growing more complex, with multiple chronic
diseases, competing risks of health complications, and medication conflicts. As
a result, medical decisions are becoming harder because what helps one patient
or condition may harm another. Chronic disease screening and medical treatment
decisions combine large state spaces that define patient health characteristics,
such as clinical risk factors and medication histories, with uncertainty in
future health outcomes due to differences among patients in genetic,
environmental, and other factors. Decisions about treatment and screening take
place over long periods (sometimes decades) under constraints due to medication
conflicts. As a result, the stochastic and sequential decision making process
gives rise to computational optimization problems that are often unsolvable with
state-of-the-art algorithms and computing resources. However, these problems
have promising structural properties that can be exploited to achieve meaningful
theoretical insights and computationally tractable stochastic optimization
methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Advancing the understanding of chronic care
delivery has the potential to improve the quality of life for a large and
growing proportion of the US population. The translation of discoveries based on
this research has the potential to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
national screening and treatment policies. Results of this research will be
disseminated to the medical community, the engineering research community, and
incorporated into educational materials ranging from high school to doctoral
studies.