* 1258878
* Facility Support: High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 741,998.00

1258878&lt;br/&gt;Ketcham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Earth Sciences
Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant supports continued operation of the
University of Texas Computed X-ray Tomography (UTCT) Facility over a three year
period. The CT scanner at UT was specifically designed to enable x-ray
tomography of a range of geological materials and sample sizes. The technology
was developed from commercial biomedical CAT scanners with the adoption of a
higher energy x-ray source and higher resolution CCD detectors to allow micron-
scale imaging of geological samples. The technique allows for completely non-
destructive imaging of the exteriors and interiors of samples. Differences in
x-ray attenuation that occur due to variations in sample density and the
elemental composition of the material along the x-ray path are digitally
recorded by a CCD. Samples are mounted on a rotating table in front of the x-ray
source. Radial 2-d slices of the attenuated x-rays are stacked by vertical
translation of the sample table. Resultant x-ray ?sinograms? are then reduced
via computer algorithms to render high resolution 3-D images of the density
distributions within samples. A ongoing upgrade of the UTCT high energy system
will increase both resolution and scanning speed, lowering costs for lab clients
and opening a multitude of new research possibilities. In particular, it will
enable ?4D? scanning of systems in motion (during fluid flow, cooling, heating,
strain, etc.). Exploration and exploitation of these new capabilities for an
expanded range of studies including studies of fluid flow through fractured and
porous media with relevance to groundwater hydrology, hydrocarbon reservoir
extraction enhancement and carbon dioxide subsurface sequestration will be
enabled by this renewal award. Continued support will benefit a large and
diverse set of research constituencies. Over the last two years , UTCT has
served 194 principal investigators, most of whom are Earth scientists spanning
the full breadth of subdisciplines, including petrology, paleontology,
structural geology, hydrology, meteoritics, and economic and petroleum geology.
UTCT's clientele also includes many researchers in other fields, principally
biology, engineering, and anthropology. Three-quarters of investigators were
from outside the University of Texas. The facility will continue to support user
training through developed short courses and assist users in data reduction
routines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***