* 1258821
* EAGER: Direct Upgrading and Stabilization of Pyrolysis Bio-Oil via Microwave-Induced Inverse Thermal Flux
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Dorin Boldor, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 74,887.00

The promise of biomass-derived transportation fuels and specialty chemicals is
based&lt;br/&gt;on the premise that complex organic molecules in readily
available biomass can be converted via a biochemical or thermochemical platform
into much simpler molecular building blocks. However, the reality is that
biochemical routes are not yet competitive in the commercial markets, while
conventional thermochemical routes such as pyrolysis currently produce a low-
quality, highly oxygenated bio-oil that is unstable due to the presence of
reactive molecules and high acidity. In order to develop advanced biofuels and
specialty chemicals, the pyrolysis oil needs to be upgraded and stabilized,
usually employing high temperature and pressure reactors containing various
catalyst beds. In the upgrading process, the unstable molecules have a great
tendency to re-polymerize into higher molecular weight compounds, leading to
catalyst instability and operational problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Dorin Boldor of Louisiana State University will test the hypothesis that a
microwave heating system of high energy density with a well-controlled
electromagnetic field distribution, when coupled with the proper upgrading
catalyst choice can significantly increase the reaction rates and increase the
catalyst usable lifetime by direct volumetric heating of the catalyst bed and
therefore producing a bio-oil of superior quality compared to that obtained in
conventional heating systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the development of a
sustainable, renewable and reliable source of energy for our society, it is
highly desirable to demonstrate a biomass process platform to produce a
transportation fuel. The proposed research, if successful, achieves this goal by
demonstrating a transformative technology for bio-oil upgrading, which can
increase the lifetime of the catalysts and reduce operational costs.This is an
EAGER topic in that there is no data to indicate this proposed plan will be
successful. The microwave technology may have little impact on rates or on
upgrading. It is conceivable that repolymerization is accelerated with greater
catalyst instability. The successful completion of this research project will
allow Boldor to acquire data in order to prove or disprove the likelihood of
success. This data would then form the foundation of a further research program
to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms behind the increased process performance
at the gas-solid interface in the presence of microwave
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train a current PhD student in the
PI?s lab from an underrepresented group. She will gain and master skills
critically needed in the competitive labor market of the 21st century. To
further increase the impact of the research, the knowledge developed will be
incorporated in the ?Biofuels and Bioproducts from Renewable Resources? course
taught by the PI, which includes a Service-Learning component in which students
demonstrate projects developed in class (one of which is production of bio-oil
via pyrolysis) to students enrolled in middle and high school science courses.