* 1258645
* Workshop: Ecohydrology and Food Web Ecology on the Tonle Sap Lake- Lower Mekong, Sept. 25-28, 2012, -Santa Ynez, CA
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2013
* USD 16,433.00

The Mekong River is one of the largest river systems on earth, and supports one
of the most biologically diverse aquatic ecosystems in the world. The Tonle Sap
Lake on the Mekong River is one of the most productive freshwater fisheries in
the world. Seasonally inundated during the flood season of the Mekong, the flood
waters of the Mekong fill the Tonle Sap basin. The fisheries associated with the
Tonle Sap and its flood pulse ecology provide the majority of the protein for
several million people in Cambodia. Despite the global ecological significance
of the Tonle Sap and the regional importance of the fishery, scientific
knowledge of the ecology of the ecosystem and of the processes underlying its
productivity is rudimentary. The life histories of most fish species in the
system have not been documented, data on foodweb relationships are almost
entirely lacking and the basic processes sustaining the incredible productivity
of the system are unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together a working group to develop a research plan and modeling effort to
provide the baseline ecological understanding and the development of local
research capacity through provision of needed scientific infrastructure and the
training of new scientists. The working group will focus on ecological research
for the Tonle Sap, designed to gather data fundamental to sound management
before the system is unrecognizably altered by climate change, upstream
developments and intensive fisheries. A secondary focus of the workshop will be
a working group to focus on Tonle Sap Foodweb Modeling. The plan will integrate
the PEER-funded research of Veasna Kum and collaborators. This workshop will
achieve broader impacts by providing a research plan, developing a consortium of
research partners (international and peer), and by training and capacity-
building to complement the PEER award to Dr. Kum.