* 1258500
* EAGER: An Exploratory Pilot Project to Build Human-Centric Physical Activity Monitoring Tools for Enhancing Rehabilitation Therapy Engagement and Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2014
* USD 170,026.00

There are many types of disabilities caused by arthritis, where systematic
physical activity and physical therapy are essential to preventing further
deterioration. The challenge here is that periods of severe pain are an obstacle
to such activities. The relationship between pain and physical activity is very
tricky; it typically involves all joints (e.g., hands, wrists, feet, knees) and
is a major cause of reduced quality of life and disability. This is the case
with Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), a chronic systemic inflammatory disease, where
preserving functional range of motion and enhancing cardiovascular health are
primary goals of physical therapy. Persons with RA who exercise regularly show
not only improvements in muscle strength and overall physical and health
function, but also reduced mortality. But it has been shown that long-term
engagement in exercise among patients with RA is poor and does not exceed 50%
when patients are not supervised. This results in a huge cost to national health
care and to national productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI argues that
computer technology (tools and interfaces) can help the RA patient remain
motivated and maintain movement. In this exploratory project her team will
develop some of the components for motion capture and data integration that will
eventually be integrated into a system called RPLAY which will enable patients
with RA to perform physical therapy at home while the system accurately monitors
their joint motions, motor performance and other physiological indicators.
Specific objectives include: development of preliminary tools for human-centric
adaptive remote monitoring, including facial, hand, arm, and body motions, and
range of motion; development of prototype interactive games to encourage patient
rehabilitation, and of a prototype user interface through which the patient and
therapist can communicate via avatars to promote physical activity; and
development of tools for validating the physical therapy monitoring and
assessment results and their integration into a visualization and report system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project addresses issues of human
joint pain and physical inactivity, which adversely affect the everyday lives of
millions of people. It will lay the foundations for integrating disparate human
data of persons in similar conditions, which will advance and extend the
relationship between engineering innovation and computational analysis. The
project will provide a training experience for computer science PhD students in
modeling human motion in innovative ways. The project will also lead to an
interdisciplinary course for physical therapy and computer science students on
improving health delivery and rehabilitation practices.