* 1258998
* SHINE: Incorporating 3D Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD) Turbulence Simulations and Kinetic Plasma Physics into a Two-Fluid Model of the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Benjamin Chandran, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 428,674.00

With this three-year SHINE project, the researchers will explore the means by
which the solar wind and Alfven-wave turbulence are affected by variations in
the amplitude, wavenumber spectrum, and frequency spectrum of the waves that are
launched by the Sun. The project team will also consider the effects of magnetic
geometry (in particular, the degree of super-radial expansion) on the properties
of turbulence and the background solar wind, which will enable them to explore
the possible relevance of Alfven-wave turbulence to the heating and acceleration
of both the fast solar wind and the slow solar wind. The team will compare the
results obtained from numerical simulations to a wide range of observations of
coronal holes and the near-Sun solar wind, including measurements of Faraday
rotation, ion temperatures, and electron densities. This research project is
expected to significantly advance the community's understanding of the role that
Alfven-wave turbulence may play in the origin of the solar
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, the team will co-organize
sessions on turbulence and the solar wind at the annual SHINE Workshop. The PI
will also deliver lectures at summer schools on plasma physics and heliospheric
physics for advanced undergraduate students and graduate students. The PI will
incorporate results from this project into courses that he teaches at the
University of New Hampshire, to expose students to current research in
heliospheric physics. The project team will also share and discuss the results
of this work with members of the Solar Probe Plus FIELDS and SWEAP experiments,
to offer guidance as to the possible relation between future measurements from
Solar Probe Plus and Alfven-wave turbulence in the solar wind. The research and
EPO agenda supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.