* 1258799
* Chloroplast Lipid Composition: Connecting Biophysics to Photosynthetic Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* John Browse, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 356,069.00

Life on Earth depends on plant photosynthesis, so it is vital that we fully
understand all the component systems that contribute to photosynthetic function
and how these respond to alterations in environmental parameters. Despite
considerable research effort over the last twenty years, knowledge of how the
lipid composition of the photosynthetic (thylakoid) membrane facilitates
photosynthesis remains rudimentary. This project aims to understand the physical
characteristics of thylakoid lipids, the biochemistry and regulation of lipid
synthesis, and the particular lipid requirements for chloroplast biogenesis and
function. The project will use the full range of biochemical, molecular and
genetic techniques to investigate mutants of the model plant, Arabidopsis, in
which different changes in membrane lipid composition are associated with
dramatic phenotypes. The knowledge gained will help scientists predict the
likely consequences of environmental changes on plant growth and crop
productivity. Eventually it will be possible to manipulate membrane lipid
composition of plants to better suit particular environmental conditions, such
as those that may develop during global warming. Because photosynthesis is
central to plant productivity, the extensive temperature-dependent effects
observed in the mutants have wide implications for understanding the temperature
responses of plants, and agricultural production systems. Furthermore, the
improved understanding of chloroplast structure and photosynthetic function that
will result from this research is an important prerequisite to modifying
photosynthesis for increased plant productivity. This project will also provide
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to receive training and
experience in plant biology research relevant to agriculture, forestry and other
fields of plant production. In support of open and cooperative science, the
mutant stocks and other resources developed in this project will be freely
available from established stock centers and from the principal investigator,
directly.