* 1258135
* Dissection Of Polysaccharide Deposition And Assembly Into Plant Cell Walls
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Georgia Drakakaki, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 574,893.00

The overarching long-term goal of this multidisciplinary project is to
investigate how plant cells deliver different polysaccharides, enzymes and
structural proteins into their developing cell walls. Plant cell walls are
dynamic structures that play a pivotal role in growth and development, the
maintenance of cell integrity and protection against pathogens. They are
composed primarily of structural carbohydrates that can be broken down into
sugars, providing energy directly as food/feed, or indirectly as biofuels. Thus,
an improved understanding of how cell walls are assembled can lead to an
increased food supply and renewable sources of fuels. Although the structure and
synthesis of plant cell walls is generally understood, remarkably little is
known about the transport mechanisms of polysaccharides and the cell wall
biosynthesis machinery. This transport is mediated through a complex network of
subcellular compartments called the endomembrane system. This project aims at
identifying endomembrane trafficking pathways regulating the transport and
deposition of cell wall components. The project uses cell permeable small
molecules that inhibit cell wall deposition. With the aid of these compounds,
the targeted endomembrane pathways will be characterized and new components
involved in these pathways will be identified. Multidisciplinary approaches
including genetics, cell biology and biochemistry will add to our understanding
of the processes that regulate wall deposition. A number of student-scientists,
including undergraduate students from underrepresented and financially
disadvantaged ethnic groups will receive multidisciplinary research training in
the project, thus enhancing the ethnic and cultural diversity of the scientific
community. Selected chemical probes from the project will be used as live
imaging teaching tools in an undergraduate laboratory course. Hands-on
laboratory experience for regional life sciences educators will be provided,
transferring excitement and state of the art knowledge across the educational
system. Data generated through this project will be available through Chemmine
(http://bioweb.ucr.edu/ChemMineV2/) and MASCP Gator (http://gator.masc-
proteomics.org/); materials such as seed stocks and constructs will be available
through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (http://abrc.osu.edu/).