* 1258482
* EAGER: A Decision Analytic Framework for Large-Scale Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Ali Abbas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 10/31/2015
* USD 298,924.00

The research objective of this EArly Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to derive a multidisciplinary theory of normative decision
making for design and manufacturing organizations. The theory will provide new
axioms for normative decision making for two types of enterprises: profit
maximizing firms (such as John Deere) and federal/governmental design
enterprises (such as NASA Langley Research Center). The theory will translate
the axioms into mathematical formulations for consistent decision making for the
ultimate purpose of improving the design and manufacturing decisions within the
United States. For a profit maximizing firm, a fundamental axiom will be
investigated: that there be no division within an organization that will accept
a project if another division within the same organization, and with the same
information and resources, would reject. This axiom will translate into the
necessity of a corporate utility function: divisions within the same
organization will operate with the same risk attitude when making design
decisions. The research will illustrate how to assess a corporate utility
function and will explore the decision making behavior that results from common
incentive structures within design firms. The work will also derive unique
incentive structures that align incentivized behavior with expected utility
maximizing behavior. Behavioral experiments will be conducted to verify whether
the incentive structures are feasible and match the desired expected utility
framework. Verification of the results will also be achieved through industry
collaborators. A new Bayesian framework for demand estimation will also be
explored and will be used in maximizing the expected utility of profit. The
research will include a significant educational component with NASA Langley,
John Deere, and the engineering design community.

If successful, the research will advance the theory and practice of engineering
design by introducing several new theoretical foundations for normative decision
making within the design process. The theory will (i) align design requirements
with the value function for the firm, (ii) align incentive structures with
expected utility maximizing behavior, (iii) provide axioms needed for consistent
decision making within a design firm. The high risk elements within this award
include verifying the new methods with the industry partners and NASA, as well
as identifying the transition mechanism to incorporate the decision framework
within the current design organizations. Improving the decision making within
design enterprises is a cornerstone of the U.S. economy. By appropriately
identifying the processes needed for consistent decision making, individuals,
design engineers, and various business enterprises will produce better products.
Besides the theoretical and experimental work, this award will enable the PI to
conduct two workshops in collaboration with NASA Langley, John Deere and other
members of the design and manufacturing community: the first will be on "Setting
Value-Based Requirements for Engineering Design" and the second will be on
'Aligning Incentive Structures with Expected Utility Maximization'. The research
will be disseminated broadly and the award will enable the PI to continue a
joint collaboration the Champaign County Juvenile Detention Center (JDC)
spreading decision skills to troubled teens.