* 1258888
* The Biographies of Scientific Ideas: What the Content and Structure of Citations Reveal About the Diffusion of Knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Freda Lynn, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 159,234.00

Currently, more than a million scholarly articles are published per year.
Understanding how these journal articles, often the primary unit of scientific
research, are consumed over time by the scientific community is essential to
understanding the production and dissemination of knowledge. Conventionally, the
main strategy used to gauge the impact of scientific research is to count the
number of citations received. The central problem with this approach is that
citation counts do not distinguish between the context of the citation (e.g.,
the difference between positive, critical, and symbolic) nor do they consider
the source of the citation (e.g., the difference between 100 detailed references
from area experts and 100 ceremonial mentions from non-specialists). Citation
counts thus reveal very little about how researchers actually use and interpret
existing knowledge, which directly impedes our ability to meaningfully gauge the
impact of scientific research. This project develops new insight into how
knowledge accumulates by systematically examining how a set of seed publications
are incorporated, distilled, and expanded upon by a set of potentially connected
citing publications. This entails compiling a large, longitudinal dataset of
focal articles and their citation histories, which will then be analyzed as life
histories. The methodological strategy is a unique combination of quantitative
and qualitative approaches (citation context analysis, co-citation analysis,
citation network analysis) that allows for the "thick description" of issues
related to time, interpretation, audience, and disciplinary context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a large sample of flagship journal
articles from two disciplines: sociology and medicine. The results will thus
inform long-standing questions about how knowledge accumulates in the 'hard'
versus 'soft' sciences. In addition, studying the diffusion and incorporation of
medical findings has practical implications for health policy makers, addressing
recent claims that clinical research studies typically go unchallenged in the
medical research community. Finally, the data generated from this project create
new opportunities to study the diffusion of innovations, networks, and social
influence. First, by following a cohort of papers published at the same time,
the research avoids retrospective sampling on "winning" innovations. Second, for
each seed article, the timeline and connectedness of its adopters can be
directly mapped via direct citation links as well as co-citation links. Third,
unlike most kinds of adoption data (e.g., sales data), citation choices give us
some insight into how an innovation was adopted. The content of the citation
provides new data on whether some citers are more influential than others in
publicizing certain aspects of an innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This historical study is designed to produce new insights into
what advancement in science actually entails. Examining how ideas are used and
incorporated provides a foundation for evaluating the logic and efficiency of
knowledge accumulation in science. In the long-term, these insights will enable
the development of metrics that describe the use-value of the myriad "new" ideas
put forth each year in science. The project thus facilitates the creation of new
empirically grounded tools that science and innovation policy makers can use to
gauge the scientific impact of research publications and individual scholars.