* 1258485
* IGERT-CIF21: Big Data U: A Program for Integrated Multidisciplinary Education and Research for Big Data Science
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John Weishampel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,800,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
provides Ph.D. students at the University of Washington with multidisciplinary
training in computer science, statistics, and domain sciences (oceanography,
astronomy, chemistry, and genome sciences). Through this blended approach,
trainees will learn how to manage, analyze, and visualize increasingly large
amounts of data (known as ?Big Data?), thereby being prepared to address the
challenges of cyberinfrastructure in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By developing a new Ph.D. program that
involves partnerships with 11 leading companies and national labs in the field
of Big Data, this program provides trainees with a collaborative approach to
processing, scaling, and modeling massive and complex data sets for the
scientific community. Trainees learn to create new statistical and machine
learning techniques needed to manage large data sets. Additionally, this program
builds an open-source system for scientists worldwide to access and analyze Big
Data through a Cloud service.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This IGERT
traineeship program aims to create a new Big Data curriculum that will be
delivered online and through University of Washington outreach initiatives. The
program also prepares a new generation of scientists with the interdisciplinary
tools to approach problems that will arise in the field of cyberinfrastructure.
Moreover, this program promotes the development of a diverse STEM workforce by
recruiting and training underrepresented groups, women, and students with
disabilities, particularly through a partnership with the AccessComputing
Alliance and the University of Washington DO-IT
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to establish new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries, and to engage students in
understanding the processes by which research is translated to innovations for
societal benefit.