* 1258120
* Genomic analysis of adaptation to an extreme terrestrial environment
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Alan Pepper, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Organisms have adapted to an astonishing diversity of habitats on our planet.
One of the most extreme terrestrial habitats is the result of geological
exposures of serpentine rocks, which are the product of chemical and
hydrological modification of materials from the Earth's mantle. Serpentine rocks
(and soils derived from these rocks) have extremely limited amounts of a number
of essential mineral nutrients, including nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, and
calcium. In addition, they have naturally high levels of toxic 'heavy' metals
such as nickel and chromium. As a result of these multiple chemical challenges,
serpentine environments are characterized by poor soil development, low levels
of organic matter, and susceptibility to drought. Only a small number of plant,
animal and microbial life forms have adapted to the harsh serpentine
environment.

The Santa Barbara Jewelflower, C. amplexicaulis var. barbarae is a wild plant in
the mustard family that is adapted to (and in fact restricted to) serpentine
geology. To study the genetic, physiological and molecular mechanisms that
underlie adaptation to serpentine habitats, this plant was crossed to its close
relative C. amplexicauis var. amplexicaulis, which grows on granite soils and
shows 100% mortality on serpentine. Progeny from this cross were used to create
an experimental population that showed genetic segregation for several
serpentine-tolerance traits, including growth on low calcium, low nitrogen, and
low phosphorous, as well as high nickel concentrations. These genetic resources
will be used along with next-generation sequencing of all expressed genes
(transcriptomics) and whole-genome resequencing to identify the genes and
genetic interactions that underlie adaptation to the serpentine environment.

The serpentine taxon C. amplexicaulis var. barbarae shows superior growth in low
nitrogen and low phosphorous conditions, compared to the non-serpentine C.
amplexicaulis var. amplexicaulis. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
underlying these genetic differences will stimulate new approaches to the
development of crops that require smaller applications of nitrogen and
phosphorous fertilizers to achieve optimum productivity, and thus help address
some of the most pressing agro-environmental issues facing humankind: balancing
global food production against pollution by excess application of nitrogen and
phosphorous fertilizers (leading to eutrophication, coastal 'dead zones', coral
reef destruction, and other ecological degradation). Further, in laboratory
experiments, C. amplexicaulis var. barbarae shows superior tolerance to toxic
nickel, and actually hyper-accumulates nickel to extraordinary levels (~1% dry
weight). Understanding the genetic mechanisms of heavy metal tolerance and
accumulation will provide the foundational science that will foster the
development of efficient phytoremediation systems for metal contaminated sites.

In collaboration with an educationally innovative high school that encompasses a
natural serpentine outcrop with a native population of Caulanthus amplexicaulis
var. barbarae, this project will explore a new paradigm for involving students
and faculty in authentic collaborative research that is integrated with teaching
in mathematics, spatial sciences, earth sciences, and biology.