* 1258994
* Collaborative Research: Stream Consumers and Lotic Ecosystem Rates (SCALER): Scaling from Centimeters to Continents
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Ford Ballantyne, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2017
* USD 192,776.00

The overarching question that Scale, Consumers and Lotic Ecosystem Rates
(SCALER) will address is: How can small-scale ecological experiments be applied
to understand the behavior of entire ecological systems? Funds are provided to
address:: 1) How should measures of fundamental properties of streams and
effects of animals on those properties be scaled up to predict ecosystem
characteristics of stream networks. 2) How do patterns of scaling compare across
the wide array of ecological systems (from tundra to tropical forest) that
occurs across North American? The SCALER experiment will be done in tropical
forest, temperate mountainous forest, prairie, northern boreal evergreen forest,
and tundra areas. Streams in each of these five areas will be examined at scales
of centimeters to 10?s of meters in small, medium and large streams. Rates of
stream metabolism (photosynthesis and respiration) and nutrient uptake will be
measured as well as the way these rates respond to animal exclusions (used to
mimic loss of animal diversity in streams). These local results will be linked
to the scale of watersheds and regions by modeling. Watershed scale predictions
will be verified by broader, but less intensive sampling. Mechanistic
explanation of how ecological measurements and experiments in streams can be
scaled to watersheds will be provided. This scaling will be characterized in
each of the five areas across the continent to explore how scaling differs
across natural habitats. The knowledge that will be generated by this project is
essential to quantify controls on stream ecosystem processes as well as to
manage human impacts on entire watersheds. The experimental and modeling results
will be relevant to general ecology because few nested, and experimental and
theoretically coupled scaling experiments have been undertaken in any
environment. Results will inform those involved in conservation, management, and
restoration of freshwater resources. Resource managers will gain a quantitative
rationale and framework to link local measurements to regional patterns. The
highly collaborative team will train six graduate students, five post doctoral
students, and mentor three early career faculty members. Additional
collaborations will be encouraged to collaborate and perform similar projects at
additional sites through workshops related to the objectives and research
design.