* 1258926
* Collaborative Proposal: Boundaries in the American Mosaic: Inclusion and Exclusion in the Contemporary United States
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Penny Edgell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 04/30/2014
* USD 58,380.00

SES-1258926&lt;br/&gt;Penny Edgell&lt;br/&gt;Douglas
Hartmann&lt;br/&gt;University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1258933&lt;br/&gt;Paul
Croll&lt;br/&gt;Augustana
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1258893&lt;br/&gt;Eric
Tranby&lt;br/&gt;University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What unites us as
Americans? What divides us? What are core Americans values and ideals today? Who
belongs and who does not? The nature and meaning of unity, social solidarity,
and collective identity in the United States have been a source of question and
contention since the nation's founding. And the challenges have become
increasingly prolific and complicated in an era of ongoing immigration,
increasing diversity, persistent inequality, and ubiquitous multiculturalism.
The investigators will study the dynamics of social inclusion and exclusion in
contemporary American society. More specifically, they will study the contours
of the American identity and the ways in which it is constituted in or crosscut
by other salient boundaries. The research focuses on race and religion as
aspects of social location and identification which may shape how Americans make
sense of their own lives, understand who is like them and who is different, and
think about the broader society and the public good. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research questions will be answered through a web-based survey of 3,000
Americans. The study extends the work of a previous research project, the
American Mosaic Project, by replicating specific items from that study in order
to establish trend data for its more innovative and influential findings; this
includes items on cultural membership, anti-Semitism, conceptions of diversity,
white identity, and views of religious minorities. In addition, the project will
include new survey questions to extend research in four interconnected
substantive areas: (1) Americans' understandings of social solidarity and
collective identity; (2) Americans? explanations for inequality, equal
opportunity, and colorblindness; (3) white privilege and white racial identity;
and (4) religious exclusion. The project builds on previous work by developing a
full set of indicators that allow the investigators to focus on interconnections
across our four core areas, providing an opportunity to test and build theory
about the relationship between cultural boundaries, inequality, and collective
identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this era
of divisive politics, culture wars, pundits, and talking points, this project
will provide rigorous empirical data with which to make sense of how people
understand American society, its goals and challenges. Results from the project
will be disseminated through both academic and media outlets, providing
opportunities to discuss the American mosaic in both classrooms and public
forums. Additionally, this project will provide research opportunities and
training for graduate students and undergraduate students at several colleges
and universities across the country and will specifically seek to include
students who are members of underrepresented groups. This national survey will
provide important data that will be of interest to faculty, students,
researchers, and the general public.