* 1259640
* Academic Opportunities through Recruitment, Retention &amp; Mentoring for Undergraduate Minorities in Biotechnology &amp; Forensic Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Sarwan Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2019
* USD 725,621.00

Intellectual merit : This project's goals at Fort Valley State University (FVSU)
are: 1) to achieve full retention of talented but financially disadvantaged
undergraduates majoring in the sciences, while significantly reducing their time
to graduation; 2) to recruit disadvantaged but talented scholars into STEM
majors, making efforts to reach underrepresented minorities and; 3) to prepare
them not only to pursue advanced degrees in STEM but also to play educational,
leadership and managerial roles in STEM fields. The project targets 33 fulltime
FVSU undergraduate students enrolling in Plant Science-Biotechnology (25
scholarships) and Biology/Forensic Science (8 scholarships). A Scholarship
Screening and Selection Committee is formed to foster this program and consists
of distinguished faculty members recognized for their mentoring ability and
scholarship from diverse STEM fields as well as the Financial Aid Director. Each
scholarship recipient is assigned a designated faculty mentor to guide the
recipient's academic development. A rich array of opportunities are available to
the scholarship recipients including a monthly seminar, tutoring, summer
internship and service learning positions, field trips, faculty-student
collaborative research, attendance at conferences, and alumni mentoring and
comprehensive career counseling. The biotechnology and forensic science
scholarships broaden the horizons of FVSU students in considering their career
choices. Broader impacts: The geographic niche that FVSU serves includes south-
central Georgia which is characterized by a high proportion of African American
residents in rural setting that are often afflicted by persistent poverty. FVSU
is a historically black university, and a vast majority (93% of enrolled
students) are minority students that are characteristically under-represented in
STEM fields. This project supports a larger STEM initiative that seeks to
increase and strengthen partnerships, networks and collaborations between HBCUs
and mainstream universities, state and regional forensic and health sciences
laboratories, USDA and other agricultural enterprises. Through this project
greater numbers of financially needy students are presented opportunities to
successfully complete their baccalaureate degrees and go on to pursue graduate
programs or enter careers in a broad range of science-related fields, meeting
regional and national workforce needs. This program serves as a model for
adapting the successful activities for other minority-serving institutions
seeking to promote undergraduate mentoring programs in STEM.