* 1259758
* Networking and Engaging in Computer Science and Technology in Northern New Jersey
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Katherine Herbert, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Sami Rollins
* 05/31/2019
* USD 619,575.00

This project is designed to bring together Montclair State University (MSU),
Saint Peter's University (SPU), and Seton Hall University (SHU) to collaborate
and enable students who have demonstrated academic ability to pursue a Master's
Degree in Computer Science. Computer science students as well as those students
who have majored in other science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and non-STEM fields are eligible for the scholarships. As partner
institutions, SPU and SHU are participating with the university in supporting
and mentoring students. The program is using a seminar series to strengthen the
collaboration among the participating institutions and pursuing collaborations
with other schools in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
scholarship program is designed to serve as a model and structure for small
geographical regions where multiple institutions service diverse populations. It
is also strengthening the ties between these regional institutions so that these
institutions can combine their strengths to better serve the student population.
The program team consists of seven faculty members, five from MSU, one from SHU
and one from SPU. All team members bring significant experiences in advising and
mentoring students to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
program is mentoring and supporting students through their graduate studies in
computer science, many of whom are women and under-represented minorities. It is
also offering opportunities to students from non-STEM backgrounds, since the
program is considering strong candidates from non-CS backgrounds for the
program. With 40% of New Jersey students leaving the state for post-secondary
education, there is a significant need for programs in state to service the
college student pool, so that the top talent invests in the region. Results are
being disseminated at appropriate computer science conferences and journals as
well as at the annual New Jersey Academy of Sciences (NJAS) meeting. The NJAS
meeting is also serving as a platform for recruiting more institutions into the
collaboration.