* 1259630
* Promoting academic and career success  for Raleigh Future Scholars at NC State
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Tony Mitchell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 633,864.00

The Raleigh Future Scholars program offers a comprehensive package of financial,
mentoring, and career support to undergraduate students pursuing degrees in
engineering and statistics disciplines. Students are recruited from the Raleigh
Promise: a cross-sector community partnership program designed to increase
educational outcomes for academically talented and economically disadvantaged
youth in Raleigh, NC. Prior to the start of the academic year, the program
begins with a summer transition program, offering incoming students guidance and
mastering of necessary skills to shift into the rigorous undergraduate schedule.
This support continues through graduation offering mentoring, career counseling,
internships and personal guidance. Students self-document these activities
through an e-portfolio that helps them see their progress, to communicate
effectively about science and engineering, to acquire high ethical standards and
professionalism, and to prepare for careers that fulfill their goals in life.

The assessment of this project is designed to provide a model of recruitment,
retention, and academic advising, transferable to STEM programs at other
institutions. The broader impacts of the proposed scholarship program are to
improve North Carolina State University's capacities to increase the
representation of students in areas of need and to highlight elements of
undergraduate student support services (e.g. financial, academic, social, and
career-related) that need to be addressed in order to promote long-term
sustainable change.