* 1259266
* Collaborative Research:   Automated Real-time Production of Political Indicators
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Ward, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 302,103.00

Systematic indicators of political characteristics such as regime type, internal
instability, and inter-state conflict have been widely used in political and
economic research over the past three decades and are increasingly used in
policy applications. There has been limited effort to automate the production of
such indicators, which are generally produced by individual research projects
using human coders and are widely available only after a considerable delay.
Improvements in computer software and hardware, meanwhile, have made the process
of analyzing large bodies of text to extract meaningful information much more
efficient. Automated coding is transparent, without the unreproducible
subjective elements of human coding, and once the source texts have been
prepared, recoding to account for new theoretical or technological perspectives
can be done quickly and efficiently. Using extant tools for automated coding,
this project will produce near real-time political indicators that will be
comparable, if not identical, to indicators produced by human coding. The
project first creates data on the interaction events of nations in the current
century. In addition, the project will extract measurements of the
characteristics and behaviors of governments, including human rights practices
and the level of autocracy. Finally, the project will construct information
about the interstate disputes among nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the realm
of world politics, most scientific analysis is based on data that are at least a
decade old. This research will significantly reduce the time-lag between events
in the contemporary world and systematic measurement and analysis of those
events in the academic and policy arena by reducing to weeks from decades the
delay with which systematic data are made publicly available. Moreover, this
project will expose these data in a transparent and widely accessible way. Not
only will the data be available to those who collected the data, but they will
be freely accessible to any and all via a web interface. The project will permit
recent patterns and changes, such as the rise of China, to be more readily
reflected in scientific research on world affairs. This should provide a
continuing foundation for more accurate and increasingly credible understandings
of politics at the global level.