* 1259286
* A Scholarship Program to Enhance Education in Computer Science and Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* Nikunja Swain, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2020
* USD 615,850.00

This project is designed to provide scholarships to academically talented
students with financial need majoring in computer science and engineering
technology. The primary goal is to offer support and experiences so that
students are qualified upon graduation to enter graduate school or employment in
a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) profession. To
accomplish this goal, the project is recruiting 20 students who are eligible for
the state-wide, merit-based Legislative Incentive for Future Excellence (LIFE)
Scholarship and who are also eligible for the Federal Pell Grant. The project is
actively recruiting underrepresented STEM students, including women. In addition
to scholarship support, the scholarship students are participating in pre-
college bridge programs; academic advising and mentoring programs;
individual/group tutoring and study sessions; and activities designed to enhance
their opportunities for internships and/or undergraduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scholars are being recruited from high schools served
by Upward Bound Science and Math programs and from other rural South Carolina
school districts where there are large concentrations of families living below
the poverty line. A two-week intensive precollege bridge program is helping to
prepare scholars for the rigors of STEM studies. Scholars are also registering
with the Career Center at the university so that they make take advantage of
internship, career development, and employment opportunities. Faculty members
are serving as academic advisors and mentors to the scholars and coordinating
study sessions with the Honors College, which has an established tutoring
program operated by professionals and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is contributing to the
body of research on the effectiveness of using scholarships to recruit students
into STEM disciplines; their retention and persistence in STEM; and their entry
into the STEM workforce or graduate school. Scholars are participating in
academic enrichment activities as they join other scholarship recipients at the
college in the development of an interdisciplinary learning community. The
university is also offering opportunities for scholars to work with faculty and
staff to participate in organized research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The program is increasing
enrollments of minority students, including female students, in the fields of
computer science and engineering technology. Their entry into the STEM pipeline
is helping to meet the shortage of computing and engineering professionals as
well as broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities and women in
the STEM workforce. Scholars and faculty members are interacting with teachers
and students in secondary schools during recruiting activities, which is
encouraging and motivating more high school students to study STEM.