* 1259311
* Thermodynamic Formalism and Dynamical Systems Arising from Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Daniel Thompson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 59,487.00

The key aims of this research are to further develop the theory of thermodynamic
formalism and to apply powerful techniques from ergodic theory and dynamical
systems to examples of special geometric interest. Thermodynamic formalism is a
powerful and versatile tool in the study of the global statistical properties of
dynamical systems, originally motivated by ideas from statistical mechanics. Key
goals of the project are (1) to study the evolution of dynamical invariants of
negatively curved manifolds under Ricci flow, (2) to develop thermodynamic
techniques to study the beta-transformation and related maps, (3) to develop
thermodynamic formalism for the Teichmueller flow. Since the 1930?s, a key
motivation in the development of the ergodic theory of dynamical systems has
been the study of problems in geometry. This project belongs to that rich
tradition, and covers a selection of problems where state of the art techniques
will produce new results at the intersection of dynamical systems and geometry.
The investigation of the effect of Ricci flow on dynamical invariants of
negative curvature manifolds combines the powerful techniques of smooth
dynamical systems with state of the art innovations from the Ricci flow
literature. The beta-transformation, which has been studied extensively since
1957, arises naturally in number theory. New results are now possible due to a
recent breakthrough co-authored by the Principal Investigator. Teichmueller
theory is an area of intensive current research at the intersection of geometry,
topology, number theory and dynamics. There is great scope for the development
of thermodynamic formalism for systems arising in this context, and the results
will be useful for a variety of geometric and statistical applications. The
project will both advance the theory of dynamical systems and build connections
between different branches of mathematics (dynamics, PDE, number theory,
Teichmueller theory). The focus of this research is on deriving fundamental pure
results, so there is significant potential that the tools developed here will
yield future applications in dynamics, geometry and beyond. In addition, the
project has a number of educational benefits. The Principle Investigator will
(1) disseminate the research through publications and talks, (2) integrate
research with teaching by delivering mini-courses and seminars for graduate
students and advanced undergraduates, (3) work with Penn State Outreach to
promote learning and participation at the K-12 level, with particular emphasis
on underrepresented groups.