* 1259732
* Scholarship Program for Improving Retention of Penn State Change of Location Students
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 600,315.00

This project aims to understand and remediate factors that reduce the retention
and success of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) students
attempting to complete a 2+2 plan at Pennsylvania State University (PSU). The
goal is to bring the retention and graduation rates of 2+2 STEM PSU students
from other campuses at least into parity with students that begin and remain at
the University Park campus of PSU. This is accomplished by implementing a
multifaceted advising, career counseling, and mentoring program, combined with
$4,000 scholarships that will provide 2+2 students with the support they need to
succeed in math and science majors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program helps to
weld a cadre of students into a community that allows a methodical investigation
into the impact of each of the targeted interventions. This knowledge will be
incorporated into a long-range plan for making successful strategies and
interventions available for all Eberly College of Science students enrolled in
the 2+2 plan, so that the project's potential impact reaches approximately one
thousand students who will transfer to PSU University Park during the project
period. This project is a model for retention efforts in STEM for students
moving from community colleges to four-year institutions and the results will be
shared broadly with the higher education community.