* 1259136
* Collaborative Reasearch: CEDAR--Gravity Wave Momentum Fluxes and Instability Studies Using Coupled Lidar, Temperature Mapper and Modeling Studies at ALOMAR and Cerra Pachon
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2012,01/31/2014
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2014
* USD 117,803.00

The investigators will conduct comprehensive experimental studies aimed at
quantifying gravity wave (GW) momentum transport and the GW instability dynamics
that drive energy and momentum deposition and energy transfers in the mesosphere
and lower thermosphere (MLT). GWs having small horizontal scales and large
amplitudes and momentum fluxes provide the majority of the mean and variable
forcing in the MLT, and these vary significantly in space and time.
Understanding of this forcing and variability is highly uncertain, but it is
extremely important for parameterization of such dynamics in large-scale
modeling of the MLT, and throughout the atmosphere. The same parameterization
needs are also critical for general circulation models (GCMs), climate models,
and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models in related fields. To quantify
these GW and instability dynamics and their mean and variable forcing as fully
as possible, the investigators will employ instrument suites at the only two
sites able to define these dynamics in the most complete and quantitative
manner. Low-latitude measurements will use the comprehensive instrumentation of
the new Cerro Pachon Observatory in Chile (30°S); high-latitude measurements
will employ the even more extensive suite of instrumentation at the ALOMAR
observatory in northern Norway (69°N).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instrument
suites permit the most complete, and redundant, specification of the GW,
instability, and mean parameters needed to quantify GW amplitudes, momentum
fluxes, and instability dynamics at any site. The recognized role of GWs in
driving the mean and variable structure of the MLT makes an understanding of
their various contributions, and an ability to model their effects, a high
priority. These dynamics also influence a wide range of other processes ranging
from tidal and planetary wave structures and dynamics to minor species
transport. The need to describe such effects accurately also has broader
implications for modeling climate change, responses to variable solar forcing,
and Space Weather.