* 1259603
* Spawning During Storms and the Subsequent Dispersal and Settlement of Coastal Invertebrate Larvae
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Richard Emlet, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2019
* USD 637,941.00

The study will address four questions concerning invertebrate spawning on the US
West Coast: 1) Which nearshore benthic invertebrates spawn during winter? 2)
What conditions are associated with spawning events? (Preliminary data lead the
PIs to predict that most spawning will occur during periods of large waves and
coastal downwelling.) 3) What is the pattern of dispersal of these winter-
spawned larvae in the coastal ocean? 4) How do variations in ocean conditions
during pelagic development affect delivery of larvae to the
shore?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water will be sampled daily from the seawater intake
for the Oregon Institute of Marine Biology marine laboratory in Coos Bay, OR.
Water is pumped at high tide when the intake samples coastal ocean water. Early
larval stages will be identified by genetic barcoding and a visual ID key will
be developed from individuals raised in the lab. Time series analysis will be
used to test for the effects of oceanographic parameters (e.g., temperature,
salinity, Chl-a, wind stress, and wave data) on spawning events indicated by the
sudden appearance of zygotes or embryos. Following a spawning event,
oceanographic cruises in the coastal ocean will follow the dispersal and pelagic
development of the larvae and relate their distribution to coastal
hydrodynamics. Using daily samples from the seawater system and settlement
collectors at intertidal sample sites, the PIs will monitor the abundance of
late stage larvae in the near-shore and settlement in the intertidal zone. These
time series will be compared to hydrographic parameters to identify conditions
favoring the maintenance of larvae in the waters adjacent to the coast and the
delivery of larvae to the shore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Larvae
will be identified using genetics. The PIs will develop a visual key to the
developmental stages of these larvae so that one can identify them under the
microscope, and the key will be made available through the internet. As part of
their project, the PIs will recruit four undergraduates to work with them during
the intense winter sampling period. These internships will be designed to be
educational and transformative. Students will be recruited from among University
of Oregon Marine Biology majors, particularly those working toward an honors
degree, and from marine biology students at the local junior college. The study
requires a diversity of work providing excellent training in a complex, real-
world scientific investigation. In addition, the PIs will mentor students as
they pursue an independent study project of their own design and participate in
a weekly seminar, which will cover the scientific background of the study,
research protocols, ethics in science, the scientific method, and how to design
and execute a scientific study. Students will present their independent projects
as posters at the annual meeting of the Western Society of Naturalists.