* 1259776
* Accomplishment Based Renewal:   An iron limitation mosaic within the central California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Kenneth Bruland, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 602,024.00

Eastern boundary upwelling systems have long been recognized for their high
phytoplankton productivity. Carr and Kearns (2003), in a detailed comparison of
eastern boundary current systems, reported that biomass sustained by a given
macronutrient concentration in Atlantic eastern boundary current systems was
twice as large as those systems in the Pacific. The authors concluded "It is not
clear whether the apparent difference in biomass supported by available
nutrients is due to differences in the efficiency of the phytoplankton
community, perhaps related to the availability of iron, or to grazing pressure."
They suggested that the width of the shelf might be considered a proxy for the
benthic availability of iron. The lowest biomass for a given macronutrient
concentration was in the Peru-Humboldt Current and in the northern California
region of the California Current System, both areas with low dust inputs and a
relatively narrow shelf.

In this Accomplishment Based Renewal project, a marine trace metal geochemist at
the University of California - Santa Cruz and his students and colleagues will
continue a decades-old quest to understand the role of iron in the central
California Current System (cCCS). Field efforts will combine continuous underway
iron and nutrient data in surface waters and a series of vertical profiles. The
focus will include three regions within the cCCS: a variety of active Fe-replete
and Fe-deplete coastal upwelling regimes, the eddy-rich California Current
transition zone that is Fe-limited and has elevated nitrate but relatively low
and uniform chlorophyll concentrations, and the offshore, oligotrophic
California Current. They will map surface and depth distributions of Fe and
other micro- and macronutrients. There are four specific goals dealing with
characterizing the organic Fe(III)-binding organic ligands, determining Fe(II)
and Fe(III) concentrations in hypoxic waters over the shelf, examining the
exchange between particulate and dissolved forms of Fe, and studying the roles
of eddies in the eddy-rich transition waters of the cCCS.

Broader Impacts

Direct Benefits to Science: There is a great deal of interest in the CCS because
of its importance in terms of phytoplankton productivity and the support of
higher trophic levels. Until now, the emphasis in studies of the CCS has been on
relationships between physics and biology. This study will insert the important
role of micronutrient chemistry into the picture. It will also serve an
important role in securing ship time in advance and providing logistical support
for other collaborative studies. This is extremely valuable and cost effective
for collaborating scientists since with the hydrography, nutrient and trace
metal data provided, they can focus on their complimentary research efforts.

Outreach and Education: The project will provide funding for two current
graduate students at UCSC, where they will also receive course training in a
curriculum that includes i) scientific communication, ii) careers in marine
science, and iii) grant writing. A broader impact goal of this project is to
facilitate teaching and learning on marine science-related topics through
translating research objectives into widely distributed educational materials
for classroom use. To accomplish this, the team will partner with the Seymour
Discovery Center at the Long Marine Lab, UCSC. The Discovery Center receives
14,000 visitors each year, and the project will provide funds to develop an
interactive display on limiting nutrients and phytoplankton bloom development in
the CCS.