* 1259057
* Collaborative Research:  Analysis of Continental Shelf Ecosystems:  Food Web Structure and Functional Relations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* James Ruzicka, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2017
* USD 182,687.00

Marine ecosystems are characterized by complex interactions among biological
components and within the physical setting. The complexity of these systems
makes them difficult to understand or interpret based on either observations or
models, both of which suffer from incomplete knowledge of the natural system. Of
interest to many scientific questions and to management is the utility of broad,
simplifying concepts about how such systems operate and how they change over
time. Among these concepts are bottom-up control (the idea that nutrient sources
and lower trophic levels govern the ecosystem), top-down control (the idea that
organisms at the highest trophic levels govern), and regime shifts (major
restructuring of the system due to natural or anthropogenic, or combined,
forcing).

A basic tenet of biological oceanography is the coupling between physical
processes and population dynamics. The study of these connections has been based
on certain simplifications, particularly the emphasis on one, or very few,
trophic components. The parallel development of trophic network models (e.g.,
ECOPATH) represents an effort to study the relationships between a more complete
spectrum of trophic groups from an energy transfer and predator-prey
perspective. Yet, ecosystem structure, function, and behavior depend on the
physical context: mixing, advection, water residence time, and seasonality,
especially for shelf ecosystems. These terms define production, recycling, and
export rates and set the scope of benthic-pelagic coupling, but they are rarely
incorporated into trophic network models. There is clear need to develop
portable methods of analysis that can illuminate physical-biological
interactions across a wide range of ecosystems and demonstrate their effects on
system productivity and resilience at all trophic levels. However, there is a
simultaneous risk of such models becoming so complex that untangling the
mechanisms and artifacts of model dynamics quickly becomes intractable.

A portable, coupled bio-physical model framework of intermediate trophic and
physical resolution is a potential solution that will be developed in this
project. The goal is to produce models simple enough to understand, but complex
enough to be realistic. Thus, about 5 physical boxes and about 20 ecological
compartments are expected to be included. The models will be developed for four
contrasting, data-rich continental shelf ecosystems. This project will use the
range of food webs and physical forcing characteristic of these four systems to
do the following. 1. Assess the merits and disadvantages of studying community
dynamics in terms of aggregated functional groups as the appropriate level of
trophic resolution. 2. Compare the relative roles of physical processes and
trophic network structure in determining system productivity, variability, and
resilience across all trophic levels, including both pelagic and benthic food
webs. 3. Test the applicability of broad concepts of ecosystem behavior such as
bottom-up vs. top-down control of community dynamics, or of sudden regime
shifts.

The project will contribute to the education of future scientists through
participation in active research. The public will be informed about ocean
ecosystem issues through development of a museum exhibit. Model code will be
provided to the community for further use and development. Collaboration with
NOAA scientists will foster application of project results to practical
management issues.