* 1259691
* Copepod Population Dynamics in Hypoxic Coastal Waters: Physical and Behavioral Regulation of Resupply and Advective Losses
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Nicholas Nidzieko, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2018
* USD 593,303.00

The PIs will develop a mechanistic understanding of how circulation interacts
with hypoxia-induced behavioral and physiological changes to affect the
population dynamics of coastal zooplankton. They will do this by assessing two
potentially contrasting mechanisms influencing the dynamics of the copepod
Acartia tonsa in the hypoxic zone of Chesapeake Bay. The first hypothesis is
that maintenance of copepod populations in the hypoxic region requires
replenishment by advection (immigration) of animals through wind-driven lateral
transport processes. The second, counteractive, hypothesis is that bottom water
hypoxia alters the vertical distribution of A. tonsa, thereby making them more
susceptible to advective losses from the region (emigration) via surface water
transport in the estuarine circulation. They will take advantage of a current
NSF-funded physical oceanography research program in Chesapeake Bay that will
comprehensively measure and model axial and lateral water exchanges in the mid-
Bay region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study will use the physical
oceanography study site as a Controlled Volume (CV) in which the oceanographic
exchanges of water and the driving mechanisms for those exchanges will be well
defined. The PIs will conduct high-resolution spatial and temporal sampling of
zooplankton and combine the data with measurements of copepod behavior,
mortality and egg production in the hypoxic region. They will use an improved
Individual-Based Model of the life history of A. tonsa coupled with the
circulation to explore the combined effects of advection, behavior, egg
production, and mortality on population dynamics. In addition to increasing our
knowledge of the impacts of bottom water hypoxia on copepod populations in
Chesapeake Bay, the study will improve our general understanding of the
regulation of zooplankton populations by physical and biological processes and
the impacts of hypoxia on secondary production and food webs in coastal waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance existing public education and
outreach efforts so that the public can be better informed about the effects of
hypoxia on Chesapeake Bay. This will be accomplished in part through the Center
for Ocean Science Education Excellence (COSEE) Coastal Trends program (now the
Horn Point Laboratory STEM Center Student Learning Activities program). The PIs
will enhance an existing set of online education modules
(http://www.teachoceanscience.net/) that focus on the causes and consequences of
the Chesapeake Bay's "Dead Zone" through development of an online interactive
version of their synthetic plankton model. The study also includes participation
by undergraduate summer interns through a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program. In addition, this research will contribute information toward the
development and improvement of dissolved oxygen criteria for Chesapeake Bay,
will support broad initiatives of the Chesapeake Bay Program by providing
information on the role of zooplankton in supporting productivity of fisheries,
and will contribute information to ecosystem-based fisheries management plans.