* 1259103
* SAVI:   Collaborative Research: Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic - Labrador Basin and Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 839,163.00

This project is one of two components of a US-led international program,
Overturning in the Sub-polar North Atlantic (OSNAP), designed to provide a
continuous record of the full-water column, trans-basin fluxes of heat, mass and
freshwater in the subpolar North Atlantic. The OSNAP observing system consists
of two legs: one extending from southern Labrador to the southwestern tip of
Greenland across the mouth of the Labrador Sea (OSNAP West), and the second from
the southeastern tip of Greenland to Scotland (OSNAP East). The observing system
also includes subsurface floats (OSNAP Floats) in order to trace the pathways of
overflow waters in the basin and to assess the connectivity of currents crossing
the OSNAP line. The location of the OSNAP East and West legs purposefully melds
with a number of long-term observational efforts in the North Atlantic: the
Canadian repeat hydrography program in the Labrador Sea; the German Labrador Sea
western boundary array at 53°N; the global Ocean Observatories Initiative node
to be placed in the southwestern Irminger Sea; the repeat hydrographic sections
across the Irminger and Iceland basins; and the Ellett line in the Rockall
region. Substantial international collaboration has been garnered for OSNAP,
including measurement contributions from the UK, Germany, the Netherlands and
Canada. Importantly, this proposed observing system, in conjunction with the
RAPID/MOCHA array at 26°N and the European Union NACLIM program at Nordic Seas
overflows, will provide the first comprehensive three-dimensional measure of the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and provide a means to
evaluate inter-gyre connectivity in the North Atlantic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will implement the OSNAP West
section and the OSNAP Float program. The primary observational components are:
(i) a mooring array across the eastern margin of the Labrador Sea, where the
subpolar boundary current enters the basin. This array will complement an
analogous array across the western margin at the exit point of the Labrador Sea,
maintained by institutions in Germany and Canada; (ii) a sequential release of
acoustically tracked floats in the lower limb of the AMOC at the OSNAP East and
OSNAP West boundary arrays. These floats will be seeded in the two densest
components of North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) over the four-year period of the
measurement program (2014-2018).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: For
decades oceanographers have understood the AMOC to be highly susceptible to
changes in the production of NADW. However, a number of recent observational and
modeling studies have called into question this supposition, as more has been
learned about the role of wind forcing in AMOC variability. Thus, the overall
goal of this project is to establish an observing system that will determine the
role that intermediate and deep water mass formation and basin-scale wind
forcing play in the overturning and associated poleward heat transport,
assessments that currently have only been theorized and modeled, but not
observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In January of 2007, the US Joint
Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology identified the study of the AMOC as
one of four near-term priorities in the US Ocean Research Priorities Plan. This
proposed work directly addresses that priority via a design of an AMOC observing
system in the sub-polar North Atlantic. While a primary motivation for studying
AMOC variability comes from its potential impact on the climate system,
additional motivation for the measure of the heat, mass and freshwater fluxes in
the sub-polar North Atlantic arises from their potential impact on marine
biogeochemistry and the cryosphere. There is growing evidence that the ocean has
played (and is playing) a role in the reduction of Arctic sea ice and in mass
loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet - both of which have been attributed to
changes in the poleward heat transport by the ocean. Also, the ocean plays an
essential role in the carbon cycle by moderating increasing atmospheric
concentrations of CO2 through the sequestration of anthropogenic carbon in the
deep ocean. Variability in the AMOC is expected to impact this sequestration.
Broader impacts also include the training of five graduate students in seagoing
operations and in the processing and analysis of observational data. The
graduate students will have an opportunity to collaborate with their
international counterparts through virtual meetings and in-person visits and
will be mentored by multiple advisors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research award
includes support for a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) that is co-
funded by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.