* 1259599
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Indigeneity, Social Movements, and Social Relations in South American Context
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Charles Hale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,145.00

This study will be conducted by University of Texas doctoral student Tathagatan
Ravindran under the guidance of Dr. Charles Hale. This project explores how
international discussions about indigeneity influence local social movements.
The research is set in the Bolivian city of El Alto, which is an ideal locale
for investigating globalization and indigenous social movements for a couple
reasons. In addition to being the largest indigenous city in the Americas, it
has also been at the center of multiple waves of mass popular mobilizations,
particularly in the last decade. This research asks what these political
mobilizations can tell social scientists about the nature of social
relationships in ethnically diverse societies. Studies on El Alto in the 1980s
and the 1990s revealed the existence of discrimination within the urban
indigenous communities against recent rural immigrants who were seen to have
more indigenous cultural traits. What influence then do indigenous political
currents in the city have on discriminatory practices, political stability, and
social relations? The research will be based on participant observation,
interviews, and the collection of oral histories in two urban neighborhoods,
which are both composed of rural migrants and have been active sites for
indigenous social movements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will advance
anthropological understandings of urban indigeneities, social movements and
socioeconomic inequalities. In particular, the project will transform
anthropological understandings about what accelerates social movements, and what
their impact is on local social relations. In addition to training a graduate
student, the study will also contribute to public policy attempts to address
social conflict and their resolution.