* 1259458
* S-STEM:  Connecting Community College Transfers for STEM Success Times Two
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Pamela Lockwood, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 625,512.00

West Texas A&amp;M University's (WTAMU) Connecting Community College Transfers
for STEM Success Times Two (C3X2) project provides at least eighteen
scholarships yearly to community college transfer students majoring in science,
technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). C3X2's goal is to increase the
quantity, quality, and diversity of students completing degrees in all STEM
fields by providing academic, social, and financial support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3X2 recruits STEM community college (CC) transfers to
WTAMU through personal contact advertisements, scholarship assistance and
outreach to scholars from Amarillo College's S-STEM program (DUE-1059696),
encouraging them to continue their STEM education at WTAMU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3X2 increases STEM CC transfers' academic achievement by
integrating scholars into the WTAMU STEM community. Scholars attend the
university's new Transfer Orientation and during their first semester
participate in a STEM transfer seminar course, addressing "transfer shock."
Quality faculty-student and student-student relationships are developed through
faculty advising and peer mentoring. Monthly seminars and social activities
provide opportunities for Industry-student mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3X2
partners with six regional CCs with diverse student bodies in a region with a
rapidly growing Hispanic population. The diversity of C3X2 leaders provides role
models for all students and equips them to lead the C3X2 research efforts
targeting CC transfer student retention and graduation in a rural, low-income,
first-generation population. Since most WTAMU graduates stay in the region,
increasing the diversity of STEM graduates also increases the diversity of the
region's STEM workforce.