* 1259577
* Preparing Female Scholars for Careers in Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Larry Viehland, Chatham College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2018
* USD 625,701.00

Chatham University includes an undergraduate college for women, and the goal of
this S-STEM project is to prepare female scholars for careers in biology,
chemistry, and biochemistry. Specifically, this project recruits and retains
academically talented students and facilitates a successful transition to STEM
careers or graduate school upon graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this plan stems from the cohort experience offered to the
scholars in order to strengthen ties to like-minded colleagues and facilitate
dynamic in- and out-of-class programming. This cohort experience enhances their
bond to the University and the disciplines. This S-STEM project works at
retaining students in STEM by providing them with realistic goals and plans for
their futures in STEM careers. Additionally, a focus on acquiring skills in
science-based information technology is provided throughout the students'
academic tenure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts result not only via
reducing the financial burden of those receiving the scholarships directly but
also via investigating the cohort approach as it impacts students' career paths.
This project has the potential to result in important curricular and
programmatic changes both at Chatham in the Science Department and in the
science education community more broadly. Plans are in place to disseminate
findings through publications and presentations at conferences.