* 1259964
* Collaborative Research:  Mantle Volatiles in an Emerging Ocean Basin: H2O, CO2, and He &amp; Ar Isotopes in Basalts from the Gulf of Aden Spreading Center System
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 292,186.00

Continental rifts and ocean spreading ridges are key places where volatile
elements are exchanged between Earth's interior and its surface. Volatiles play
a central role in the initiation of rifting/spreading, in volcanic evolution,
and in associated geologic hazards. This research characterizes major volatile
concentrations (H2O and CO2) and mantle source tracers (helium and argon
isotopes) in magma erupted along the mid-ocean ridge in the Gulf of Aden in the
Arabian Sea because this is a mid-ocean spreading center in its early stages of
formation and evolution. The research also quantifies the flux of water coming
from the mantle in the region. The Gulf of Aden is a unique locality for this
work because it is a young ocean basin influenced by flow from the Afar mantle
plume under the Horn of Africa. The plume affects the base of the Arabian
lithosphere along the Red Sea and the western part of the Gulf of Aden; and its
widespread influence is thought to result from the channeling of asthenospheric
magma from the plume to the spreading center by rifts. However, the Afar Plume's
apparent weaker penetration into the Gulf of Aden is not well understood and may
be related to tectonic segmentation/discontinuities of the spreading ridge. The
research will analyze submarine basalt glasses that were collected from previous
oceanographic and sampling expeditions to the area for major element
composition, volatile concentrations (CO2, H2O, Cl, F and S), and He and Ar
isotopes. Initial results for Aden basalt glasses reveal a strong plume signal
that may become rapidly attenuated with distance from the plume axis. Project
goals are to determine how partial melting and degassing control mantle volatile
signatures in young ocean spreading centers. Geochemical evidence (e.g.,
3He/4He, 40Ar/36Ar, 4He/40Ar*, CO2/Nb, H2O/Ce) in about 40 basalt glasses from
this region will be used to make this determination. Results of the study allow
us to quantify variation in the volatile flux from the Afar plume and the upper
mantle along the length of this emerging ocean basin between 44°E and 57°E. The
results also provide a basic framework needed for geophysical and geodynamic
models in terms of model input for regional and smaller scale variations in
mantle composition, partial melting, and the heat and mass flux associated with
the evolution from continental rifting to oceanic spreading. Broader impacts of
the work include support of graduate and undergraduate students at two
institutions, one in an EPSCoR state (Oklahoma), leverages existing samples
collected with prior NSF support, and utilization of NSF-funded analytical
facilities at Oregon State University and the University of Tulsa. Results will
be described on institutional web pages as well as NSF-funded publically
available data systems. Findings will also be incorporated into classes taught
by the investigators.