* 1259549
* SHINE: Understanding Multi-spacecraft Observations of Solar Energetic Particle Events in Terms of Global Disturbances in the Solar Corona and Heliospheric Magnetic Field Connection
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Nariaki Nitta, Lockheed-Martin Advanced Technology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2018
* USD 380,980.00

With this three-year SHINE project, the PI aims to investigate the relationship
between global disturbances from the solar corona and the angular spread of
Solar Energetic Particle (SEP) events, in order to advance present understanding
of when, where and how these particles are accelerated and released. The project
team examine Extreme Ultra Violet (EUV) images taken by SDO and STEREO in
comparison with coronagraph data from STEREO and SOHO to trace the global
coronal disturbances into coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and associated shock
waves. For 20 to 30 near-relativistic electron events (with and without large
angular spread), the team will look for significant differences in the
properties of global coronal disturbances and lack thereof. The team will
compare the observed onset times of electron events at STEREO and near the Earth
with the times at which the global coronal disturbances and CME-driven shocks
intersect field lines connecting to observers at the respective spacecraft. The
SEP onsets can also be influenced by the interplanetary magnetic field, which
may deviate from the Parker spiral. The team will analyze solar wind data from
STEREO, near the Earth, and at other locations in the inner heliosphere, to
estimate the effective path length the particles experience and additionally to
understand the origin of non-Parker-spiral field. The research agenda is
supplemented by running heliospheric simulations at the Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) with customized boundary conditions to probe macroscopic
disturbances in solar wind. Furthermore, the team will investigate the
associated SEP ion data in perspective to address the distinction between
impulsive and gradual SEP events in terms of the processes near the Sun and in
the interplanetary space.

The project team aims to improve present understanding of SEP events by adopting
a cross-disciplinary approach that addresses both solar and interplanetary in-
situ data as important elements, and includes numerical simulations. This
project has the potential of changing the prevalent view of the origins of SEP
events in a major way, and thus eventually give societal benefit of correctly
predicting SEP events. The team will disseminate the project results at various
meetings including SHINE workshops, in refereed journals, and through the
Heliophysics Event Knowledge-base developed at the PI's institution. The
research agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division
in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.