* 1259419
* IRES: Responsive Fibers
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Margaret Frey, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2017
* USD 190,900.00

Technical Abstract

The potential technologies enabled by advanced fiber materials are countless,
ranging from better body armor to artificial neurons to instantaneously drying
raincoats. Electro-optical and electro-mechanical responses of the filamentous
materials offer flexible and wearable displays and hold the promise for an
entirely new class of artificial muscles and/or strain sensors. The goal of this
project is to incorporate two important functionalities into fibers: electro-
optics and electro-mechanical couplings. This will be achieved by three
different approaches. (i) Incorporate liquid crystals and functional
nanoparticles in electrospun polymer fibers in coaxial and tri-axial
configurations; (ii) Draw stable free-standing fluid fibers from low molecular
weight bent-core liquid crystals and study their mechanical and optical
properties; (iii) Study both electrospun and self assembling liquid crystal
polymer fibers in their pure form, with functional nanoparticles and in UV-
induced cross-linked elastomer forms. Students will learn about coaxial and
double coaxial electrospinning techniques, optical wave-guiding, nanoparticle
preparations, and polymerization processes. They will acquire various
characterization methods, such as polarizing optical microscopy, Scanning and
Transmission Electron Microscopy and high-speed camera photography. &#8195; Non-
technical Abstract Our body is soft, stretchable and curved, but the present
electronics are rigid, heavy and breakable. Making electronics flexible,
stretchable, lightweight, rugged and wearable is an emerging and transformative
direction for research. In this three years project 24 US students will work
either in Suwon, South Korea or Magdeburg, Germany to combine liquid crystals
and polymers to make responsive smart fibers. During their work abroad the
students will learn cutting edge new technologies involving sophisticated
experimental techniques probing fiber properties, such as stability, strength,
flexibility, optical and mechanical sensitivity to electric fields. The students
will also learn how to collaborate at international scientific level, will
appreciate the culture of foreign countries, and will represent the greatest
features of the American culture abroad. This way we will educate global
scientists, who will be able to compete in the international science market.