* 1259544
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Religious Conflict and the Use of Space: Testing Theory in Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* John Dulin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 25,200.00

University of California San Diego doctoral student John C. Dulin, under the
direction of Dr. Joel Robbins, will conduct social scientific research on the
relationship between religious conflict and the use of geographic space. While
both religious conflict and territorial competition frequently co-occur, this
research will be the first to focus on the particular trajectory of conflict in
relation to variability in the use of space. The research will be conducted in
the town of Gondar, in northwest Ethiopia, a traditional center of Ethiopian
Orthodoxy and the site recent outbreaks of religious violence. The Gondor
religious field contains a multiplicity of religions, which allows the
researcher to examine the distinct ways each relates to space and how that has
shaped the course of religious conflict. In particular, he will test the
hypothesis that differences in spatial practices rather than sectarian
differences explain the greater rates of violent conflict between some religious
groups and not others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will conduct 24
months of fieldwork in Gondor, collecting data with a mixture of social
scientific methods including: qualitative interviewing, archival research, and
the mapping of religious space and religious conflicts using Global Positioning
Systems (GPS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important because it will
further develop anthropological theories of religious conflict, which
acknowledge that many conflicts center on the religious use of space, but do not
articulate the relationship between the particular trajectory of an instance of
religious conflict and the specific form of the antagonists' religious use of
space. On a more practical level, by getting at the underlying reasons for
space-related conflict, findings from this research might inform practices and
policy for reducing conflict. Funding this research also supports the education
of a graduate student.