* 1259448
* Assessing the Effects of Risk Interdependency, Social Norms, and Costs on Homeowners' Wildfire Mitigation Decisions using Choice Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Nicholas Flores, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2016
* USD 298,045.00

Homeowners' decisions in fire-prone areas play a crucial role in shaping
wildfire occurrence and impacts. These decisions are interdependent: each
household's actions can affect the choices of neighbors. This study explores two
pathways linking homeowners' choices: risk interdependency (i.e., the fact that
the risk that any individual faces is affected by the level of mitigation on
neighboring properties) and social norms (specifically, the possibility that
comparative information highlighting high levels of mitigation among neighbors
may encourage households to increase their mitigation levels). The research
involves a web-based survey of homeowners living in fire-prone areas of
Colorado's Western Slope to measure the effects of risk interdependency, social
norms, and costs on risk reduction decisions. The approach combines both
observational and experimental data collection in order to separately identify
the influence of risk interdependency and social norms messages on hazard
mitigation behavior. Specifically, the survey instrument involves both 1)
observational data on current knowledge, risk perceptions, and practices; and 2)
choice experiments that vary neighbors' mitigation levels, social norms
messages, and costs in order to assess the impact of these factors on wildfire
mitigation behaviors. The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
integration of two strands of research that have separately pursued the
understanding of risk interdependency and social norms. The use of choice
experiments also overcomes the challenge of purely observational studies, in
which it is difficult to separate causal social effects from other explanations
for common patterns of behavior within social groups, such as shared
characteristics or influences. At the same time, the observational data puts the
experimental results in context and helps to inform the data analysis and policy
recommendations.

In the past 10 years, areas throughout the United States have incurred increased
economic and social costs due to wildfire. In the face of increasing wildfire
hazards, action at multiple scales is required to effectively reduce fire risk.
In particular, individual homeowners play a central role through the actions
they take (or do not take) to mitigate wildfire risk on their private property.
This study contributes to a growing body of knowledge on the factors that shape
wildfire-related behaviors by homeowners in fire-prone areas. More specifically,
by focusing attention on the ways in which households can influence each other
in the face of wildfire risk, the results can help to inform policies that
harness the power of social norms to increase private mitigation actions in the
face of interdependent risk. The research tests whether a program giving
homeowners social comparison messages (e.g., "You are doing less wildfire
mitigation than 75% of your neighbors.") could induce behavior change. The
insights gained can provide direct feedback to forest and fire managers
currently engaged in community outreach, potentially informing the design of
programs aimed at reducing wildfire risk.