* 1259440
* Resolving seawater stable (88Sr/86Sr) strontium isotope variations and their implications for the global strontium cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2018
* USD 334,996.00

Strontium (Sr) isotopes in the marine sediment record have the potential to shed
light on past changes in the ocean-climate system. Although records of
radiogenic Sr isotopes have been established, the analytical capabilities needed
to measure stable Sr isotopes were developed only recently. The proposed work
will take advantage of these analytical advances to measure stable Sr isotopes
recorded in marine barite. The relationship between marine barite and stable Sr
in seawater will be calibrated and used to reconstruct stable Sr in the global
ocean for the past 130 million years. These data will be combined with an
existing radiogenic Sr record to better understand global changes in seawater
chemistry and biogeochemical cycles, and to determine their relationship to
perturbations in tectonics and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will help
establish the utility of a relatively new tool in the study of past ocean and
climate conditions. Training and mentoring will be provided for a graduate
student and several undergraduate students, who will have the opportunity to
present their research at scientific conferences. The PI will develop new
curricula and continue ongoing outreach efforts. The project will facilitate
collaboration between researchers at UCSC, Kent State University, the U.S.
Geological Survey, and GEOMAR (Germany).