* 1259794
* Energy Pathways and Scale Interactions in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Geoffrey Vallis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 365,082.00

Large-scale currents and eddies pervade the ocean and play a prime role in the
general circulation and climate. The coupling between scales ranging from ten
thousand kilometers to a millimeter presents a major difficulty in
understanding, modeling, and predicting oceanic circulation and mixing. What are
the power requirements to sustain turbulence and mixing in the ocean? What are
its sources and sinks? What are the mechanisms to transfer such energy across
scales? Due to the lack of rigorous quantitative methods for detecting and
measuring energy transfer rates between scales in the ocean, our understanding
of the oceanic energy budget is uncertain within at least a factor of two and
possibly as large as ten. This poses serious limitations on our climate
prediction capabilities. Using a novel mathematical scale-analysis framework, we
propose to study the coupling between scales and map out the energy pathways
from realistic ocean model data. The approach is very general, allows for
probing the dynamics simultaneously in scale and in space, and is not restricted
by the usual assumptions of homogeneity or isotropy, thus making it ideally
suited for studying oceanic flows. A primary goal is to examine the extent to
which the accepted geostrophic model for such pathways is valid in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of various nonlinear mechanisms to
the transfer of energy across scales such as baroclinic and barotropic
instabilities, barotropization, Rossby wave generation, and internal wave
generation and breaking will be investigated. If successful, this research will
provide oceanographers with a promising set of tools with which to analyze and
interpret data from simulations, satellite measurements, and
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and quantifying the oceanic energy pathways
and balances as a function of scale is a challenging fundamental problem in
oceanography. To this end, rigorous analytical tools will be further developed
and to applied to data from global, regional, and idealized numerical
simulations. The problem of understanding nonlinear interactions in the ocean is
a major intellectual challenge and new techniques and ideas will be applied to
better quantify the energetics of the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping and quantifying the energy pathways
supplying and depleting the mesoscale flow will reduce the current uncertainty
in the oceanic energy budget. The work also promises to provide insights into
the scale-physics at play in the ocean, offer a priori constraints on parameter
tuning of current parameterization schemes such as Gent-McWilliams, on proposed
schemes that may be applied to eddy permitting ocean models, and will help in
the development of a new class of ocean parameterizations that are a function of
location and resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will support a junior
scientist at the threshold of a promising career. Finally, the P.I. will be
revising a general textbook that has been adopted by a number of universities
for the teaching of atmospheric and oceanic dynamics. The book will help
education in the geosciences broadly, and the research conducted under this
project will provide context and examples for the students.