* 1259011
* Collaborative Research: Ontario Winter Lake-effect Systems-Surface and Atmospheric Influences on Lake-effect Convection (OWLeS-SAIL)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2020
* George Young, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 380,874.00

This grant is part of a larger effort centered on the Ontario Winter (OW) Lake-
effect Systems (LeS) field project, to be conducted December 2013-January 2014.
OWLeS will focus on two complementary lines of research, each tracing to a
preferred wind regime, characteristic cross-lake fetch and corresponding
distinct mesoscale mode of winter storm organization. Activities led by this
sub-group will focus on "short-fetch" events in which prevailing low-level winds
are oriented at large angles relative to Lake Ontario's long axis. These
investigators will seek to advance process-oriented understanding of atmospheric
boundary-layer circulations over adjacent complex land cover, factors
controlling the location and downwind persistence/spatial extent of lake-effect
circulations and associated bands of heavy snowfall, as well as those
precipitation events associated with smaller bodies of water as are found in the
Finger Lakes region. Observational assets to be deployed during OWLeS will
include the University of Wyoming King Air instrumented aircraft, the CSWR
Doppler on Wheels mobile radars, multiple mobile rawinsounding systems, the
Millersville University Profiling System, the UAH Mobile Integrated Profiling
System, and a variety of other surface measurement systems. The intellectual
merit of this sub-group's activities is centered upon determination of (1) how
upwind land-surface and atmospheric factors determine the three-dimensional
structure of the short-fetch convective LeS PBL that develop over a relatively-
warm, open water surface; (2) how organized, initially convective cloud and
precipitation structures under short-fetch conditions persist far downstream
over land, long after leaving the buoyancy source (i.e., the ice-free waters of
Lake Ontario); and (3) factors controlling the development of, and interactions
between, complex atmospheric stratifications embodying a internal planetary
boundary layer and residual layers resulting from airmass advection over
multiple mesoscale bodies of water and intervening land.

Broader impacts of OWLeS will include improved physical understanding and model-
based representations of conditions that impact populations and associated major
transportation corridors along the shores of the Great Lakes region, as well as
extensive opportunities for enhanced classroom and hands-on field project based
educational opportunities for a large number of students who will be actively
engaged in field campaign planning, instrument preparation, data collection and
analysis. Outreach efforts will extend to K-12 students and college students
enrolled at nearby institutes of higher learning.