* 1259786
* Inequality and Multiracial Gatekeeping
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Mamadi Corra, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 191,514.00

This research studies the impact of racial status on gatekeeper-client
relations. Gatekeepers control access to "benefits" they do not own, benefits
that are valued by "clients." Seeking access to those benefits, clients assume
obligations which may be discharged by a fee paid to the gatekeeper. Employment
agents, car salesmen, real estate agents are gatekeepers because they control
access to jobs, cars and housing respectively as well as information about each.
When clients are lower status, for example African American, employment agents
may steer them to lower paid, less desirable jobs, car salesmen may ask for and
receive higher prices, and real estate agents may show only segregated housing.
This research will experimentally test the impact of racial status differences
on gatekeeping. Do African American gatekeepers gain smaller fees from White
clients? What happens when Whites are gatekeepers? Do African American clients
pay higher fees for the access they seek? And what is the impact of the race of
the person to whom clients seek access? These questions are important for both
practical and theoretical reasons. The research findings will help us better
understand the continuing effects of status differences and stratification on
everyday life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiracial gatekeeping is studied in the
context of exchange networks. For example, B is the gatekeeper when an A - B
exchange must be completed before A may exchange with C. B is the gatekeeper
because A, acting in the role of client, must gain B's consent to exchange
before gaining access to and exchanging with C. As a part of the research, a
measure of the quantitative impact of race differences is developed, along with
hypotheses drawn from that measure. The research uses a 2 x 2 x 2 (race of A,
race of B, race of C) design to test hypotheses. Funded by the Digital Library
Initiative at the National Science Foundation, ExNet will be used to produce
exchange relations among actors. Subjects seated in separate rooms negotiate
through connected PCs using only mouse control. ExNet shows the network being
investigated as an active display on each subject's screen. Subjects click icons
to make and reject offers and to complete exchanges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will advance
understandings of discriminatory practices in which power over racial minorities
is grounded jointly in structure and status. Formal sociological theory is
extended through new bridges between Network Exchange Theory and Status
Characteristics Theory; perhaps the most extensively tested formal theories in
sociology. More generally, results of will show how racially grounded status
differences affect access to commodities that people value, potentially shedding
light on one of the systemic, structural ways in which discrimination persists.
While the research focuses on the impact of race on gatekeeping, the underlying
theoretical process is not limited to racial status. It applies to any
gatekeeping setting where "status characteristic" (identifiable attribute of
individuals that carries with it cultural beliefs and/or evaluations of
worthiness and competence) becomes salient. Gender, age, beauty and sexual
orientation, for example, are all status characteristics, and when they become
salient in a gatekeeper-client relationship, their effects should be the same as
those predicted for racial status.