* 1259122
* State Formation and Urbanization in EIA Rome:   Investigating the Role of the Exchange and Human-Environment Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Elizabeth Greene, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 244,484.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, a multi-disciplinary
international team directed by Dr. Nicola Terrenato will carry out
archaeological research at a Tiber River site in downtown Rome around which the
ancient city grew. Preliminary drilling has shown that the environment of the
Tiber shore was extremely challenging for early Romans, with frequent flooding,
silting and land sliding. Given the strategic significance of the harbor though,
the inhabitants had to reclaim this area with infill, river walls and
resurfacing over a course of two or three centuries in the early first
millennium BCE. This was one of the first collective projects that the Romans
undertook and it arguably signaled the first emergence of a state structure and
of a city government. The excavations will reveal how and when this crucial
human impact took place, while at the same time allowing a more precise
reconstruction of the original environmental conditions when the city was
founded. The site of S. Omobono is also characterized by the presence of a cult
structure: a wooden temple whose fa√ßade was highly visible by the ships arriving
in the harbor. It honored Good Fortune, a key deity for ancient Mediterranean
traders. The excavation will explore some of the associated votive deposits,
deep pits in which objects dedicated to the goddess were thrown, revealing
important aspects of the religious life of the early city and exploring the
connection between cult places and early markets. Thus the project will shed
light on the interaction of multiple variables - economic, social and political
- which contributed to the rise of this early and iconic
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep levels which will be exposed have been
submerged in water since their original deposition, a situation that allows the
conservation of organic materials, such as wood, leather, fabric and much else,
which normally rot away and are lost forever. This rare kind of wet preservation
will allow for the recovery of a unique range of artifacts and of other
perishable materials (such as fruits or insects), which will significantly
improve knowledge of early Mediterranean cultures and environments. New light
will be thrown on aspects such as agricultural production, diet, craft
activities and trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well attested from goods found
in tombs that merchants from Syria, Cyprus and Greece, among other Mediterranean
commercial centers, would regularly visit Rome. Given the proximity to the
harbor, evidence of trade is expected to be particularly rich at S. Omobono.
Combined with the exceptional wet preservation and the presence of votive pits,
the site is highly likely to yield a unique range of imported materials. Their
sequence and quantification will definitively test the hypothesis that the
formation of early states is accompanied by a sharp increase in long-distance
commercial contacts.