* 1259362
* Promoting STEM Degrees and Careers through a Natural Science Scholar Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Jack Lu, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 04/30/2018
* USD 592,468.00

This S-STEM project provides 16 scholarships per year to upper-level STEM majors
at the University of Houston, Clear Lake. UHCL students enter as juniors, and
the STEM programs are well designed to serve community college transfer
students. The scholarships are being made available to academically talented,
low-income undergraduate students pursuing degrees in Biology, Chemistry,
Environmental Sciences, and Physics. STEM studies at UHCL provide a natural
pipeline for low-income and underrepresented students to enter science-related
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM project not only complements a prior
S-STEM project for computing and mathematics majors but also builds upon lessons
learned from the prior project. Intellectual merit of the project is realized by
features that include recruitment activities, faculty involvement in several
capacities, peer and career mentoring, a Natural Science Scholar Organization,
opportunities for research experiences, an emphasis on developing communication
skills, career exposure via partnerships with local high technology laboratories
and industries, and a well-defined set of metrics to evaluate and improve
project effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are realized by
educating and diversifying a workforce prepared for STEM jobs. Broader impacts
will also result from scholars presenting results of their experiences at
community colleges, local conferences, and national meetings of professional
science organizations. Plans exist to present project outcomes at meetings of
professional STEM societies and in journals as well as reports to the public via
the project website.