* 1259530
* Rural Migrant Children in Urban Schools
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2016
* USD 375,891.00

The study examines the process by which rural-to-urban migration generates and
sustains new forms of education segregation in urban areas. The project
highlights whether and how urban schools exacerbate educational inequality when
the rural-urban divide is brought into urban schools. More generally, the
project uses the Chinese case to provide insights to inform Western theories on
education segregation, which were developed when school segregation was already
well in place. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Since the mid-1980s China has seen
increasing influx of rural people to cities for manufacturing and service jobs.
This migration was first temporary and the children remained at home to go to
rural schools. More recently, migrants have moved to cities permanently and many
have brought their children along. However, children of rural migrants have
limited access to urban public education because of the law linking migrant
students' educational right to their rural home. The PI hypothesizes that new
forms of educational segregation are emerging as a consequence of the large
influx of rural migrant children into the urban education system. To learn about
the causes, processes and consequences of this emergent education segregation in
urban schools, systematic and longitudinal data and a rigorous analysis of these
data are needed. The project will augment an upcoming nationally representative
survey of Chinese 7th graders who will be followed over time, the Chinese
Education Panel Studies (CEPS). Data will be collected from a supplemental
sample of 6,400 seventh graders in 80 urban schools that primarily serve rural
migrant children. In addition, a set of survey questions will be added to the
CEPS core questionnaire regarding rural migrant children's school process in
urban schools. Using the data from the augmented CEPS, investigators will
document and explain the extent to which rural migrant children's access to
urban education is limited and how teachers and peers treat them differently
from urban students. These examinations will provide evidence for whether and
how new forms of education segregation emerge and are sustained and rural
migrant children are marginalized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's data collection is efficient as it
piggybacks on an upcoming national, longitudinal survey of students, benefiting
from its sampling design, field preparation, fixed costs, and comprehensive core
contents. The project will make a significant contribution to data and research
infrastructure by adding a sample of 6,400 students in 80 schools. As a result,
the project makes access to data on a total of 66,400 students in 830 schools to
the U.S. research community. During the project duration U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained to use theoretical and methodological
tools from the Western literature to study educational inequality in China.