* 1259520
* Scholarships to Encourage the Next Generation of Innovative iNtelligent Engaged Engineers to Reach Success (ENGINEERS) Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Chris Geiger, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 558,562.00

By Encouraging the Next Generation of Innovative iNtelligent Engaged Engineers
to Reach Success, the ENGINEERS program within the U. A. Whitaker College of
Engineering at Florida Gulf Coast University gives academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need the opportunity to augment their
educational experience through enhanced academic mentoring and meaningful
extracurricular activities tailored to their own requirements for professional
development. In their first two years in the program, participants are provided
with enriched academic support, cohort and programmatic activities, discipline
specific mentoring, and additional opportunities to engage the engineering
community within the University and the Southwest Florida region. Programs
designed to improve technical writing skills, resume building, and effective
learning are offered to maximize each participant's chances of success. In their
last two year in the program, based on their career goals and aspirations, each
student links with a mentor whose expertise is consistent with the student's
chosen career path (post-graduate education, immediate entry into the work force
or entrepreneurial endeavors). Each student, in consultation with the program
staff and mentors, develops a plan that encompasses a series of specific,
measurable, attainable, realistic and timely goals that fit their career
development needs. Progress is assessed through end of the semester portfolio
reviews with the program staff, as well as regularly scheduled meetings with
their mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enhancing each participant's
educational experience, the ENGINEERS program encourages civic engagement from
the demographically diverse cohort. The impact of programmatic activities on the
student cohorts undergoes formative and summative assessment with the findings
broadly disseminated at the college, university, and national level to
contribute to best practices for implementing targeted extracurricular
activities that significantly enhance the student educational experiences.