* 1259051
* Indigenous activism and epidemiological knowledge: An international comparison
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Erica Prussing, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 224,315.00

Since the 1990s a rising number of indigenous-controlled epidemiology centers
have been founded in multiple nation-states. By collecting, interpreting, and
disseminating statistical information about indigenous health, these centers aim
to link the political &amp; cultural authority of "science" with indigenous
claims for greater social justice in health, and for greater indigenous control
of health research and services. This study offers an international comparison
of these efforts, examining the different resources, strategies and political-
economic contexts for indigenous-controlled health research in two settings:
Aotearoa/New Zealand and the United States. These two nation-states share
significant cultural and political similarities, but different historical
legacies have shaped the institutionalization of indigenous-controlled research
in each. As such, indigenous researchers face distinctive challenges as they
continually articulate and assert their goals and findings to multiple audiences
in each setting. Using ethnographic methods of participant observation and
interviewing, complemented by methods of discourse analysis, this study will
compare how epidemiological research is conducted at selected indigenous-
controlled health research centers in both New Zealand and the U.S.; and how the
resulting knowledge claims circulate in public life (e.g., through publication
and presentation, media coverage, and/or public policy debates and decisions) in
each setting. This international comparison enables a nuanced analysis of how
cultural and political contexts are shaping indigenous epidemiological research,
and engages ongoing efforts to better understand the dynamics of articulating
indigeneity worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study findings will enhance
understanding of the complex boundaries between science and politics, and
promote appreciation of the complexity and diversity of contemporary indigenous
peoples, in ways that encourage further communication and collaboration across
the fields of medical anthropology, science &amp; technology studies, indigenous
studies, and public health.