* 1259290
* Collaborative Research:   SHINE--Automated System for Observation-Based Real-Time Simulation of the Solar Corona and Inner Heliosphere at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Dusan Odstrcil, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2017
* USD 135,095.00

The investigators will develop an automated system for continuously running a
research-based, observation-driven, real-time simulation of the solar corona and
inner heliosphere at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC). Every
day, or more frequently, the system will automatically restart a new simulation
of the state of the solar corona using the latest solar magnetogram as the input
and the result of the previous simulation as the initial condition for the new
one. A prediction of the realistic three-dimensional (3D) and time-dependent
distributions of the interplanetary magnetic field and solar wind parameters
throughout the solar corona and inner heliosphere is one of the most challenging
scientific problems in space physics. The task becomes even more difficult if
the simulation is routinely performed in real-time, on a daily basis, with the
latest magnetogram data incorporated as an input for the model together with the
capability to validate the model using a continuous flow of observational data.
The Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) model of the solar corona, already
available in the CCMC, will be used for the effort. To validate the model,
synthetic extreme ultraviolet images will be produced to compare with the images
as observed with NASA satellite instruments. The coupled model prediction will
be continuously validated with the solar wind parameters measured by the ACE
satellite. The intellectual merit of the research is the development of a
research-based model that can be used to better understand the propagation of
Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs), both in real-time when CME signatures are
observed in coronograph images, and for historical analysis and research of
interesting events. The broader impact of the project is that a new generation
of global models of the Sun-heliosphere system will be delivered to the CCMC to
enable broad use by the solar-heliophysics community. The project will involve
the training of a junior female postdoctoral researcher and will enhance
infrastructure for research and education.