* 1259241
* WORKSHOP:   Support for Political Networks Conference and Training Workshops
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Robert Huckfeldt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2017
* USD 187,173.00

Network analysis focuses on the connections among individuals that produce
aggregate outcomes, rather than focusing solely on the characteristics of either
the individuals or the aggregates. The focus is directed toward the complex,
critical, yet little understood processes lying between extensively developed
individual and institutional level understandings that have been most common in
political analysis. This is a particularly promising period for the development
of network studies in politics and policy. Extensive "big" data sets, expanded
computational capabilities, and newly-developed analytic techniques have reduced
many of the past obstacles to the serious study of political networks. Hence the
study of political networks is at an important juncture, supported by newly
established interdisciplinary organizations and training efforts that are
currently underway. As a consequence, network studies have gained supporters and
practitioners in virtually every area of political study - political
institutions, comparative politics, political behavior, international relations,
public policy, parties and elections, public opinion, interest groups, social
movements, and political communication.

The project continues to build and develop the field of political network
analysis. The resources are dedicated to support graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and under-funded assistant professors, expand diversity efforts, extend
mentoring and networking efforts, and encourage the development and
dissemination of new methods and theories appropriate for the specific needs of
subfields brought together by an interest in studying political networks. The
project leverages strengths in training and mentoring to advance the field of
political networks and foster interdisciplinary ties in what has been deemed "a
new discipline."

Intellectual Merit: The project is interdisciplinary, data-intensive, and
collaborative. The aims are to promote the study of political networks and the
use of network analysis by: 1) enhancing communication between scholars who work
in this area, 2) supporting the process of developing and disseminating new
methods and data sources, 3) supporting the process of diffusion about the
appropriate application of conceptual and analytic techniques in political
networks research, and 4) accelerating training in political network analysis.
Training is the primary component and this contributes to interdisciplinary
capacity building. Broader Impacts: Beyond training and learning for
participants, the goal is that participants take what they learn and move it
into their graduate and undergraduate teaching and contribute to quantitative
social science programs at their home institutions. Network scientists can play
a large role in developing undergraduate courses on network concepts and
analysis which would be popular and useful contributions to quantitative social
science programs. Broad dissemination is also achieved through conference
participants providing classroom materials and recorded lectures. Additional
sessions from 2012 onward will be recorded and posted. The training and
conference is interdisciplinary by design and has resulted in deep and extensive
engagement across disciplines. The ability to incorporate relational factors has
been demonstrated to improve the understanding of public opinion and voting
behavior, war and international conflicts, and policy development and
implementation, and this proposal accelerates the improvements in these and
other areas of social sciences.