* 1259010
* Small Community Analysis in the Casas Grandes Area, Chihuahua, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Michael Whalen, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 132,110.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Michael E. Whalen will
conduct three seasons of archaeological excavation and data analysis in the
Casas Grandes area of Chihuahua, Mexico. This continues more than 20 years of
research into the origin, operation, and collapse of the great north Mexican
center of Casas Grandes. Casas Grandes long has been famous among archaeologists
for its blend of domestic architecture from the southwestern US and such
ceremonial constructions as flat-topped temple mounds and ball courts from
farther south in Mexico. Nothing else like it is known on either side of the
border. Regional reconnaissance shows that the neighbors of Casas Grandes
consisted of a few large communities and many small ones. The small neighbors of
Casas Grandes, however, are estimated to contain at least half of the region's
total count of residential buildings. This means that most of the population
lived in small sites at some point(s) in the prehistory of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several possibilities for explaining the
interaction between small "outliers" and major centers. One is that small site
residents were too insignificant to have played a role in regional political and
economic life. This is doubtful, however, as a large fraction of the regional
population thus would have been ignored by the center. A second possibility is
that people once lived in small, scattered villages and then were absorbed into
the growing center, resulting in the abandonment of most small villages. In a
third scenario the center grew rapidly, flourished for several centuries, and
finally collapsed. Collapses like this usually are accompanied by two processes:
population reduction and population dispersal into smaller, more scattered
communities as the central authority fails. Here, the small villages largely are
post-Casas Grandes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small site chronology is the key
selecting among alternates. The present project will excavate a sample of small
residential sites in the Casas Grandes river valley, the region's best
environmental zone. Radiocarbon dating will be used to establish site
occupational histories, and these data will be used to consider the three
alternatives presented above. Other data from architecture, facilities and
artifacts will be used to model how these small communities were connected to
each other and to the center of Casas Grandes. Whatever the outcome of this
dating and analytical work, the project has the potential to provide important
new insights on questions of the origin, operation, and collapse of Casas
Grandes from a heretofore unexplored perspective: the region's many small
residential sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project and others like it
significantly enhance the infrastructure for research in northwest Mexico by
increasing contact and collaboration between North American and Mexican
archaeologists. Project personnel participate annually in Mexican archaeology
conferences, give interviews and presentations for local radio, television,
newspapers, and civic groups, and conduct site tours for a range of people, from
school children to government officials. NSF funded projects have been a major
presence in Chihuahua, and all of the related activity significantly raises the
visibility of the national patrimony for the citizens of this part of Mexico.