* 1259388
* Ocean carbon reservoirs and the air-sea flux of CO2 in a changing climate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2017
* USD 675,197.00

The unprecedented rate of increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide, and its
potential impact on climate, has stimulated significant development and
application of numerical climate and carbon-cycle models. Such models are
becoming extremely complicated, with numerous physical and biogeochemical
modules coupled in complex, four-dimensional integrations. Moreover many
processes in models may be poorly resolved and/or crudely parameterized. The
interpretation of these models requires robust and simplifying diagnostic
frameworks.

In this project, a research team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
will develop and apply tools to map and quantify the ocean carbon pumps and the
physical/biological drivers of the air-sea fluxes of carbon dioxide. They will
use these tools to elucidate and quantify mechanisms underpinning the response
of the carbon cycle to climate change, through careful analysis of an ensemble
of sensitivity studies using the MIT Earth System Model of intermediate
complexity (IGSM), as well as available CMIP5, IPCC climate and carbon cycle
simulations and projections: (1) Diagnostic frameworks will be used to evaluate
the contributions of several ocean carbon pumps (reservoirs) to ocean carbon
storage in models and observations as well as to interpret regional drivers of
air-sea carbon flux. (2) An ensemble of simulations with the IGSM will be used
to explore how key uncertainties in model parameters affect simulations of the
ocean carbon pumps in the pre-industrial era. (3) Ensemble simulations will be
extended through the 21st Century, additionally exploring uncertainties in
climate sensitivity, aerosol forcing and wind pattern changes under several
anthropogenic emissions scenarios. (4) The large IGSM ensemble and diagnostic
tools will be used as the context for examining climate/carbon cycle projections
from state-of-the-art CMIP5 climate models, both in simulations of the present
day and future change scenarios. These tools should be useful not only in the
analysis of observations and for the project simulations, but also as a
framework for the interpretation of all IPCC-class climate and carbon
simulations.

Broader Impacts: The key broader impact of this study is its significance for
the application of climate and carbon cycle models to near-future projections,
an important part of the IPCC process. The proposed study will provide an
evaluation of model-derived uncertainties which can be used in assessments of
current and future states of the climate system. It will provide a framework for
elucidating how the changing physical environment may impact the ocean carbon
pumps and air-sea fluxes over the next century. All of the diagnostic tools and
derivative products will be distributed freely for continued application to
assist in the interpretation of the growing inventory of increasingly complex
coupled numerical simulations. In addition, the proposed work will provide a
stimulating and interdisciplinary project for a post-doctoral researcher.