* 1259904
* Biology Scholars: Literature, Laboratory, and Leadership Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Stephen Jodis, Saint Vincent College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 606,528.00

The overall goal of the program is to increase biology graduation rates in
selected rural communities by providing scholarships and support to academically
talented biology students with limited financial means. The project supports 18
total students, six students in each of three cohorts with funding for up to
four years per student. From 2003-2007, freshmen biology majors from the
selected rural communities graduated in lower rates in biology (39.1%) compared
to freshman biology majors from all counties (45.5% graduation rate). These
academically talented students are being retained and becoming graduates of the
Saint Vincent biology program through two objectives: 1) increasing (or
maintaining) their enthusiasm for the field of biology and 2) strengthening
their biology foundation. The program is focussing on three general activities:
engagement in the biological literature through Journal Clubs; research through
Sophomore Laboratory Rotations; and leadership experiences including mentoring
underclassmen, presenting at conferences, and participation in academic, social,
and community service activities. The program is providing the skills and
resources necessary for Scholars to properly attain employment or graduate
school acceptance depending on the individual desires and abilities of the
Scholar. Preliminary and final reports are being presented at Biology and STEM
conferences and are being written for publication. A recruitment presentation is
also being made. An S-STEM Scholars website includes an overview of the program,
application materials, updates on the Scholars, and preliminary data to increase
dissemination of the program and results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Within the last several years, there has been a movement to increase
student engagement and become more student-centered in the classroom to increase
student retention in Biology and other STEM fields (Seymour and Hewitt, 2000;
Vision and Change, 2009; A New Biology, 2009). The activities the Saint Vincent
S-STEM Scholars participate in are increasing critical thinking, reasoning
skills, communication and collaboration, and are exposing the students to
external research and biological careers, and leadership opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This successful program allows continual
engagement of academically talented students from rural communities. In
addition, the overall graduation rate with students from these areas has been
low so the success of this program is encouraging expansion to other majors to
increase graduation rates. There are many college students from similar rural
counties throughout the United States that will benefit from the extra
engagement the Saint Vincent program is demonstrating leads to student success
in biology.