* 1259678
* WORKSHOP:  Methodological Training Opportunity for Politics and Genetics
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Christopher Zorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 94,110.00

The recent introduction of genetic methods into political science impels the
need for training the larger political science community in these methods.
Despite increasing availability of data and publications that integrate politics
and genetics, very few political scientists are trained in the methodologies
needed to review, evaluate, critique, or take part in this burgeoning area of
research. Moreover, for political scientists interested in this growing area of
political behavior, there are few avenues to pursue training; to date, no
existing political science programs, methods workshops or other curricula offer
(or are qualified to offer) training in genetics and familial modeling. Our
project addresses these deficiencies by supporting dedicated opportunities for
political scientists to attend the Institute of Behavioral Genetics (IBG)'s
annual methods workshop at the University of Colorado-Boulder over the next four
years. The most critical benefit of this program will be the introduction of
methods for genetic analysis to a broader population of mainstream political
scientists. These individuals will in turn have the tools to train future
graduate students, include familial modeling their coursework, conduct primary
research, write new grants, supervise theses, and review grants, articles, and
other scholarship. In addition, the training will have spillover effects in
facilitating cross-disciplinary collaboration between political scientists and
scholars in psychology, genetics, and other fields where such partnerships have
been rare. Exposing and training more political scientists in behavior genetics
will also open doors to funding from different sources, and to a wider range of
publication venues for scholars conducting this research. Importantly, for
political scientists, this type of training may also help to dissipate notions
of determinism that surround genetics research, while for geneticists, it may
help dispel the notion that social science is anti-science. The long-term impact
will undoubtedly be to spawn new interest in these areas, create a long-term
investment in behavioral work with a genetic component, and to make better
reviewers and researchers.