* 1259255
* Life Cycles of Diapausing Copepods in the Arabian Sea:  cues for sinking at the end of the SW Monsoon
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Sharon Smith, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2018
* USD 549,151.00

Intellectual Merit. The infusion or transport of large-bodied copepods, whose
life cycle includes diapauses (hibernation) at subsurface depths, into the
upwelling area off Oman is fundamental to the success of the pelagic ecosystem
in the region. Changes in the SW Monsoon wind pattern or strength can alter
timing and intensity of upwelling and mixing, presenting the possibility that
primary productivity during upwelling (dominated by diatoms) and the large-
bodied, diapausing copepods that ingest phytoplankton, may become de-coupled.
When decoupling has happened in other ecosystems, populations crash forcing a
food web reorganization, often with outcomes that are undesirable. In the case
of Oman, the abundant myctophid fish, a key link to upper trophic level fish of
commercial importance, may be at risk for a significant population decline
because of changes in the timing of primary production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now
that climate change may be altering the monsoon cycle of wind forcing in the
Arabian Sea, there exists the possibility that the life cycle of diapausing C.
carinatus may become mismatched with the appearance of their food supply
occurring during the upwelling season. While ontogenetic migration is generally
associated with high latitude environments, where the spring bloom of
phytoplankton driven by the annual cycle of sunlight provides a spatially and
temporally reliable food supply, there are no other copepods inhabiting the
tropics and subtropics that have diapause at depth in their life cycle (except
perhaps Subeucalanus crassus in the Arabian Sea). Understanding the cues that
trigger downward migration of C. carinatus at the end of the upwelling season,
and investigating whether S. crassus has a phenology similar to C. carinatus,
are the goals of this project. An international archive of samples from the
Arabian Sea extending back to 1992, as well as new samples, will be used in this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Collaboration will continue with
the Sultan Qaboos University in Muscat, Oman. The university is just 26 years
old, and marine science in Oman is not much older in spite of the fact Oman has
1700 miles of coastline bordering the Sea/Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea.
These collaborative efforts will extend times series observations that began six
years ago off Masirah Island (located in the seasonal upwelling zone) with a
goal of introducing Omanis to the value of sustained measurements in their
coastal waters. There have been important successes, especially with the Beduin
fishermen on Masirah Island, who have known their local waters for a lifetime,
and recognize that dramatic changes are happening now. They are eager
participants in the "knowledge gathering" such as making daily measurements of
sea surface temperature. As fish kills and red tides proliferate in the coastal
waters of Oman, and costly cyclones impact the coast with greater frequency, the
value of sustained observations has become appreciated. In addition, the PI has
recently co-authored two books on Arabian Sea plankton taxonomy and two more
volumes are expected to result from the research.