* 1259473
* Scholarship Program to Increase Numbers and Strengthen the Workforce in Technology and Mathematics (SPIN+)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Nancy Eaton, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sami Rollins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 638,939.00

This project is designed to offer approximately 75 scholarships over the course
of five years to talented undergraduates who are in financial need and who are
majoring in computer science (CS), computer engineering (CE), or mathematics.
These students are being supported through their studies and assisted in their
transition to the workforce by making use of communities - both the fostering of
a community of peers within these disciplines to support scholarship students
through to graduation, and the connection of these students with the community
outside the university to support their transition to the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The university is using the
scholarship program to create within the existing university infrastructure a
new model for finding, recruiting, supporting, graduating and placing into the
workforce a wide variety of students talented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. This model (1) seeks to identify
STEM majors who may not have yet self-identified as such, (2) emphasizes to
students the connection between undergraduate education and workforce placement,
and (3) builds a network of peer support systems among undergraduates. This
project is helping students maintain this network after graduation by using
online social media (e.g. Facebook, LinkedIn) to create interest groups that
connect students to each other and the wider business community. The project is
working with the admissions department and with community partners to find
talented students with unmet financial needs, with special attention to those
from underrepresented demographics, including those who may not have self-
identified as STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Graduating a
larger and more diverse workforce in computer science, computer engineering, and
mathematics is leading to better problem-solving in these increasingly critical
areas of STEM. Further, the university is leveraging the success of the project
in graduating and placing students into the workforce to obtain long-term
funding commitments from local and regional industry, education, and government
partners to maintain the financial support necessary for the continuation of
this program. The new paths within the university infrastructure being developed
to recruit talented and diverse STEM students and to reduce attrition in these
fields through more cohesive and coordinated support are permanently changing
the university.