* 1259355
* Collaborative Research: Apalachicola Ecosystems Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Howard Foster, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 76,398.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Thomas Foster, Barnet
Pavao-Zuckerman, Roger Brown, and the Apalachicola Ecosystems Project (AEP) will
advance the understanding of the dynamic relationship of humans and their
physical and social environment. The AEP will use archaeological, historical,
and ancient botanical data to investigate how Native American populations
adapted to a changing biophysical and colonial environment. The AEP's
interdisciplinary approach integrates ecological systems and human agency in the
analysis of socio-ecological resilience in the face of dynamic and nonlinear
changes in the political, social, and ecological environments. This project will
use a unique case where the emigrant and immigrant sites of a single town are
well documented. By studying the archaeological sites of Apalachicola
(1715-1836) in eastern Alabama and accurately controlling for temporal
variation, this project will characterize how humans dynamically adapt to and,
simultaneously, affect their biophysical and social environment. Apalachicola
was one of the most politically important Creek Indian towns and was, according
to historic legend, the site of the origin of the Creek Confederacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the AEP are to (1) investigate how
Native Americans maintained social, economic, and ecological viability in the
face of substantial and rapid change to the social and biophysical environments,
(2) identify the anthropogenic effects of the Creek Indian economic strategies
on plant and animal communities, and (3) better understand Native American
social, economic, and ecological resilience during the Historic Period. Sections
of two archaeological sites will be excavated, Apalachicola town (1757-1836) and
Apalachicola Old Town (1715-1757), to measure cultural resilience throughout the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The project will couple the
archaeological investigations with historical research to elucidate broader
political climate, alliances, and conflicts. Finally, the project will measure
local changes in the biophysical environment through pollen cores, analysis of
anthropogenic changes in the plant and animal communities, and climate
variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the AEP is relevant
to studies of resilience theory and risk management, historical ecology and
environmental management. Reconstructing human impact upon, and interaction
with, past environments is important to our understanding of current human
affected environments. This project will contribute to our understanding of how
the Southeastern Indians adapted to a diverse plant and animal environment
within a changing social and economic environment. The project will also help
refine our understanding of the processes of historical ecology, migration, and
cultural resilience in an understudied region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this study are significant to a wide range of fields and will
contribute to scientific education and descendant communities. The study of
anthropogenic effects on the environment is one of the most important problems
facing humans today. The Apalachicola Ecosystems Project is relevant to modern
forest managers, policy makers, environmental historians, anthropologists,
culture historians, and ecologists. The AEP will further understanding of how
humans use culture to adapt to and modify their physical environment as well as
contribute to student training.