* 1259202
* Collaborative Research: U and Th decay series dating of seafloor hydrothermal deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Susan Humphris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 126,203.00

Seafloor hydrothermal deposits form on time-scales of minutes to thousands of
years, are products of significant heat and mass transfer from the oceanic crust
to the oceans, and form in conjunction with activity that supports significant
life in the deep-sea. Understanding time-scales over which these deposits form
and whether they form continuously or episodically can provide important
information about (1) energy and mass transfer between the ocean and crust; (2)
environments, speciation rates, larvae dispersal, energy, and nutrient sources
for hydrothermal biological communities; and (3) relationships between
hydrothermal structure, crustal structure, and heat transfer within the crust.
Unfortunately, there are currently no dependable methods to confidently date
seafloor hydrothermal deposits to help us constrain some of these major
processes. The most promising method involves measuring the radioactive decay of
isotopes in the 238U- and 232Th- decay chains. The half-lives of target isotopes
(238U-234U-230Th-226Ra-210Pb-210Po; 232Th-228Ra-228Th) range from 138 days to 75
kyrs, and allow investigation of samples ranging from ~1 to 105 years. These
time-scales are appropriate for geologically young seafloor hydrothermal
deposits. In addition, application of these isotopes is uniquely suited for
dating minerals formed in seafloor hydrothermal deposits because geochemical
processes isolate specific parent-daughter pairs in the U- and Th- series that
can be exploited for age information. The motivation for this research is based
on scientific need for a reliable method for dating seafloor hydrothermal
deposits and to test the assumptions required for realization of the full
potential of the 238U- and 232Th- method. This research combines a solid
understanding of hydrothermal processes with high-precision isotopic
measurements to rigorously test the assumptions that are central to full
development of the analytical method and interpretation of the results and their
application to seafloor hydrothermal vent chimney deposits. Goals will be to
define the utility and limitations of the method and, hopefully, enable reliable
dating of hydrothermal vent deposits of unknown age. The data produced on
samples of known age, together with measurements of additional samples of
unknown age, will be used to investigate the time-scales of hydrothermal
processes at three distinct locations. Samples selected for analysis are in-hand
and from (1) the Trans-Atlantic Geotraverse hydrothermal system (i.e., TAG); (2)
the PACMANUS hydrothermal field in the Manus Basin in the Pacific Ocean near New
Guinea; and (3) the Eastern Lau Spreading Center/Valu Fa Ridge in the Lau Basin
of the western Pacific. Broader impacts of the study include the development of
new analytical techniques and age pairs for geological applications,
implications for ore deposit formation, public outreach, and broad dissemination
of results to K-12 teachers, students, and the general public. Support of a
graduate student and support of an institution in an EPSCoR stated (Wyoming) are
additional impacts.