* 1259252
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:   Logical Incoherence in the United States Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Gregory Caldeira, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 16,827.00

Existing above the accountability of elections, the Supreme Court?s legitimacy
depends in part on the persuasiveness of its reasoning. In principle, the Court
ought to justify its authority by providing logically coherent reasons for its
decisions, that is the judgment in a case follows from premises supported by a
majority of justices. If a decision of the Court is logically incoherent, then
no rationale for its judgment carries a majority of justices. This study
explores the occurrence, frequency, and impacts of logically incoherent
decisions at the U.S. Supreme Court from 1946-2010. To address these puzzles,
this project conducts three related analyses: first, identification of
incoherent decisions in the aggregate over time and exploration of how
institutional change affects coherence; second, investigation of the correlates
of incoherent decisions in individual cases for evidence of legal or
institutional factors at the case level which curb or encourage incoherence,
while also identification of the areas of law are and least plagued by
incoherence; and, third, determination of the extent to which incoherent
decisions differ from others in their usage and treatment in the lower courts.
This final analysis uses original data on lower circuit court citations in
Supreme Court opinions.

This study provides the first systematic empirical evidence of the existence,
correlates, and effects of logical incoherence. This evidence informs the lively
debate among judicial reform advocates as some claim that the possibility of
incoherence necessitates drastic reforms of courts, committees, boards, and
other bodies while others argue against such dramatic action. Systematic
evidence of the frequency and consequences of incoherence will move this debate
forward. Further, a greater understanding of how the structure of judicial
institutions affects the quality of their subsequent output and influence may
provide guidance to actors creating new judiciaries, along with other collective
decision making bodies. Additionally, one of the byproducts of the study will be
a unique and rich dataset of lower court citations to Supreme Court opinions
which should be of broad interest to scholars and practitioners.