* 1259900
* Attracting and Retaining Scholars in the Mathematical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Guoqing Tang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 04/30/2019
* USD 617,848.00

The project is increasing the number of underrepresented students in mathematics
by providing support for a cohort of 25 students annually. Selection of scholars
is based on academic achievement in mathematics, personal statements, letters,
and an interview. Students are being recruited from current mathematics
students, students seeking a graduate degree, transfer students, and recent high
school graduates. To better educate and retain students, this project is using
lessons learned in prior projects to allow students to participate in a
carefully selected, guided research activity that includes attending conferences
and making presentations. These students are joining a successful learning
community, developed during a prior S-STEM project, with a support structure
that includes vertical, peer, and faculty mentoring. The project is utilizing a
three-tier program of advising, mentoring, and research support for S-STEM
scholars at typically difficult stages for students: 1) the calculus sequence
level, 2) the introduction to proof courses level, and 3) the introduction to
graduate level mathematical research. The program builds on existing mentoring
activities that better serve all departmental students, not just the S-STEM
cohort. The rigorous requirement of involvement in the discipline is improving
retention rates and the readiness of graduates to participate in the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is increasing
the number of graduates in mathematics who are prepared to succeed in high-tech
careers. Graduates are also being prepared to continue their education at the
masters or doctoral levels in order to do basic research in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The project is supporting engagement
in cross-disciplinary work because such efforts provide new ways of approaching
difficult problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Many problems in
society including those in medicine, economics, the environment, law, and other
areas yield to solutions developed through work done in mathematics and related
STEM disciplines, but insufficient numbers of people are currently majoring in
the STEM fields. This project is having a broad impact on society because it is
increasing the number of students in STEM fields and because it is drawing upon
groups of people who previously participated at low rates, in this case African
American and female students. Increasing the number of mathematicians from
underrepresented groups supports people with different backgrounds who may
approach various scientific and technical problems in ways that offer the
possibility of finding new solutions to current problems.