* 1259306
* Fish aggregations and biogeochemical hot spots across regional environmental gradients
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Craig Layman, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2013
* USD 657,849.00

Consumers in marine ecosystems have long been acknowledged for their role in
top-down regulation of ecosystems, but their influence through bottom-up
pathways such as nutrient supply is often underappreciated and has not been
integrated into models of coastal ecosystem dynamics. Yet, nutrient supply from
consumers may be a regulating factor when consumers aggregate, such as fishes
around structurally complex habitat. Examining this bottom-up mechanistic
pathway is essential for a more holistic understanding of seagrass ecosystems,
which are important and threatened globally. This study will address the
following questions: (1) Does concentrated nutrient supply from consumers result
in distinct biogeochemical hot spots in seagrass beds? and (2) How do consumer
effects on ecosystem processes vary across regional environmental contexts where
nutrient availability and fishing pressure vary? The PIs will conduct
experiments at multiple sites within three biogeographic regions in the
Caribbean (The Bahamas, Hispaniola, and Grenada/St.Vincent/Grenadines). The
experiments will utilize artificial reefs that mimic natural patch reef habitats
that concentrate animals at high densities. Response variables reflecting
ecosystem processes (e.g., seagrass nutrient content, seagrass biomass, primary
producer diversity) will be measured at reef sites and compared with control
sites (seagrass sites without reefs). The spatial extent over which ecosystem
processes may be affected, i.e., distance from artificial reef, will be
quantified and used to detect ecological thresholds in ecosystem responses.
Predictor variables, including measures of ambient nutrient availability, fish
densities and fish grazing rates, will be used to contextualize the relative
importance of consumer-mediated nutrient supply. The hierarchical experimental
design and two-pronged analysis will characterize relationships across
environmental gradients found among and within the biogeographic regions,
facilitating a conceptual framework needed to predict when, where, and why
consumer-mediated nutrient supply is an important control of ecosystems
processes in seagrass beds. Broader Impacts: The project is designed to maximize
broader impacts at regional, national, and local levels through extensive
integration of research and education efforts. The entire program is designed in
partnership with The Nature Conservancy, for which the PI serves on the
Caribbean Advisory Board. The Nature Conservancy is at the forefront of the
Caribbean Challenge, an effort to protect 20% of marine habitats by the year
2020. All of the planned study sites are part of current, or proposed, marine
protected areas as part of the Caribbean Challenge initiative. Data from the
research will inform monitoring plans, management strategies, and prioritization
of conservation measures. Outreach initiatives at local and national levels will
be designed with sensitivity to local environmental and social opportunities and
challenges. For example, in The Bahamas, the PI will help design and develop a
new center on Abaco Island intended to support research, education and
conservation activities: ACRE (the Abaco Conservation, Research & Education
Center). The outreach website "The Abaco Scientist" will be expanded, continuing
to provide a platform for quick dissemination of information to the general
public. Emphasis will be placed on training minority students under-represented
in the sciences, providing experiences within an integrated science, education,
and cross-cultural integration model.