* 1259013
* The Boston Reentry Study: Extensions and Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Bruce Western, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2015
* USD 198,680.00

NSF 1259013 Bruce Western January 30, 2013

Under what conditions will men and women released from prison find work, unite
with their families, and desist from crime? As incarceration - concentrated
among the most disadvantaged - has climbed to historically high levels, these
questions have become basic to understanding contemporary crime and poverty. The
Boston Reentry Study aims to study the transition from prison to community by
collecting data on former Massachusetts state prisoners, newly-released to the
Boston area. Support from NSF expands the study sample from 60 to 100
respondents.

The data collection has two main parts. First, a series of interviews is
conducted with prisoners who are within a month of release to the Boston area.
They are interviewed five times over 12 months, both in prison and after
release. The sample includes parolees, probationers, and those who have
completed sentences (a largely unstudied population). Second, the project will
assess attrition and greatly expand the utility of the survey data by linking to
administrative records from the Department of Correction (DOC). DOC records
provide information on criminal history, prison conduct and programming, and
risk assessment. Respondent data may also be linked to Unemployment Insurance
and MassHealth records.

Studying the transition from prison to community is particularly challenging
because the formerly-incarcerated are an acutely disadvantaged, hard-to-reach
population that are only loosely connected to stable households. The Boston
Reentry Study has two key objectives: to sustain a high rate of study retention
over the course of a year of follow-up with released prisoners, and to explain
the reentry process of released prisoners in the areas of employment, family
life, and criminal desistance. While earlier studies of the formerly
incarcerated were marred by high rates of attrition and other under-coverage,
the Boston Reentry Study expects to maintain a high rate of retention in four
ways: with interview incentives, regular phone check-ins with respondents,
interviews with proxies, and the use of place-based contacts in the community.
We also expect the main sources of criminal desistance to arise from stable
households, steady employment, and the formal institutional supports of social
programs and community supervision. In addition to asking in detail about
criminal involvement, education and programming, and employment, the study
surveys delve into three areas beyond the reach of previous data collections on
prison reentry: ties to families and children, patterns of households and
residential mobility, and prison climate.

The great scale of US incarceration has made the penal system a key
institutional influence on many dimensions of socioeconomic disadvantage. High
rates of incarceration have had far-reaching effects on poor urban communities,
but the scientific challenge is substantial. Because they are typically weakly
attached to households but closely connected to penal and other institutions,
released prisoners are commonly overlooked and undercounted in studies of urban
inequality and poverty. Understanding an acutely disadvantaged population that
is jointly at risk of social and economic failure and under-enumeration, is thus
a key task for the analysis of contemporary urban poverty.