* 1259858
* Joint Undergraduate Mathematics and Physics Scholarships (JUMP)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Gerald Feldman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 614,440.00

The JUMP Scholarship program is supporting students beginning in their sophomore
year through a comprehensive set of activities involving financial aid,
outreach, recruiting, cohort activities, and mentoring by faculty, student
peers, and alumni from industry and government. The objectives of the project
are to: (1) enhance the educational opportunities for 30 talented students in
mathematics or physics with documented financial need by providing scholarships
for each student for up to three years; (2) mentor and support these students
through an integrated cohort program to complete their degrees in a timely
manner and prepare them to enter the science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM) workforce or graduate school; (3) expand the overall student
support programs in mathematics and physics at the university to benefit all
STEM majors; and (4) create a model for educational collaborations between the
Mathematics and Physics Departments that can be adopted by other STEM
departments at the university and other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel
features of the JUMP program include: (1) a focus on great ideas at the
intersection of physics and mathematics to motivate cohorts of students to stay
in these majors, (2) an advisory committee of successful STEM professionals to
mentor the JUMP Scholars toward STEM careers, (3) the use of best practices in
Physics Education Research to give JUMP Scholars the latest in active-learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The JUMP program is based
on joint efforts in mathematics and physics to enhance the educational
opportunities and intellectual life for students. The scientific interaction
between cohorts of mathematics and physics students provides additional
motivation and role modeling for students about the exciting problems in the
fields and the relationships to the current body of knowledge. Cohorts of
mathematics and physics majors are learning about the important issues and
problems in the fields and engaging in intellectual discussions through seminars
and special courses. Students are strongly encouraged to participate in the
active research areas of faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
institution is working to significantly increase STEM interest by
undergraduates. Both the Mathematics and Physics Departments have devoted
considerable effort in recent years to high school outreach programs, and these
efforts have led to more freshmen interested in STEM fields. This project is
reaching out to the large pool of talented students currently in non-STEM
fields, but with great potential to excel in mathematics and physics. The
program is helping to increase the diversity of STEM students, building on (a)
the fact that 60% of the students in the College of Arts and Sciences are women
and (b) the close connections of the university to several high schools and
community colleges with high percentages of minority students.