* 1259283
* Enabling the Future: Scholarships in Computational Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Yiming Ji, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 05/31/2019
* USD 601,650.00

This project provides scholarships to at least 62 talented undergraduate
students with financial need in the Computational Science program at the
University of South Carolina-Beaufort. The objectives of the project are to
generate stimulating educational opportunities for students (particularly women
and minorities), to improve their academic performance, to increase retention of
students in the Computational Science program, and to ensure the competitiveness
of graduates for placement in challenging and highly rewarding jobs that demand
advanced technical skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses mainly on
freshman and sophomore students, with reasonable entry requirements to encourage
students to enroll in Computational Science. Students with a high school GPA of
3.0 and above with demonstrated financial need are eligible for the scholarship.
With a combination of active mentoring and full scale academic support programs
(such as peer and professional tutoring) particularly designed for this program,
at least 80% of scholarship recipients are expected to make significant academic
progress and graduate within five years. Beginning in their second year of
study, many eligible students continuing in the Computational Science program
see their source of financial support transition from the funds supplied by this
S-STEM program to the South Carolina state-funded and merit-based Legislative
Incentive for Future Excellence (LIFE) scholarship. In addition, summer
internship programs and entry-level career placement services help enable
students to find success as computational scientists, thereby helping to ensure
the future of the Nation's scientific leadership, economic competitiveness, and
national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Computational
Science is a field of applied Computer Science in which computing theories and
software techniques are used to serve and advance many diverse fields, including
science, engineering, social science and business. The University of South
Carolina Beaufort is one of just a handful of institutions in the U.S. that
currently offer an undergraduate degree in Computational Science. This
scholarship program attracts and retains the best and brightest students,
thereby increasing the number and diversity of computational scientists trained
to harness the power of high performance computing, and sustaining the Nation's
scientific leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The University of
South Carolina Beaufort draws its students primarily from the Lowcountry area of
South Carolina. Many of its students come from families with low household
income; in 2011-2012, 46.5% of USCB students received Pell grants. For the
Computational Science program, 66% demonstrated financial need, and among these
financial needy students, 70% are from underrepresented groups (African
Americans, Hispanics, and Native Hawaiian Pacific Islander). Consequently, this
scholarship program provides a unique opportunity for this diverse group of
students, allowing them to concentrate on science education and enabling their
future. As one of the few Computational Science undergraduate degree programs in
the country, this program also holds promise to contribute to the national
understanding of how to best train undergraduates in this area.