* 1259237
* Overcoming Barriers to STEM Success for Deaf Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2020
* Paul Sabila, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 519,689.00

Gallaudet University is the world's only liberal arts university with programs
and services specifically designed to accommodate deaf and hard of hearing
students. Gallaudet's S-STEM project provides scholarships to deaf students
majoring in biology, chemistry, or mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's intellectual merit results from addressing the severe under-
representation of deaf individuals in STEM fields by providing a specific plan
to prepare deaf students for STEM careers. The goals of this plan are realized
through the following objectives: 1) recruit deaf students into STEM majors, 2)
provide scholarships to talented deaf STEM students with documented financial
need, 3) provide individual and group activities to support undergraduate S-STEM
Scholars, 4) assist deaf S-STEM Scholars in overcoming cultural and linguistic
barriers, and 5) to provide support services to deaf S-STEM Scholars to
ultimately enter STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts result from
increasing the number of talented deaf students who choose a STEM major, and
increasing the number of deaf STEM majors who are well prepared to enter STEM
careers. Deaf S-STEM Scholars are interacting with deaf mentors and deaf
scientists to understand that they truly can make significant contributions to
STEM fields. There is a need for replicable best practices in educating deaf
undergraduates in STEM disciplines, and this project can help develop such
practices. Plans are in place to disseminate these best practices on Gallaudet's
website for prospective students and the public. Plans are also in place to
reach the STEM education community through presentations at national venues and
publications in professional and higher education literature, including those
that focus on teaching and learning.