* 1259803
* Fostering Outstanding Cohorts in Undergraduate Science II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Lee Hughes, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 625,235.00

Fostering Outstanding Cohorts in Undergraduate Science II (FOCUS II) provides a
two-tier program for biology, biochemistry, chemistry, mathematics, and physics
majors to promote retention at the freshman and sophomore levels and to provide
targeted support for juniors and seniors. Students participate in cohort
scheduling and a mentor network including graduate students, faculty, and
professionals in their field and can apply for travel support to attend
professional conferences. A "Careers in Science" seminar course is offered to
provide career preparation, advice on coursework, professional career skills,
and academic success skills to participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this program includes utilizing proven strategies in
cohort building to focus on student retention in STEM majors while also
employing new approaches to increase student success. This effort provides
undergraduate students with financial support, as both an incentive to do well
in their coursework, but also as a means to reduce the necessity for outside
jobs during the most intensive portion of their undergraduate program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impact, this program provides training
to a diverse population of low-income students. Students who participate will be
well prepared to enter STEM fields or graduate programs with a strong mentor
network to assist them. The program team works with an external evaluator to
measure student outcomes and provide both formative and summative assessment of
program activities, which will be disseminated to the science education
community through conferences and publications.