* 1259305
* Heterogeneous and Photochemical Transformations on Aerosol Surfaces:   Understanding the Link between Hydrogen Peroxide and Carbonates Using Carbon and Oxygen Triple Isotopes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robina Shaheen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 437,327.00

This project incorporates a novel approach for measuring in-situ formation of
peroxide and carbonates using carbon and oxygen triple isotopes to help
elucidate heterogeneous chemical transformations on aerosol surfaces. The ozone
molecule is unique isotopically as it possesses the highest enrichment (70-120%)
in the heavier isotopes of oxygen and serves as a natural tracer of chemical
reactions involving ozone interaction. Since hydrogen peroxide is formed on
aerosol surfaces, O-triple isotopic measurements of the newly formed peroxide on
aerosol surfaces in the laboratory with ozone, water, and CaO indicate that the
transfer of anomaly from ozone to carbonates proceeds via peroxide. This project
employs both night and daytime aerosol sampling (12h sampling) of ambient air in
La Jolla CA to look for day/night differences in 13C and oxygen triple isotopic
composition (17O and 18O) of atmospheric carbonates and hydrogen peroxide in
coarse and fine fractions of aerosols. The isotopic analyses in this project
will help elucidate the molecular-level details of the mechanisms of
heterogeneous reactions at aerosol surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
will enhance our understanding of the radiative properties of aerosols, the role
of oxygen isotopes in ice core data, impacts of aerosol transport to ecosystems,
and health impacts of aerosols. The results will address the issue of thin films
on aerosol surfaces while at the same time make progress in areas of importance
to fundamental physical chemistry.