* 1259762
* PERSIST 2.0 in Biology and Chemistry (Program to Enhance Retention of Students In Science Trajectories in Biology and Chemistry)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Derek Westbrook, The College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 635,567.00

The College of New Jersey, a public, primarily undergraduate, residential,
comprehensive institution of higher education, is improving access to, and is
increasing success of, financially-needy students who seeking a bachelor's
degree in Biology or Chemistry with plans go to graduate school or enter the
STEM workforce. Building on experiences and outcomes from a prior award, the
PERSIST program includes a well-defined application process (with a required
interview), peer and faculty mentoring, tutoring, mini-bridge component, and
career development programming. Over the 5-year project, 34 unique individuals
are receiving scholarship support including two cohorts of freshmen, one cohort
each of five sophomores or five juniors, as well as 6 seniors (for just the
first project year). The project is increasing the retention and graduation
rates of students from underrepresented groups by thoughtfully addressing
academic disadvantages that otherwise talented and motivated students from low-
performing high schools bring with them. In addition, PERSIST is designed to
allow carefully chosen students, the time and academic support necessary to
improve basic skills, leading to a reduction in an artificially acquired
achievement gap. The project is documenting and disseminating effective peer and
faculty mentor strategies for students, is increasing student-faculty
interactions, is improving the effective use of math and science tutoring, and
is sharing, through presentations and publications, the findings. By deliberate
design, PERSIST practices are having a halo effect and are benefitting far more
students than just those who receive scholarships.