* 1259985
* Reduction of Survey Length through Split Questionnaire Design: Consequences for Nonresponse and Measurement Error
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Emilia Peytcheva, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 580,000.00

Much research in the social sciences and development of government policy relies
on survey data, and the demand for survey data continues to grow. The need for
more data has led to longer surveys, increasing the burden for survey
respondents in terms of time and effort. Empirical evidence shows a positive
correlation between survey length and survey nonresponse, which threatens the
representativeness of the survey estimates. There also is evidence that
measurement (reporting) error increases as respondents are asked to answer more
questions in the survey. Collecting fewer variables may not satisfy a given
study's objectives, however. This research project experimentally evaluates the
ability to collect all desired data through a split questionnaire design in
which respondents are asked only a subset of the questions. The project will use
a multiple imputation method to complete the data in the sections that are not
asked of particular respondents. The investigators' will extend current
imputation methods to include semi-parametric and parametric models. The main
hypothesis is that the split questionnaire design approach will yield estimates
with less bias and even less total error compared to deploying the full
questionnaire.

This project evaluates a method that essentially transfers part of the time and
effort to complete the survey from the individual to the researcher. It also
evaluates the ability to collect higher quality data as a result of this
reduction in respondent burden. Finally, the study aims to extend the employed
statistical methods to better preserve the properties of the data. The results
will help to provide an alternative methodology for a wide array of surveys,
improve split questionnaire design methodology itself, and provide information
regarding the circumstances under which implementing such designs can be
beneficial.