* 1259752
* Material, Linguistic, and Cultural Influences in the Production of Heritage Food
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Jillian Cavanaugh, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 120,736.00

Dr. Jillian R. Cavanaugh, Brooklyn College and the Graduate Center CUNY, will
conduct research exploring how the production of and demand for locally-
important, or "heritage" foods, influences cultural and political economic
change. Recently, various types of specialty foods - local, organic,
sustainable, heritage - have become increasingly important for understanding the
cultural and economic transformations associated with globalization; yet not all
foods that fall in these categories enjoy the same type of cultural and economic
success. The research will investigate the different types of labor that are
required for everyday foods to become both successful commodities as well as
emblems of local heritage and tradition. This project will focus on the work of
local food producers in Northern Italy, as well as the food activists and
government officials who aid them, in order to examine why people invest in
their past in order to prosper in the present and future.

The project will employ a range of social science research methods, including
participant observation, audio-recording of naturally occurring conversation and
public events, interviews, and the collection and analysis of documentary
practices. Field research will take place across a variety of sites, including
farms, processing plants, government offices, and heritage events.

This research will contribute to social scientific literature that has explored
how entrepreneurs make choices that are driven by concerns about the
preservation of heritage and culture, as well as by economic motivations. This
project will also promote international scientific collaborations, and aid in
the training of undergraduate and graduate students. The results of this
research will deepen understandings of how food production has become part of a
range of important debates about the value and meaning of food today.