* 1259896
* Maine Mathematics and Science Scholars for School and University Collaboration Centered on Educating STEM Students (SUCCESS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* James Vesenka, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 620,788.00

The Maine Mathematics and Science Scholars for School and University
Collaboration Centered on Educating STEM Students (SUCCESS) Program is providing
talented students majoring in applied mathematics, chemistry, biology, marine
sciences, and environmental sciences at the University of New England (UNE) with
four-year scholarships, education programs, mentoring, internship opportunities,
and career counseling. The program has five primary objectives: 1) increase the
number of meritorious students majoring in STEM programs; 2) provide
scholarships to students interested in pursuing a STEM career who may otherwise
not be able to attend UNE due to financial constraints; 3) retain STEM students
to graduation; 4) develop sustained excellence in undergraduate STEM education;
and 5) support SUCCESS Scholars with internships and career counseling. UNE
chemistry/physics and mathematical science faculty and staff liaise with faculty
and staff from targeted high schools to encourage talented STEM-bound students
with demonstrated financial need to apply. The SUCCESS program also includes a
weeklong summer bridge program consisting of coursework in mathematics, science,
and English, as well as the Trailblazers program, which is designed to increase
student appreciation of available natural and human resources and to establish
rapport among the participants. Overall, the program facilitates SUCCESS
Scholars' ability to obtain local employment in STEM fields.