* 1259527
* ECE Scholars: A Program for Recruiting, Transitioning, and Supporting Students to Succeed in Electrical and Computer Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Agnieszka Miguel, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Tamara Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 611,412.00

This project is awarding scholarships to academically talented and financially
needy junior year students who plan to transfer to the Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ECE) Department at Seattle University (SU) from two- and four-year
colleges. The main goal of the SU ECE Scholars program is to enhance the number
of skilled electrical and computer engineers in the State of Washington. SU ECE
scholars receive financial, academic, and professional development support to
ensure their successful progression toward the Bachelor of Science in Electrical
Engineering degree. Student support services include peer tutoring and
mentoring, study partners, industry mentorship program, professional development
seminars, and social activities. An innovative feature of this program is a
recruitment plan that targets academically-talented students who do not have the
necessary preparation to be admitted to a highly competitive program at one of
the state's research-intensive universities. Because of the S-STEM financial
support, instead of abandoning their plans to study electrical engineering, such
students are able to continue their education in SU's nurturing environment
which balances academic challenges with individual attention. The project also
recruits students from the extensive network of Washington State's community
colleges. This project is contributing to a broad understanding of how to
recruit, transition, and support academically talented and financially needy
electrical and computer engineering students at a small, private, liberal arts
college. The proposed program will also serve as a model for collaboration
between large research institutions and small teaching universities to ensure
that capable students, who do not have the necessary preparation, can still
major in their chosen field of study and successfully enter the STEM workforce.