* 1259427
* Establishment of a Scholarship Program in Chemistry and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Scott Feller, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2020
* USD 599,695.00

This project is designed to establish the Establishment of a Scholarship Program
in Chemistry and Physics with the overall goal of increasing the number of
science degrees awarded and broadening participation in the physical sciences.
The specific objectives of the project are to: &lt;br/&gt;(a) Expand access to
the high quality and proven academic programs in the physical sciences at the
college by reducing the financial burden for qualified and motivated
students;&lt;br/&gt;(b) Leverage the fact that many students come from
backgrounds and regions where participation in the scientific enterprise is
low;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Engage prospective science students in the scientific
research process early in their college career through pre-enrollment
internships, an innovative research-focused freshman seminar course, and
subsequent immersion in the culture of scientific research; &lt;br/&gt;(d)
Develop a robust community of science scholars using multiple mentoring models
that involve student peers, faculty, staff and alumni; and &lt;br/&gt;(e)
Provide learning experiences that represent the best aspects of the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Scholarships are being
awarded annually to highly-capable and motivated college students pursuing
degrees in chemistry and physics. Strategies being utilized include an early
immersion in faculty mentored undergraduate research, formation of a community
among the scholars, and frequent, quality interactions with science faculty to
provide both one-on-one tutoring and referral to the extensive set of programs
that the college has developed to aid students in their transition to college,
to retain them as students, and to assure their success in their chosen course
of study. Faculty members are working closely with admissions staff to market
the program, identify prospective scholars, and bring them to campus for pre-
admission events. First-year scholars arrive on campus the week before their
classmates to begin a comprehensive first-year program that includes academic
support, professional development, and research opportunities. Scholars are
sharing academic experiences through common sections of Chemistry, Physics,
Mathematics, and English, as well as their own section of the first-year seminar
course called the Freshman Tutorial. In this tutorial section scholars are
exploring a science-related topic that includes a laboratory/experiential
component focused on a shared research problem from the laboratories of the
faculty. Support services that are being made available to the students include
one-on-one tutoring, participation in mentoring networks developed specifically
for these students, and biweekly lunches with science faculty and advanced
students to discuss issues related to career development, the practice of
science, ethics, and other topics. Faculty members are continuing to mentor
these students throughout their four year experience and are coordinating with
the career development staff as these students seek internships, apply to
graduate programs, and seek employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This program is broadening participation by underrepresented groups and
providing a diverse group of students access to and guidance through the high
quality physical sciences programs at the college that have historically been
among the top producers in the nation of students that go on to earn Ph.D.
degrees.