* 1259692
* Empowering students to achieve STEM success
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* D. Denbow, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 577,937.00

This project is designed to foster a community of scholars and to develop 21st
century STEM thinking among a cohort of high-potential, high-need undergraduate
students by capitalizing on their common passion for a career in animal biology.
Building on strong institutional support in the College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences, this project identifies and recruits academically-talented yet
economically disadvantaged rising sophomores for 16 scholarships of up to
$10,000 annually for three years. The intellectual merit of the project comes
from advancing the knowledge and the understanding of the multidisciplinary
nature of animal biology and agricultural science among highly motivated
undergraduate students. These students are developing skill sets based on
scientific reasoning, collaboration, and creative problem solving. The plan is
to create cohorts of students well-equipped to use STEM skills in the global
workplace and in their everyday lives. The project builds on lessons learned
from previous NSF S-STEM efforts and leverages institutional commitment and
demonstrated departmental excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
derive from the new and innovative courses added to the curriculum as a function
of this project. Not only will the scholars be allowed to participate, but also
other students will as well. Further, publications highlighting the efforts of
the undergraduates and the project as a whole are planned. Presentations are
planned for the community of agricultural educators, which is an audience that
isn't often reached by such projects. By capitalizing on proven pedagogical
methods, this program builds the STEM workforce and creates a comprehensive
support system to empower economically disadvantaged students and guides them to
graduation and beyond.