* 1259029
* Javelina Engineers STEM Scholarships:   Building the Pathway for Baccalaureate to Masters Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Rajab Challoo, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 609,025.00

The Javelina Engineers STEM Scholarship (JESS) program provides scholarships to
academically talented and financially needy students to complete baccalaureate
and master's degrees in engineering, computer science, or industrial management
and technology at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMUK), a Hispanic-
Serving Institution. The JESS program objectives are to: recruit at least 20
academically promising students with diverse socio-economic backgrounds and high
levels of financial need, with an emphasis on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups; retain 80% of these students through completion of a
baccalaureate degree and 40% through enrollment into a master's program; and
integrate student support infrastructure across the TAMUK campus to improve
access to services for all engineering students. Additionally, JESS partners
with Del Mar College, an HSI community college in the same service region, to
recruit and retain high-quality community college transfer students to TAMUK
College of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JESS program provides
comprehensive support for both bachelor's and master's degrees. Student support
services include tutoring, social activities, one-on-one advising from JESS
project team members, undergraduate research and/or internship placement, and a
lecture series to promote graduate school preparation and awareness.
Scholarships are awarded to Javelina Scholars early in their undergraduate
careers with the expectation that they pursue a master's program immediately
following attainment of the baccalaureate degree. At least 20 scholarships are
provided annually for students studying architectural, chemical, civil,
electrical, environmental, or mechanical engineering; industrial management and
technology; or computer science.