* 1259713
* Enhancing Academic Achievement and Career Preparation for Scholars in Computer Science, Mathematics, and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Weidong Liao, Shepherd University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 627,010.00

The five-year S-STEM program at Shepherd University provides support for 30
students majoring in Computer Sciences, Mathematics and Engineering (CME) and
has four objectives: (1) increase enrollment of first-year and transfer students
in CME, (2) increase retention of S-STEM scholars, (3) increase the four-year
graduation rate of S-STEM scholars, and (4) increase the proportion of
graduating S-STEM scholars who continue graduate studies or find employment in
their field within six months of graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program provides financial, academic, social, and
career support to a diverse cohort of students, particularly first generation (a
large percentage of the student body), female, and transfer students, and
assesses the effect of these supports on their retention and graduation rates.
Student learning, engagement, and career preparation are enhanced through
tutoring, faculty and peer mentoring, learning communities, CME student clubs,
close interaction with industry and government agencies, and research,
internship, and networking opportunities. The focus on first generation,
transfer, and female students--the latter highly underrepresented in CME fields
--demonstrates which recruitment and support activities are most effective at
encouraging these populations to continue to baccalaureate-level studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
strengthens and applies student support systems to the educational success of a
diverse community of CME scholars. In particular, it eliminates barriers and
seeks to improve retention of first generation, transfer, and female students in
STEM fields. Entering students from small towns and rural areas and transfer
students from community colleges are supported and encouraged to complete their
education at least to the baccalaureate level. The program strengthens student
education, undergraduate research, and career counseling infrastructure;
enhances Shepherd's regional alliance with business, industry, and government
agencies; and improves connections with local high schools and community
colleges.