* 1259941
* Scholarships for Academically Talented and Financially Disadvantaged Undergraduate and Graduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* David Seybert, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 617,850.00

The project is leveraging a long-standing commitment of the university to
provide upward social mobility to low-income students. To this end, the project
is awarding scholarships to approximately nineteen unique individuals thereby
enabling one advanced undergraduate, nine entering freshmen, six students
transferring from 2-year schools, and 3 entering graduate students, to complete
either a bachelor's or doctor of philosophy degree in chemistry within four (or
two for the transfer students) years of matriculating to
Duquesne.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is augmenting
existing, high quality student-support services with a novel mentoring plan that
engages undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty, both in their
traditional academic endeavors but also in the development of skills that will
lead to valuable STEM workforce personnel. The project is enabling student
success in timely completion of degrees through cohort formation that addresses
the challenges of course work. The professional development activities are
reinforcing essential skills such as time management, prioritization, critical
thinking, writing like a scientist, scientific speaking, advanced
instrumentation, and leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
successful program is documenting how research universities can integrate
scholarship support across all levels of their educational enterprise while
ensuring financially-challenged students, at any level, are able to pursue a
quality higher education degree. The project is also cementing relationships
between the university, local groups that aid in recruiting underserved student
populations, and the local industry in which many graduates have found and will
continue to find satisfying STEM careers that are also beneficial to society.