* 1259971
* Collaborative Research: Nitrous Oxide Production and Fluxes in Coastal Sediments: Response to Environmental Change
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2016
* USD 313,995.00

Although marine sediments are known "hotspots" of nitrous oxide (N2O) production
and emission, current estimates and future projections of this potent greenhouse
gas from coastal areas, especially in response to lower levels of dissolved
oxygen and increased nitrogen inputs, are an approximation at best. Scientists
from the University of Southern California and Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute plan to improve upon these values by determining N2O dynamics at two
coastal sites, Sylt, the German Wadden Sea, and Santa Catalina Island, a
California Coastal lagoon. To attain their goal, they will carry out in-situ,
high resolution microsensor measurements of N2O, oxygen, nitrate, nitric oxide,
hydrogen sulfide, pH, redox potential, and temperature in conjunction with
sediment and pore water analyses. Some of the sediment cores to be collected
will be subjected to changes in oxygen content and nitrate concentrations in the
overlying water to determine changes in nitrogen cycling activity and N2O flux
as a function of low oxygen or nitrate addition. Using experimental incubations,
the isotopic composition of N2O, nitrate, and ammonia will be measured to
provide a quantitative estimate of net isotopic flux and N2O cycling processes.
The combined use of microprofiling and multi-isotope approaches will provide not
only detailed insight into N2O production and flux at these sites, but also
yield data for a recently developed metabolic model to simulate and predict N2O
dynamics under varying environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research would strengthen the collaboration with German scientists.
The proponents plan to create a webpage to discuss the technologies used in
their project, as well as the activities taking place during their field trips.
One postdoc and one undergraduate student from the University of Southern
California would be supported and trained as part of this project.