* 1259573
* Interpreting Regional and Temporal Variability in Global Diapycnal Mixing Inferred from Argo Profiles
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Lynne Talley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 390,942.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The influence of turbulent ocean mixing transcends
its inherently small scales to affect large scale ocean processes including
water-mass transformation, stratification maintenance, and the overturning
circulation. However, the distribution of diapycnal (near vertical) mixing is
not well described by sparse ship-based observations since this mixing is both
spatially patchy and temporally intermittent. Recently, techniques have been
developed to infer diapycnal mixing rates from finescale (tens to hundreds of
meter vertical scales) shear or strain, using assumptions about the underlying
internal wave dynamics that often drive turbulent mixing. The project?s
investigators have begun to apply these techniques to strain measured by the
global Argo array. They have used strain information from Argo float profiles in
the upper 2,000 m of the ocean to generate over 400,000 estimates of the
turbulent energy dissipation rate, indicative of ocean mixing. While these
estimates rely on numerous assumptions, and do not take the place of direct
measurement methods, they have been shown to be a good proxy for the
distribution of diapycnal mixing. Temporally averaged estimates reveal clear
spatial patterns in the parameterized dissipation rate and diffusivity
distribution across all the oceans. They corroborate previous observations
linking elevated dissipation rates to regions of rough topography. Heightened
estimated dissipation rates have been observed in areas of high eddy kinetic
energy, along the equatorial band, as well as heightened diffusivity in high
latitudes where stratification is weak. The seasonal dependence of mixing is
observed the Northwest Pacific, suggesting a wind-forced response in the upper
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, graduate student, Caitlin Whalen,
will continue this work for her doctoral thesis. She will tackle two of the
major open questions that these initial results pose. First, the correlation
between the estimated diapycnal mixing and the eddy kinetic energy field will be
investigated by considering the distribution of the mixing estimates across a
composite eddy derived from Argo-float and satellite sea level anomaly data.
This distribution will be compared with an eddy modeled by the MIT ocean
circulation model inspired by the characteristics of the composite eddy. Second,
the locally elevated diapycnal mixing along the equator will be compared to
equatorial microstructure measurements to corroborate the pattern, and the
observed oscillations along the equator will be placed in the context of
equatorial waves and ENSO, inspired by previous results that link near-surface
equatorial mixing with these phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project will train a graduate student, Ms. Whalen, who
has been and will continue to be involved in a variety of outreach activities,
including volunteering at the Birch Aquarium, assisting teachers and social
media outreach efforts during the CalEchoes student-run research cruise,
participating in workshops to educate local teachers about oceanography, and
discussing her work with the local TV news media. Scientifically, the proposed
work contributes to our understanding of global patterns of diapycnal mixing in
the ocean, a major unresolved process in global ocean models. The principal
investigator is leading a NSF-funded Climate Process Team (CPT) tasked with
improving representations of diapycnal mixing in global climate models. To the
extent that both the magnitude and distribution of diapycnal mixing is likely to
change in a future climate (as, for example, wind stress and associated
mesoscale patterns evolve), accurate prediction of future or past climate
requires development of parameterizations of turbulent mixing that are based on
appropriate physics. The results of the project will be incorporated into
ongoing CPT efforts.