* 1259873
* Making Opportunities for Computer Science and Computer Engineering Students (MOCS)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Joseph Kizza, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 585,020.00

To help address the critical shortage of students majoring in computer fields at
the local, state, and national levels, this project is supporting 28
academically excellent and financially needy undergraduate students majoring in
Computer Science and Computer Engineering (CSCE). New and transfer college
students satisfying and maintaining the scholarship academic merit award
criteria receive a scholarship of up to $4,800 per academic year for up to five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expanding two prior NSF scholarship
programs (DUE0323994 and 0728350) offered to engineering students. This project
builds on successful outcomes and lessons learned by adapting two of the main
features: mentorship for each scholarship recipient and a cohort living and
learning community. New features in this project include heavy involvement by
the local business community in the professional development of the scholarship
recipients, and use of local Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) and
the Tennessee Universal transfer program to recruit freshmen and transfer
students into the program. The project includes supplemental instruction to
improve retention rates and electronic professional portfolios to enhance career
placement. Minority and female students are especially encouraged to apply. This
program serves as a model for a living and learning community at the university
and in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) higher
educational environments. The goal is for 85% of the scholars to graduate with a
computer science or computer engineering degree.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The recruitment plan for freshman students draws
on existing relationships with local businesses and partnerships with faculty,
high school teachers, local community organizations, student ambassadors, and
community colleges. Recruited scholars are being provided newly designed
services and timely support geared towards their needs. Local and regional
industry representatives serve as resources to enhance career exploration
efforts and academic success of the scholarship recipients and to assist
students in their transition to the workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: These scholarships allow academically talented and financially
disadvantaged students to concentrate on their studies. Many activities proposed
are being institutionalized and available to all students at the university.
This program is helping to produce the technically educated workforce necessary
for sustained regional economic growth for the region. Partnerships with local
industry enhance job placement for students and outreach of the university into
the community.