* 1259389
* Conference: 2013 Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference; Kohala Coast, Hawaii; 1-5 January 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Nic Leipzig, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 11/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of this award is to support students/fellows and young independent
investigators (Rising Stars) to attend the 2013 Cellular and Molecular
Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference, to be held in Waimea, Hawaii from January 2 to
5, 2013. CMBE was recently created as a special interest group (SIG) within the
Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) and represents a merger of the Society for
Physical Regulation in Biology and Medicine (SPRBM) with BMES. This will be the
first time that this conference is held as the primary meeting for the CMBE SIG,
and BMES will provide enhanced exposure and membership. The specific theme of
2013 conference will be ?Gradient, Interfacial and Spatiotemporal Control of
Cells and Tissues?. Within this central theme, a broad spectrum of isolated
groups have converged from disparate disciplines, but without any sense of
community. The need for this conference lies in the unique opportunity to bring
these scientists together in one room for the first time to exchange ideas and
brainstorm new spatiotemporal strategies for moving the field of regenerative
medicine forward. This travel support opportunity will be advertised though
emails to be sent out by BMES and CMBE as well as on the conference website. The
application process will require a short abstract, an extended abstract and a
resume/biosketch submitted via email sent to a specially created BMES email
address. The selection committee will consider scientific merit, and previous
accomplishments with special emphasis on promoting individuals from
underrepresented groups and women scientists in the field. The selected
students/fellows and Rising Stars will be expected to present during the
conference. The Rising Stars will all present in a special session held on the
first day of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this award are
two-fold. The first is to provide support to junior investigators, postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students. The meeting will thus provide a platform for the
development of long-term interdisciplinary interactions, and expose researchers
in bioengineering, biology and medicine to the latest ideas and opportunities at
the confluence of CMBE. The second objective of this award is to foster the
emergence and growth of the burgeoning sub-field of CMBE. &lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of the conference will be published in a special issue of the journal
of Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;