* 1259580
* Beyond Horizontal Convection
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Kraig Winters, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2016
* USD 373,388.00

Intellectual Merit: This project extend the investigators? work on horizontal
convection which refers to the circulation resulting from differential heating
along one horizontal boundary of a fluid and is seen as the simplest dynamical
element contributing to the oceanic Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC).
The full problem of the MOC is complex and difficult, involving thermal, haline
and mechanical forcing. The investigators on this project have been working on
understanding single-component horizontal convection, which is commonly viewed
as a simplified conceptual model of the MOC. This work, and that of other
groups, suggests that the gap between horizontal convection and the MOC is not
only quantitative, but also qualitative. The goal of this project is to move
from the overly simplified problem of horizontal convection toward the richer
dynamical setting of the ocean by conducting further laboratory and numerical
experiments. The following hypotheses will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Deep stratification is largely set by the interaction between the vertical
transport of buoyancy in the depth-varying, negatively buoyant plume and the
lateral transport due to baroclinic eddies.&lt;br/&gt;2. Kinetic energy
dissipation in rotating horizontal convection with and without surface stress
occurs primarily in the interior of the flow and is not due to bottom drag.
Direct Numerical Simulations indicate that this is true yet ocean circulation
simulations with parameterized convection and turbulence suggest
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;3. An input of mechanical energy in the form of a surface
stress in opposition to a buoyancy-driven circulation leads to a two-cell
circulation, in which the system is no longer governed by classical scaling
arguments.&lt;br/&gt;4. Spatial variability of the applied surface stress
introduces new dynamical responses and energy pathways. The relative phase
between wind and buoyancy forcing is thus
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This renewal project will
enable two graduate students to finish their thesis research and acquire skills
in laboratory work and computational fluid dynamics. To reach pre-college
students, the investigators will continue to contribute to the professional
development of high school teachers in the San Diego Unified School District. In
partnership with the NSF-funded Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence ?
California, they will sponsor a one-day workshop for approximately 25 Earth
sciences teachers. The numerical simulations in this project will be used as
examples in a seminar class on scientific computing, aimed at introducing
graduate students carrying out computational research at the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography to the NSF-supported supercomputing facilities.