* 1259933
* Engineering, Computer Science and Information Assurance Recruitment and Retention Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Alex Antunes, Capitol College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 655,988.00

This project builds on previous successes by providing a mentoring program and
faculty led extra-curricular activities. The current project is increasing
retention of all students and most notably of the scholars. Successful elements
of the earlier project that are being continued include a three-week summer
bridge session prior to the freshman year focusing on the transition to college,
cohort building activities, and monitoring of academic progress with appropriate
interventions. The project is providing a supportive environment that improves
learning, encourages student bonding and good study skills, and reinforces
student motivation to earn a degree in a STEM field. The project is awarding
scholarships to 33 incoming high-need, high-ability freshmen in the departments
of Engineering, Computer Science and Information Assurance. These scholarships
are renewable for the sophomore year. After students reach the milestone third
year, the college is providing continuing financial support for the remaining
two years, along with advising, mentoring and career-planning assistance.
Participants are selected based on financial need, SAT scores, high school
grades, and an interview process. Cohorts of 11 students enter the college as
freshmen in three fall semesters. An evaluation process is determining if
retention is improved and if it is correlated to project activities.