* 1259185
* Collaborative Research: The Kinematics, Microphysics and Dynamics of Long-fetch Lake-effect Systems in Ontario Winter Lake-effect Systems (OWLeS)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Karen Kosiba, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 758,122.00

This award is one key segment of a larger effort centered on the Ontario Winter
(OW) Lake-effect Systems (LeS) field project, to be conducted December
2013-January 2014. OWLeS will focus on two complementary lines of research, each
tracing to a preferred wind regime over the U.S. Great lakes region and
corresponding distinct mesoscale mode of winter storm organization. Activities
led by this group will focus on so-called "long-fetch" storm events, for which
low-level winds are aligned approximately parallel to Lake Ontario's long axis.
Observational assets to be employed during OWLeS include the University of
Wyoming King Air instrumented aircraft, the CSWR Doppler on Wheels (DOW) mobile
radars, multiple mobile rawinsounding systems, the Millersville University
Profiling System, the UAH Mobile Integrated Profiling System, and a variety of
other deployable surface measurement systems. These researchers contend that
predictions of the amounts and inland extent of LeS snowfall remain poor, due in
part to fine-scale variations in upwind planetary boundary layer structure and
poor representation of cloud microphysical, dynamical, and surface processes. To
address these shortcomings, the intellectual merits of this research will derive
from improved understanding of: 1) How long-fetch LeS intensify and evolve
downwind of the lake, where prolonged heavy snowfall rates are particularly
impactful; 2) how cloud and dynamical processes may contribute to cloud
electrification and to lightning, as occasionally observed in long-fetch LeS
heavy precipitation cells; and 3) how dual-polarimetric (and in select regions,
dual-Doppler) radar measurements at X- and S-band wavelengths as utilized by
mobile-DOW and operational National Weather Service WSR-88D radars,
respectively, may reveal detailed precipitation processes in LeS. Through
detailed comparisons with in-situ aircraft measurements, evaluations dual-
polarimetric particle identification and quantitative precipitation estimate
(QPE) algorithms will extend the utility of remote-sensing observations in this
unique cool-season environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will
include experience infield campaign planning, hands-on data collection and data
analysis for a notably large number of undergraduate as well as graduate
students. A desirable mix of junior and senior principal investigators will
facilitate exchange of established and complex project design and observing
methodologies, and foster improved field observing techniques tailored to severe
winter weather conditions. Outreach efforts will extend to K-12 students and
college students enrolled at nearby institutes of higher learning. Given the
significant impacts of lake effect snowfall on public safety and economic
activity along the populous shores of the U.S. Great Lakes, improved
understanding of lake-effect systems should foster refined models and
forecasting techniques that will address a longer-term societal need.