* 1259859
* Increasing Access and Diversity in STEM Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Judith Peisen, Hagerstown Community College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 09/30/2018
* USD 748,003.00

The S-STEM project at Hagerstown Community College(HCC) serves students in a
variety of STEM disciplines and students in a number of degree programs are
eligible for S-STEM. HCC coordinates efforts through the PI and two division
chairs to ensure that scholarships are awarded equitably and efficiently, while
still involving program coordinators and lead faculty members in scholarship
decisions.

Project objectives include raising S-STEM full-time enrollment rates by 30% and
increasing retention rates for S-STEM students (compared to students in S-STEM-
eligible majors in the past) by 20%. HCC also seeks to improve
completion/transfer rates and the percentage of full-time STEM degree program
students who are members of minority groups or female. Ambitious targets specify
high rates at which S-STEM graduates will either find employment in a field
related to S-STEM or enroll at a four-year institution within one year of
graduation. In order to ensure that HCC achieves its goals, the college is
implementing "intrusive" S-STEM-specific advising, an S-STEM one-credit seminar
required for all awardees, and additional activities such as an STEM club, field
trips, and an S-STEM scholar recognition ceremony. HCC works to increase the
number of internship sites and four-year articulation agreements available to
S-STEM students; the project also provides a limited number of scholarships for
students who have graduated from HCC and have transferred to a four-year college
or university. HCC's project is intellectually meritorious because it examines
the effects of supports such as scholarships and academic supports on student
enrollment, retention, completion, and success. The project evaluation plan is
designed not just to measure whether activities occur, but also whether they are
effective. HCC is also surveying students to determine how they learned about
the S-STEM program and to identify which supports are most crucial to their
success.

The greatest impact of this project is expected to be demonstrated through
projected increases in enrollment, retention, and completion rates of students,
particularly underrepresented students, in STEM programs in HCC's Appalachian
service area. Data indicate that a very low percentage of adults (~15%) in the
region have bachelor's degrees, compared to 35.7% for Maryland as a whole and
28.6% in the nation. Therefore, the project is particularly crucial for
achieving local, regional, and national goals of assisting more students to
complete degrees and transfer to further baccalaureate studies and/or
immediately join the workforce.