* 1259027
* BioMEMS Workshop:  Emerging Frontiers and Applications, Bosto, MA, July 29-August 2, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2013
* Mehmet Dokmeci, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

1259027&lt;br/&gt;Khademhosseini&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The
emergence of micro- and nanotechnologies have changed much of what is possible
in research today and have opened up new possibilities in exploring the
surroundings and generating new ways of improving human life. Also they have
become one of the most "game changing" fields in science over the past few
decades. Given the increasing amount of interest in this area we aim to develop
an educational workshop on the use of micro- and nanotechnologies and their
applications and emerging research frontiers. This workshop will bring leading
experts in the area of micro- and nanotechnology to present the latest work on
the use of various types of technologies for addressing a range of different
challenges that are of importance for biomedicine and education of engineers at
the interface of engineering, medicine, and biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will be held in Boston, on July
29-Aug 2, 2013. The workshop will be held near MIT and Harvard Medical School at
the center of some of the leading facilities in the world. The goal of the
workshop is to provide a forum to discuss research at the interface between
engineering, biology and medicine, to present a program that is highly rich in
both intellectual merit as well as educational opportunities. In particular the
workshop brings together students from various academic institutions with world
leading experts in a small and intimate setting that will enable ample
opportunities to network and learn. The workshop will focus on a number of
unique areas that are highly inter-related yet not fully put together in a
similar program. These areas include fundamental science of micro- and
nanofluidics and small matter to applications in engineering the environment of
cells using various small-scale? technologies, developing devices to detect and
analyze molecules for biosensing and global health applications. Another unique
aspect of the workshop is the involvement of people from companies. The proposed
workshop will generate a range of opportunities for students and young
investigators to learn about the process of developing and commercializing a
technology from industry speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
potential impact of this proposed workshop on micro and nanoengineering is far-
reaching. Since this workshop combines fundamentals of micro and nano science
and engineering with their applications in medicine, it will catalyz
conversations between otherwise disparate fields. Various biomedical grand
challenges facing our society and the world can be addressed in part or in whole
by interfacing biology and medicine with nanotechnology. By drawing leaders from
each of these fields together to discuss ways of addressing important medical
issues with the most cutting edge technology in an intimate venue, it will
enable progress at the interface of science, engineering, and medicine. To
maximize the broader impact of such a promising workshop, we propose several
approaches to raise awareness, with the larger scientific community as well as
engage participation by under-represented minorities by hosting: 1)
Opportunities for students to engage more intimately with thought leaders.
Students can get to know leaders in the field through meetings to help guide and
further their careers. Having access to mentors is a critical component for a
successful education, and therefore providing a forum to engage mentor and
student interactions would help facilitate this. 2) Encouraging women in
Science, Engineering, and Medicine. With still so few women in engineering and
science, it will encourage in which women can learn from established role models
as well as open a dialogue on how to best attract and engage women in these
burgeoning fields is needed. 3) Travel grants for US students. These grants will
enable students who otherwise cannot afford to come to participate in this
workshop. The grants will be distributed based on merit (quality of paper
submission) with consideration for inclusion of under-represented minorities and
women.