* 1259364
* Collaborative Research:  Places, Poverty and State Capacity:  Local State Responses to Recession and Socioeconomic Well-Being, 2001-2012
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Gregory Hooks, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2016
* USD 41,484.00

This collaborative research project will examine the degree to which local
governments improve socioeconomic well-being across the nation and whether they
contribute to recovery following the recession of 2008 to 2011. The impacts of
local governments on employment growth, income growth, poverty alleviation, and
other socioeconomic indicators will be investigated. The researchers will focus
their efforts on tests of three broad-ranging hypotheses: (1) Capacity (size,
administrative/fiscal resources, and policy interventions) of local governments
is positively related to the well-being of the populations they serve. (2)
Capacity is related to countercyclical (proactive) local government responses to
the Great Recession. (3) Where local governments took countercyclical responses,
future socioeconomic well-being improved. Each of these hypotheses will be
addressed for all local governments within county-area units across 50 states
and for the county governments. Although county governments exceed federal
civilian government in employment size, social scientists have all but ignored
them. A local government database constructed by the investigators will be
extended for the post-recession period through the use of the Census of
Governments and other secondary data. For county governments, unique primary
longitudinal data spanning 2001-2008 will be used.

The project will have theoretical significance across the social sciences and
broad utility for communities and families across the U.S. as they face
potential cuts to their local governments in the aftermath of the Great
Recession. The project will create a new bridge between political sociology and
the longstanding poverty-and-place literature, a tradition addressing
subnational disparities that spans sociology, geography, economics, and regional
science. The project will address fundamental social science questions about the
role of government in promoting public well-being across the nation. It will
inform policies aimed at post-recession recovery. Captured in the data are local
public employment changes during the Obama stimulus-package period that will
enable the researchers to measure their impact on poverty and to also assess
whether place-based (locally centered) policies helped in poverty alleviation.
The project will provide education and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, and it will enhance the data infrastructure for detailed
studies of local governments and well-being for future research.