* 1259951
* Broadening Opportunities for Interdisciplinary Computational Science and Engineering Research Training (ICSERT)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2020
* Satchi Venkataraman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 02/29/2020
* USD 618,792.00

The Computational Science Research Center at San Diego State University (SDSU)
is awarding $10,000 per year scholarships to 26 graduate students in
interdisciplinary computational science and engineering areas. Over the course
of this 4 year project, SDSU is awarding support to 16 PhD students, in unique
cohorts of four to six students, during their first two years of study, and
these doctoral candidates are being supported as research assistants in
subsequent years. In addition, 10 Master's students, in unique cohorts of 3 or 4
students per year, are supported each year of their two-year degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is ensuring the development of a
future workforce with high level problem solving skills and experience to work
on interdisciplinary computational science and engineering problems in team
settings. The project is engaging and training the cohorts of graduate students
in 'discovery teams' which include professors, research staff, graduate and
undergraduate students, working interactively to solve practical problems.
S-STEM scholars are being supported through to degree completion via strategic
academic and career counseling, appropriate and timely course support as needed,
guidance on seeking additional graduate study financial support, networking
opportunities with researchers from academia, national laboratories, and
industry, and enhanced teaching, outreach, and leadership
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is increasing the diversity of
graduate students in interdisciplinary computational science graduate program
and is increasing the number of women and socioeconomically disadvantaged
students who complete graduate level STEM-programs and obtain private sector or
academic appointments in interdisciplinary computational science and engineering
fields.