* 1259343
* Undergraduate Sustainable Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (U-S2TEM) Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 609,923.00

The intellectual merit of the Undergraduate Training in the Environment (UTE)
Scholars program derives from its focus on the impacts of global changes and the
dynamics and sustainability of natural and human built systems. The UTE Scholars
program supports 14 students in the Colleges of Science, Mines and Earth
Science, and Engineering who work as a multidisciplinary cohort to explore how
various scientific and engineering fields interact. This scholarship program is
a partnership of the University of Utah's Global Change and Sustainability
Center (GCSC) and the Center for Science and Math Education (CSME). This
partnership provides academically talented and financially challenged
undergraduate students with unique educational and research opportunities. The
program also provides academic scaffolding, mentoring, professional development,
and supports them throughout their undergraduate
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the UTE Scholars program
derive from partnerships with various and diverse organizations both in
recruiting and outreach. These partnerships engage scholars in outreach to the
minority-majority school districts as well as rural areas. The UTE Scholars
seminar series provides a forum for participants to learn to integrate research
activities with education in order to place their science in a broader societal
context. This scholarship project is developing an interdisciplinary learning
community of students, faculty, and professionals that synergistically engages
and supports the UTE Scholars as they move through their academic training.
Further, this program provides a model for similar programs in the future both
within and outside of the University of Utah.