* 1259226
* Geometry of Moduli Spaces, Geometric Invariant Theory, and Deformations of Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Maksym Fedorchuk, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 117,999.00

This proposal is concerned with the study of moduli spaces in algebraic
geometry. By using methods of Geometric Invariant Theory, deformation theory,
and enumerative geometry, the investigator will pursue several projects in order
to elucidate the geometry of well-studied moduli spaces and to adopt new
approaches to less studied ones. In the first project, the investigator will
continue the study of finite Hilbert stability of embedded curves with the goal
of advancing the log minimal model program for the Deligne-Mumford moduli space
of stable curves. In the second project, the investigator will approach
fundamental open questions about effective and ample divisors on this moduli
space and its variants. The study of singularities is an important ingredient of
these two projects. In the third project, the investigator will extend recent
results in the theory of curves to certain classes of higher-dimensional
varieties (e.g., K3 surfaces) and their moduli spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
algebraic variety is a collection of solutions to a system of polynomial
equations. Algebraic varieties are fundamental objects of study in mathematics
and, in particular, in the field of algebraic geometry, to which this proposal
belongs. Variation of the polynomials' coefficients gives rise to a moduli space
for a given class of varieties. The study of moduli spaces is essential to
understanding algebraic varieties themselves and, ultimately, to solving systems
of polynomial equations. The investigator proposes to study moduli spaces of
algebraic varieties depending on one or two free parameters using both classical
and modern techniques. The broader impacts of the proposal include advancing an
active research program and co-organizing workshops on moduli spaces and related
problems.