* 1260876
* Extending Entry Models with Applications to Mergers, Bailouts, Entry Deterrence and Procurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Andrew Sweeting, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 415,066.00

Government policies often directly impact firms' incentives to sell products or
services in a particular market. These same incentives may also affect how well
policies achieve their goals. Existing economic models of entry take into
account the effect of entry on the number and size of firms in a market.
However, some important questions about the effects of government policies on
entry cannot be answered using existing models, and these models also impose
sometimes unrealistic assumptions that directly affect the conclusions that can
be drawn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team builds new
mathematical models of entry that are more realistic in key dimensions. They
will use these models to examine (i) merger policy in the airline industry; (ii)
the effectiveness of a corporate bailout scheme aimed at preserving competition
in timber auctions conducted by the US government; (iii) whether firms can deter
entry by keeping prices low in advance of possible entry; and (iv) the possible
value of using two-stage indicative bidding schemes in government procurement
auctions. The research draws upon recent advances in economic theory and
econometrics to build these models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
the development of methodological innovations to address important policy
questions about the nature and effects of firm competition. The results will be
useful for competition policy and government procurement. Graduate students will
learn state-of-the art empirical methods and the computer code and data will be
widely available.