* 1260312
* Eddy-internal wave interactions in regions of frontogenesis
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Leif Thomas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 526,829.00

Near-inertial waves, mesoscale eddies, and fronts are ubiquitous in the ocean.
Classical theory predicts that the interaction between the fast, unbalanced
waves and the slow, balanced eddies is usually weak. A new theory demonstrates,
however, that this interaction can be strong in regions of frontogenesis, where
mesoscale strain drives a cross-front ageostrophic circulation and rapidly
intensifies thermal wind shear. This change in geostrophic flow modifies the
polarization relation of near-inertial waves that are present, making their
horizontal velocity rectilinear, and resulting in a Reynolds stress that draws
kinetic energy from the eddies. The kinetic energy transferred from eddies is
ultimately lost to the ageostrophic circulation, hence the near-inertial waves
play a catalytic role in loss-of-balance. In the process the waves lose all of
their energy. Scaling arguments based on a simple theoretical model for the
interaction suggest that it could play a significant role in closing the global
kinetic energy budgets for both near-inertial waves and eddies. To correctly
assess the impact of this process on global energy balances, however, the
physics of the mechanism must be understood without the simplifying assumption
used in the model of a spatially homogeneous front and wave field. This project
aims to do this using a hierarchy of hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic numerical
simulations of spatially localized fronts and wave fields. Two dimensional
simulations will be performed that are designed to study the modifications of
the waves and isolate the wave-induced changes to the mean flow. These will not,
however, allow the changes in mean flow to feedback on the wave dynamics. Three-
dimensional hydrostatic simulations without this constraint will be used to
investigate these feedbacks and quantify the wave-induced adjustments to the
eddy kinetic energy. The ultimate fate of the kinetic energy lost from the wave
and eddy fields to presumably small-scale turbulence will be investigated with
high-resolution non-hydrostatic simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The theory that forms the basis of the proposed research merges studies
of frontal dynamics, internal wave physics, and wave mean flow interactions,
yielding rich new phenomena that may shed light on one of the fundamental
problems in geophysical fluid dynamics of how kinetic energy is transferred from
balanced to unbalanced motions and dissipated. At the same time, the work
provides a mechanism for the removal of the kinetic energy in the near-inertial
wave field, a problem that is not fully understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed research tackles one of the outstanding questions in
physical oceanography ? how the kinetic energy in the mesoscale is dissipated.
This is important because how eddies lose their kinetic energy affects their
properties, with consequences for the large-scale circulation and hence climate.
The research points to a pathway where kinetic energy from eddies and internal
waves drives mixing at fronts, with implications for nutrient fluxes, primary
productivity, and water mass transformation. Insights from this study will guide
the development of parameterizations for the dissipation of eddies and near-
inertial waves for use in global circulation models. The project will be used to
train a graduate student and includes mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher.
The research results will be incorporated into lectures and outreach activities
that provoke interest and fascination in the ocean circulation.