* 1260953
* Measuring Firms' Financial Soundness
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Andrew Atkeson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2017
* USD 463,415.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Measuring Firms' Financial
Soundness&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES - 1260953&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Atkeson, Andrew G.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
structural models of credit risk, this project develops a simple, transparent,
and robust method for measuring the financial soundness of individual firms
using data on their equity volatility. The method proposed for measuring firms'
financial soundness is compared to other measures such as those use by Duffie
(2011) to measure corporate default risk and those implied by prices for credit
default swaps. The primary advantage of the proposed method is that it can be
applied over a long time horizon and, across diverse industries because it
relies only on readily available equity return data and not on accounting data
and/or prices on more recently developed securities such as credit default
swaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project retraces quantitatively the history of
firms' financial soundness during U.S. business cycles over most of the last
century yielding preliminary insights into the role played by financial
frictions and financial firms in U.S. recessions. The summary of the main
preliminary findings is as follows. First, the largest recessions of the
1926-2011, in 1932-33, 1937, and 2008, were associated with deep insolvency
crises, in the sense that the distribution of financial soundness across firms
collapsed to abnormally low levels for almost all firms. Insolvency crises did
not occur during other recessions, but did occur several times outside
recessions, for example during the stock market crash of October 1987. Second,
the insolvency crisis of fall 2008 was mainly a result of a sudden increase in
the asset volatility, or business risk, facing all firms. Contrary to many
theories of financial crises, the contribution of the increase in leverage,
induced by a fall in asset values, was relatively small over the time period
2007-2008. Third, in each insolvency crisis, the timing of the financial
soundness collapse is almost exactly the same for financial firms as it is for
all firms, both financial and non-financial. This finding holds even if we
restrict attention to the distribution of financial soundness across the largest
financial firms. Thus, during each of our crisis episodes, there is little
evidence that the financial soundness of financial firms deteriorated first.
Finally, this project also examines the distribution of financial soundness
across a smaller group of large financial firms that were at the center of
attention of the recent financial crisis: the 18 publicly traded "Stress Test"
banks and the six large financial firms that failed during the 2008 crisis (AIG,
Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Wachovia, and Washington Mutual).
Compared with other firms, both large or small financial firms and large non-
financial firms, the financial soundness of these large institutions was quite
similar from 1997 to the summer of 2007, but substantially worse for the full
four years that have passed since the crisis began. Thus, these government
backed large financial firms did not look different than their peers in terms of
their financial soundness in advance of the recent financial crises but they do
look different afterwards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to extend
the preliminary results by broadening the theoretical foundation of the
measurement procedure and by extending the empirical work to other countries and
time periods to see if similar patterns in the evolution of the distribution of
financial soundness across firms are present in other financial crises. The
project also proposes to examine the theoretical and empirical relationship
between the proposed measure and other financial indicators of firms' financial
soundness, with an eye to developing an empirical foundation for practical
market signals of firms' and banks' financial soundness.