* 1260844
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  The evolution and genetic basis of primate brain cortical gyrification in a pedigreed Papio population
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* James Cheverud, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2015
* USD 30,400.00

Elevated cognition, related to the dramatic increase in brain volume, is a
hallmark of the primates. Cognition is directly related to the number of neurons
in the cerebral cortex and the connectivity network underlying information
processing in the brain. Increased cortical folding (gyrification) allows for
more neurons to be contained within the volume of the braincase and the
arrangement of folds and ridges across the cerebral cortex is an indication of
the underlying neural network connecting regions. This dissertation project by
Elizabeth Atkinson (Washington University), under the supervision of Dr. James
Cheverud, uses a pedigreed baboon population to assess the genetic basis and
structure of cortical folding in primates. It then further investigates the
genomic regions identified in baboons to determine the role of natural selection
in altering the DNA sequence of genes across the primate family tree. Questions
addressed include: Is the organizational structure of the cerebral cortex
modular? Are brain regions that develop together in utero or work together
throughout an organism's life also inherited together? How susceptible to
developmental noise is the cerebral cortex? What chromosomal regions and genes
affect variation in brain function and cortical traits? Is there evidence that
genes affecting cortical traits have been selectively altered at an evolutionary
scale? Overall, this project addresses critical questions in human and primate
brain evolution, including the genetic architecture of brain morphology,
differing cognitive strategies across the primate clade, and the evolutionary
mechanisms responsible for their formation.

In addition to addressing issues of the genetics of brain morphology and
cognition in primates, this project also will involve mentoring undergraduates
and local high school students from ethnicities and socioeconomic groups
typically underrepresented in the sciences, teaching evolutionary concepts at
inner-city St. Louis schools, furthering the efforts of a graduate student-run
program for science outreach, and disseminating the notable findings from this
project to other scientists at meetings and conferences. Participating in this
project will further the scientific career and curriculum vitae of an
underprivileged St. Louis high school student, mentored closely over the course
of the summer of 2013, who otherwise would have few opportunities to engage in
scientific research at this early point in their academic development.