* 1260882
* Response dynamics in decision making
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robin Thomas, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2017
* USD 289,607.00

Recent advances in decision research seek to identify the cognitive and brain
processes that cause people to choose one option over another. This is notable
because it allows us to understand and predict not just what decisions people
make, but why they make them. One significant limitation of this more meaningful
work is the lack of empirical methods that are capable of revealing the inner
workings of an individual's thinking while they choose among options. The
current work remedies this shortcoming by examining a new measure of choice
behavior -- the movement of a person's hand, arm, or other effector, while they
are trying to pick one option over others in tasks requiring them to make
choices. Human movement, often referred to as response dynamics in this context,
has become an exciting new metric for a number of cognitive processes thought to
be hidden from view inside the "black box" of the mind. The innovation of the
current research program is to validate and extend this methodology using
computational modeling, neuro-electric brain imagery, and additional
physiological measures (e.g., eye-tracking) to further reveal how response
dynamics can inform scientists about how people make choices.

There are many opportunities for broader impact of this research beyond the
immediate scope and research questions. First, the systematic and comprehensive
investigation of the limitations, qualifications, and generalizability of the
response dynamics paradigm can influence other domains where it has been
employed, including: categorization, speech perception, stereotyping, deceptive
intentions, learning and memory, and perception of culture, race and gender.
Second, the theoretical questions addressed can make significant contributions
to specific content areas and real-world issues. Any situation where society
might benefit from better understanding of how individual decision-making
actually occurs -- such as public policy making, educational reform, medical
care choices, etc. -- stands to gain from our theoretical advances. For example,
we would have new potential to target interventions to improve suboptimal or
deviant decision making, and/or to structure decision situations to account for
people's natural tendencies.