* 1260164
* The Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT):   Sustaining ocean ecosystem and climate observations in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2019
* USD 8,148,909.00

Intellectual Merit: This proposal will extend funding for the Hawaii Ocean Time-
series(HOT) research program for an additional 5 year period (August 2013-July
2018). This will extend the program into its 30th year of sustained observations
of ocean ecosystem and climate variability at Station ALOHA in the North Pacific
Subtropical Gyre (NPSG). The underlying objectives of HOT continue to focus on
documenting temporal dynamics in the cycling of carbon and associated
bioelements, in addition to identifying variability associated with hydrological
and ecological properties, heat fluxes, and circulation of the NPSG. The program
relies on monthly shipboard and near-continuous moored platform measurements to
document variability in ocean properties and processes over time scales ranging
from semi-diurnal to decadal. Foremost among HOT accomplishments are improved
quantification of reservoirs and fluxes of carbon and associated bioelements,
identification of how changes to the North Pacific hydrological cycle influence
ocean physics and biogeochemistry, increased understanding of the sensitivity of
bioelemental cycling to large scale ocean-climate interactions, and creation of
long-term data sets needed for assessing future changes to the NPSG. This award
provides funds to maintain the high quality suite of biogeochemical and physical
measurements required for continued assessment of dynamics in ocean carbon and
nutrient pools and fluxes, physical climate, plankton community structure,
ecosystem productivity, and inherent optical properties. Increasing the length
of program observations continues to improve the value of the dataset for
deciphering how low-frequency natural and anthropogenic climate signals
influence ecosystem structure in the NPSG. Such efforts will continue to aid on-
going biogeochemical and numerical ocean circulation models required for
predicting how future habitat perturbations may influence ecosystem dynamics in
the NPSG.

Broader Impacts: Education, outreach, and training will continue to play a
prominent role in HOT program activities. HOT provides a unique learning
platform for high school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students and
teachers from Hawaii and around the world. The monthly HOT cruises provide
short-duration (4 day) opportunities for students and teachers to gain first-
hand exposure to ocean and climate sciences. In addition, HOT helps support the
research of numerous ocean scientists who rely on the program's infrastructure
(ship time, staff, laboratories, and equipment) to conduct their research,
education and outreach activities. For example, the Center for Microbial
Oceanography: Research and Education (C-MORE) uses the monthly HOT cruises for
their "Teachers-at Sea" program that provides opportunities for local area
middle school and high school teachers to participate in oceanographic field
research. Moreover, HOT PIs maintain a strong commitment to mentoring and
training of secondary, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, and
the current proposal requests support for both graduate and undergraduate
students. HOT program data remain readily accessible and freely available. For
example, HOT CO2 data are being included in the forthcoming 5th Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, increasing the
visibility of program data and public awareness of ocean-climate change.
Moreover, program data are widely used in the classroom and appear in textbooks
on ocean science.