* 1260917
* Monitoring for worker quality: a theory of task assignment, job ladders, wages and mobility in internal labor markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Kevin Lang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2017
* USD 283,525.00

The broad goal of the proposed research is to understand how the nature of
information and the technology for acquiring it affect wages, promotion paths
and task-assignment within firms (the internal labor market). The narrower goal
is to explain some of the regularities and variation in the structure of
internal labor markets for non-managerial workers. In contrast with much of the
literature, the PIs do not focus on policies intended to incentivize hard work
or discourage moral hazard, which may be an intuitively unappealing starting
point and might lead to conclusions that are inconsistent with the data.
Instead, this project focuses on monitoring in order to assess workers.

The baseline model is one with two types of workers, good and bad, and two types
of task, high and low. In this model most work is routine (at least for suitably
trained workers), but workers face occasional "crises" which good workers can
resolve but bad workers cannot. Failures are readily observed, but successes are
only observed if the firm monitors the worker. Routine work is more productive
in the "high" task but failures are more costly. Since monitoring is costly, a
firm can choose one of three strategies. First, it can place a worker in the
high task and hope for the best. Second, the firm can assign the worker to the
low task and monitor the worker. When a crisis arrives, it will observe success
as well as failure and know whether the worker is good or bad. Workers who
resolve the crisis will be moved to the high task. Finally, it can assign the
worker to the low task, not monitor and wait for a failure. As time passes
without a failure, it becomes increasingly likely that the worker has
successfully resolved a crisis. When sufficient time has passed, the firm will
assign the worker to the high task.

The first task of this project is the completion of an optimal assignment model
with extensions such as partial monitoring, false positive and false negatives
as well as the consideration of multiple tasks of increasing complexity. The
second task is to embed the model in a broader model of the labor market and
wage determination.

This type of analysis is expected to enable the PIs to explain important
features of non-managerial labor markets.