* 1260107
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Social Networks and Class in a Contemporary Caribbean Society
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Brett Williams, American University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Networks and Class in a Contemporary
Caribbean Society

American University anthropology doctoral candidate, Hope Bastian Martinez,
supervised by Dr. Brett Williams, will investigate how individuals of different
social groups living in an urban setting use personal networks to resolve
everyday socioeconomic challenges encountered in a historic moment characterized
by rapid changes, generalized uncertainty, and growing economic inequalities.
This research will explore how changes in consumption practices and new
opportunities for consumption are affecting social networks, processes of
stratification, and emerging identities.

The researcher will map personal networks through methods of participant
observation in two sites of sociability central to the active everyday
construction and maintenance of social networks, and structured interviews.
Research questions query whether there is evidence that ties formed in the
period of austerity and re-stratification following the end of the Cold War
might connect the new "top" and "bottom" of society. The research design will
test whether these networks mitigate the effects of growing economic
inequalities by informally distributing wealth and opportunities through
personal ties.

This research is important because it will contribute to new theories of social
inequality in the contemporary world. The research findings may also be of value
to policymakers who are seeking to target social policy to address social
inequalities. This research also supports the education of a graduate student.