* 1260456
* Social Mobility in Multiple Generations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Robert Mare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 192,050.00

SES-1260456 Robert D. Mare University of California, Los Angeles

This research examines multigenerational influences on educational, occupational
and income achievement and inequality. It investigates the ways that individuals
are advantaged or disadvantaged by their grandparents and more remote ancestors.
It asks: Do grandparents and other kin affect the well-being of grandchildren
beyond the benefits that the grandchildren receive from their parents? Do
grandparents and other more remote ancestors have more of an effect in some
kinds of families than in others? Specifically, are these effects particularly
large for the most affluent families or for the poorest families or possibly
other types of families? In addition, the research focusses on how demographic
factors may modify the effects of grandparents on their grandchildren. These
include the effects of increased longevity, which makes grandparents more likely
to survive long enough to help their grandchildren; family size, which affects
how many people share resources within families; and divorce and non-marital
childbearing, which may increase the need for grandparents to help their adult
children raise their grandchildren. The study will also ask: Which families are
most successful over many generations because they both grow in size as well as
prosper economically? And, which families are likely to die out? This research
addresses these questions in both the United States during the past 50 years and
in several historical populations in China. It makes novel use of longitudinal
survey data and genealogical data from archived population registers. These
data, unlike conventional survey data, enable one to follow the same families
for many generations, thereby showing the connections between the resources and
actions of people in one generation on their descendants several generations
later.

Broader Impacts. The findings of this research will advance the public's
understanding of the multigenerational mechanisms through which families
contribute to social inequality or offset short term adverse family
circumstances. The findings will guide policymakers in identifying the most
disadvantaged groups and in remedying their hardships. The results of the study
will contribute to a wider understanding of how grandparents and parents
contribute to the success of later generations. The research also will inform
the public of the scientific value of genealogical records and contribute to the
development of new databases for studies on long-term trends in social well-
being and hardship. As a member of the National Academy of Sciences Committee on
Population, the Principal Investigator will use this research to influence
future thinking and research about social inequality and demographic processes.
The approaches and research findings from this project will also enrich
sociology curricula in colleges and high schools. As a teacher of social
stratification to classes of undergraduate sociology students in a large public
university, many of whom are first generation college students, the Principal
Investigator will use the results of this research to better inform these
students about the causes and consequences of social inequality.