* 1260092
* Scholarships for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Kathleen Armstrong, Foothill-De Anza Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,438.00

The goal of this project is to recruit and retain to transfer or completion of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) degrees academically
capable students with financial need. The focus of the project is to enable
scholarship students to attend full-time and to complete their STEM programs
reliably in two years. The students are being supported by the STEM Emporium at
the college, a program designed to increase completions in STEM majors by
supplying out-of-classroom academic support. The student scholars are also
supported by many established student support groups that supply experienced and
focused support for student sub-populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project is providing scholarship recipients full opportunities and
resources to stay in a STEM major, to focus on courses and not be distracted by
working and financially supporting themselves, to attend full-time, and to
engage with faculty and cohort students. The scholars are benefiting from an
array of support services that includes faculty mentors, dedicated counselors,
academic tutoring, and services to aid students who are transferring to
universities or who wish to obtain career-track internships or research
opportunities. A diverse group of faculty members, who are knowledgeable about
population subgroups and serve as role models, are mentoring the students. The
scholarships are increasing the academic success of students, rates of
completion, transfer to universities, and career readiness. In addition, the
program is offering students optional research opportunities that are
traditionally available only to students at four-year universities by partnering
with universities that provide access to advanced laboratories, instrumentation,
and personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is improving
the retention of academically talented, financially disadvantaged students, many
of whom are from groups underrepresented in STEM professions, thus increasing
the economic and racial diversity in STEM graduates and transfer students, and
narrowing socioeconomic gaps. Students are learning job skills and gaining
confidence for employment through enrichment activities such as faculty
mentoring and optional internships. By recruiting and drawing students from
local high schools and partnering with private sector companies, the project is
giving at-risk students a financially rewarding pathway in STEM careers to which
they otherwise might not have been exposed or motivated to pursue.