* 1260840
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cooperation in Stochastic Games: A Prisoner's Dilemma Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 13,583.00

One question that economists and social scientists have contemplated for some
time is what are the proper prerequisites for societal cooperation when private
incentives conflict with social ones? One answer to this question comes from the
theory of repeated games, the study of decision making amongst members of a
group (the game) where the decision is made over and over again. More precisely,
the specific game associated with this answer is the repeated prisoner's
dilemma. In the prisoner's dilemma, cooperation is socially beneficial but it is
in the private best interest of each player to not cooperate and thus, when only
played once, no cooperation occurs. However, when the prisoner's dilemma is
repeated, cooperation can be sustained by linking future choices to current
choices so that the gain that one would obtain by deviating from cooperation in
the present period is offset by a loss in future periods. Specifically, the gain
is deterred by the credible threat of mutual non-cooperation by all players in
the future.

Repeated games, however, are a drastic simplification of the real world.
Realistically, while many economic situations feature repeated interaction, the
nature of the interaction changes through time. This feature is captured by
stochastic games, a generalization of repeated games in which the game played
each period changes and is determined, at least partially, by chance.

This project is a laboratory experiment in the field of stochastic games. In
particular, the experiment utilizes a repeated prisoner's dilemma in which the
payoffs of the prisoner?s dilemma are stochastically determined each period.
Most importantly, given the link between future choices and current choices that
is established to sustain cooperation, altering the nature of future choices is
a substantial step towards understanding how people behave in these
environments.

From a broader perspective, the main economic example for the stochastic
prisoner?s dilemma in the experiment is collusion among firms over the business
cycle. In this environment, firms desire collusion, cooperation on non-
competitive prices or quantities, and compete over many periods. The demand
fluctuates because of booms and busts in the economy, which changes the exact
interaction they face each period. This experiment can potentially guide
antitrust law by providing insight into conditions where firms may find it
easier to collude.