* 1260424
* An Integrative Investigation of Population Connectivity Using a Coral Reef Fish
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Richard Harrison, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,439,322.00

Understanding the patterns, causes and consequences of larval dispersal is a
major goal of 21st century marine ecology. Patterns of dispersal determine the
rates of larval exchange, or connectivity, between populations. Both physical
factors (e.g., water movement) and biological factors (e.g., larval behavior)
cause variation in population connectivity. Population connectivity, in turn,
has major consequences for all aspects of an organism?s biology, from individual
behavior to metapopulation dynamics, and from evolution within metapopulations
to the origin and extinction of species. Further, understanding population
connectivity is critical for the design of effective networks of marine reserves
? vital tools in conservation and the development of sustainable fisheries.

Over the last decade, three methods, each of which tells something slightly
different, have emerged as leading contenders to provide the greatest insights
into population connectivity. First, coupled biophysical models make assumptions
regarding water flow, larval behavior and ecology, to predict population
connectivity. Second, indirect genetic methods use spatial distributions of
allele frequencies to infer population connectivity. Third, direct genetic
methods use parentage analyses, tracing recruits to specific adults, to measure
population connectivity. Despite advances, lack of integration means that we do
not know the predictive skill of biophysical models, or the extent to which
patterns of dispersal predict spatial genetic structure. The overall objective
of this proposal is to conduct an integrated investigation of population
connectivity, using all three methods in one tractable system: the neon goby,
Elacatinus lori, on the Belizean Barrier Reef. There are three motives for this
choice of study system: i) fourteenhighly polymorphic microsatellite loci have
been developed, facilitating the assignment of recruits to parents using
parentage analyses and the measurement of dispersal; ii) the physical
oceanography of the Belizean Barrier Reef is well-studied, facilitating the
development and testing of coupled biophysical models; and, iii) E. lori has a
relatively small biogeographic range, facilitating analysis of the spatial
distribution of allele frequencies throughout its range.

Broader Impacts. The grant will support one postdoc and two graduate students
who will be trained in scientific diving, marine fieldwork, population genetics,
biophysical modeling, and mathematical modeling, and will gain collaborative
research experience. PIs will incorporate research findings in their courses,
which cover all these topics. The grant will also broaden participation of
under-represented groups by supporting six undergraduates from groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. In each year of the project there
will be an All Participants meeting to reinforce the network of participants. A
project website will be developed, in English and Spanish, on the theme of
larval dispersal and population connectivity. This will include a resource for
K-12 marine science educators developed in collaboration with a marine science
educator. All PIs will ensure that results are broadly disseminated to the
scientific community and general public via appropriate forms of media.