* 1260348
* Generalized Reciprocity: Can Generosity Become Contagious?
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 115,412.00

Every day, millions of people donate blood, stop to help a stranded motorist,
participate in unpaid surveys, review restaurants, leave online product ratings,
answer questions on Ask.com, contribute code to open-source software, and edit
Wikipedia articles, often anonymously, without social recognition or opportunity
to benefit from direct reciprocation. This widespread willingness to help a
stranger poses a fascinating theoretical puzzle with enormous practical
implications. An important key to the puzzle may be the possibility that helping
behavior can be contagious--people respond to being helped by "paying it
forward" to a third person. Known as "generalized reciprocity," this behavior
has the potential to trigger a chain of helping that reaches far beyond the
original act.

Generalized reciprocity bridges two largely disconnected existing literatures on
social contagion and altruistic behavior. Integrating these two research
traditions, this project identifies and tests four specific conditions expected
to alter the probability that a recipient of help will pay it forward: group
size, observation of generalized reciprocity by others, the number of others
from whom help has been received, and the number of others who will benefit.
Data will be collected from a large field experiment in an online labor market
and validated with a small-group experiment run in a traditional laboratory
setting. The results will advance theoretical knowledge about helping behavior
and its diffusion, as well as new methodologies for online research, both within
sociology and across multiple fields, including social psychology, behavioral
economics, moral philosophy, computer science, communication, and information
science.

Broader Impact

The potential ripple effect of generalized reciprocity means that when we help
others, we may also be indirectly helping many -- both online and offline -- to
mobilize voluntary contributions by more effectively targeting those who have
benefited in the past. In addition, the project will have practical benefits for
the scientific community by developing and demonstrating an innovative method
for large online field experiments that can be adapted for a wide range of other
studies of decision-making and diffusion.