* 1260454
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of atmospheric nitrogen deposition on the biogeochemistry of oligotrophic coastal waters
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Margaret Mulholland, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2017
* USD 432,513.00

Deposition of atmospheric nitrogen provides reactive nitrogen species that
influence primary production in nitrogen-limited regions. Although it is
generally assumed that these species in precipitation contributes substantially
to anthropogenic nitrogen loadings in many coastal marine systems, its
biological impact remains poorly understood. Scientists from Pennsylvania State
University, William &amp; Mary College, and Old Dominion University will carry
out a process-oriented field and modeling effort to test the hypothesis that
deposits of wet atmospheric nitrogen (i.e., precipitation) stimulate primary
productivity and accumulation of algal biomass in coastal waters following
summer storms and this effect exceeds the associated biogeochemical responses to
wind-induced mixing and increased stratification caused by surface freshening in
oligotrophic coastal waters of the eastern United States. To attain their goal,
the researchers would perform a Lagrangian field experiment during the summer
months in coastal waters located between Delaware Bay and the coastal Carolinas
to determine the response of surface-layer biogeochemistry and biology to
precipitation events, which will be identified and intercepted using radar and
satellite data. As regards the modeling effort, a 1-D upper ocean mixing model
and a 1-D biogeochemical upper-ocean will be calibrated by assimilating the
field data obtained a part of the study using the adjoint method. The hypothesis
will be tested using sensitivity studies with the calibrated model combined with
in-situ data and results from the incubation experiments. Lastly, to provide
regional and historical context for the field measurements and the associated
1-D modeling, linked regional atmospheric-oceanic biogeochemical modeling will
be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Results from the study would
be incorporated into class lectures for graduate courses on marine policy and
marine biogeochemistry. One graduate student from Pennsylvania State University,
one graduate student from the College of William and Mary, and one graduate and
one undergraduate student from Old Dominion University would be supported and
trained as part of this project.