* 1260806
* Bayes Factor Methods for Model Comparison in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Jeffrey Rouder, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The project will develop Bayes factors for common research designs. Bayes
factors provide an attractive alternative to conventional significance tests, in
particular to F-tests for linear models. They have failed, however, to achieve
broad acceptance for at least two reasons: They are perceived as having an
undesirable dependence on the chosen prior distribution, and they are viewed as
being difficult to compute. To address the first concern, Bayes factors for a
class of "default" priors will be developed; this is, with priors that result in
Bayes factors with desirable theoretical properties, impart a minimal degree of
information, and are broadly applicable in a wide range of common designs. One
natural property of a desirable prior is "consistency," the ability to support
the correct model in the large sample limit. The focus is on consistency when
the model dimension is relatively large compared to the sample size, as is
common in many ANOVA designs. Consistency will be proved for common one-way and
two-way and possibly higher order designs. With respect to the second concern,
computation entails integration across perhaps many dimensions. There are
several choices (including quadrature, Monte Carlo sampling, bridge sampling,
Laplace approximation, or Savage-Dickey density ratio estimation), and which
choice works best will vary depending on the sample size and design. Heuristics
for picking a method of computation that is quick and efficient will be
developed. The end result will be the development of easy-to-compute Bayes
factors with excellent properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical sciences
have made gains by identifying invariances -- those elements that stay constant
when others change. In contrast, the social sciences have emphasized
demonstrations of effects rather than of invariances. One difficulty in
demonstrating invariances in noisy environments is methodological --
conventional hypothesis testing allows researchers to amass evidence against the
null but never for it. Bayes factors provide an ideal solution because they can
be used to assess evidence for the null or alternative, are straightforward to
interpret, and provide a natural penalty for model complexity. The project's
ultimate goal is that Bayes factors become a widely-adopted, everyday method in
substantive researchers' methodological toolkit. To that end, the project will
develop a series of software applications. Some of these will be R packages for
methodologists. Others will be web applets and GUI software for substantive
researchers without statistical expertise. These latter products will be very
easy to use, and this ease should encourage rapid adoption. In addition,
conference workshops and tutorials, including short courses, are planned in the
investigators' respective disciplines.