* 1260362
* Racial Neighborhood Inequality in the United States, 1980-2010
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Glenn Firebaugh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 145,025.00

This research project will examine economic differences in the neighborhoods
where whites, blacks, Hispanics, and Asians live in the U.S. Although it is
commonly believed that blacks and Hispanics generally live in neighborhoods
where poverty rates are higher than they are in the neighborhoods where whites
and Asians live, very little research has tracked the change in racial
disparities in neighborhood conditions over time. In prior research, this
project's investigators found that racial differences in neighborhood economic
conditions have diminished in the U.S. Since 1980 the decline in racial
neighborhood inequality has been much faster than the decline in racial
residential segregation. Because prior research on neighborhoods has focused on
change in the residential segregation of different racial and ethnic groups, the
trend in racial neighborhood inequality has been largely overlooked, and its
causes are unknown. The objective of this project is to account for the decline
in racial neighborhood inequality by investigating why it has declined faster in
some metropolitan areas than in others. The investigators theorize that this
largely-unnoticed decline in racial neighborhood inequality is attributable to
the rising importance of income and the declining importance of race as factors
influencing where people reside. This theory will be tested using census data
for all U.S. metropolitan areas (comprising 80 percent of the total U.S.
population) in 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010.

As a general rule, high-income neighborhoods have good schools, reliable social
services, low crime rates, and green space. Low-income neighborhoods are
characterized by the opposite. As a result, racial inequality at the
neighborhood level likely serves as the wellspring for many other types of
racial disparities in American society. In contrast to the large number of
studies examining the racial segregation of neighborhoods, no studies have
employed the most statistically appropriate methods for investigating racial
inequality in neighborhood income environments. This project will provide new
insights and information regarding which groups are converging with respect to
neighborhood economic environments and why they are doing so. The project
therefore will enhance basic understanding of one of the most crucial axes of
racial inequality in America today. Project findings will be useful for
policymakers, the informed public, and other scholars examining this and related
topics. The project also will provide valuable education and training
opportunities for graduate students.