* 1260252
* 2013 Plant Lipids GRC/GRS January 26-February 1; 2013; Galveston, TX
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Ruth Welti, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls
* 10/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on
Plant Lipids: &lt;br/&gt;Structure, Metabolism, and Function&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ruth
Welti, Kansas State University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Edgar Cahoon, University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on Plant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism, and Function,
to be held January 27 to February 1, 2013 at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston,
Texas, is being organized by the GRC, an organization internationally known for
high-quality, cutting-edge meetings. The program for the meeting is assembled
around the theme of "Emerging and advancing research areas in plant lipid
metabolism and signaling". Presentations will focus on elucidation of lipid
signaling and lipid metabolic mechanisms, strategies to enhance production of
economically important plant products, and new lipid imaging strategies. The GRC
on Plant Lipids brings together experts working to create and disseminate new
research tools, discovering fundamental paradigms for lipid-mediated regulation
of development, physiology, and stress responses and developing new
understanding of lipid storage and homeostasis. Formal and informal interactions
throughout the conference will stimulate new research directions and provide the
basis for collaborative interactions to advance fundamental research into plant
lipid structure, metabolism, and function. For the first time, a pre-conference
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), planned for January 26-27, 2013 at the same
location, is being organized by investigators at the graduate student and
postdoctoral levels for investigators at those levels. Activities during the
seminar are intended to provide (1) background that will enhance understanding
of science presented at the subsequent conference, (2) opportunities to share
research and to network with peers and experts in the field, and (3) peer and
expert feedback and supportive suggestions about ongoing research. NSF support
of the GRC and GRS will partially defray registration fees for 16 graduate
student and postdoctoral researchers who will present their research at one or
both meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Scientific talks,
poster presentations, get-togethers, and discussion at the 2013 GRC and GRS on
Plant Lipids will stimulate new research directions and provide underpinnings
for collaborative interactions that advance the study of lipid structure,
metabolism, and function, leading to practical applications, such as improved
plant production and increased seed oil quality and quantity. The GRS will offer
a concentrated opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees to
network and learn. The GRS will include a thought-provoking session on mentoring
that will encourage participants to consider new ideas for effectively receiving
and providing mentoring. The proportion of women among the invited speakers and
discussion leaders (29%) at the GRC exceeds the proportion of women who attended
the 2011 conference (26%). Because conference participation is an important
facet of inclusion in the research community, the GRC and GRS will employ a
diverse, international committee with 5 women in its 8 members, to seek
additional speakers from among those submitting abstracts, with positive
consideration of under-represented status. Fiscal support for registration will
increase participation of students and postdoctoral trainees who present their
research at the GRC and GRS. Participating as a presenter and interacting with
other scientists in the supportive atmosphere of the GRS and GRC provides an
excellent opportunity for beginning researchers to develop a strong network of
peers and senior colleagues, while increasing scientific breadth and depth. This
opportunity for young researchers should aid in their retention and success in
scientific endeavors, providing long term benefit to society.