* 1260394
* Dynamics of and Transport by Buoyant Coastal Ocean Currents Driven by Spatially Distributed and Highly-Time Dependent Coastal Mountain Rivers
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* James Lerczak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 448,127.00

Small mountainous river (SMR) systems have been shown to contribute a
significant fraction of the global sediment and particulate organic carbon
fluxes to the ocean. They are also important intermittent sources of nutrients
and trace metals to the coastal ocean. Large-scale storm events are the dominant
source of freshwater for these systems. Subsequent discharge to the coastal
ocean occurs coherently across the river system as a large episodic pulse during
which winds and waves are typically strong over the ocean. The dynamics of river
plumes and buoyant coastal flows from these intermittent, but large pulses of
discharge have received little scientific attention. This numerical modeling
study will quantify the dynamics of the combined buoyancy and wind driven flows
of an SMR system. Models of an idealized SMR system and the SMR system of the
Oregon coastal range will be used to characterize the transport pathways of
freshwater and river derived materials under different discharge and wind
regimes.

Intellectual Merit: The dynamics of buoyant coastal flows from the coherent but
highly intermittent discharge of rivers of an SMR system, such as that of Oregon
coastal range, have received very little scientific study. Yet the instantaneous
combined discharge from these rivers can be greater than 20,000 m3/s during the
winter, exceeding the discharge of the larger Columbia River to the north.
Buoyancy forcing on the inner shelf must be important during these periods. This
study will quantify the significance of SMR buoyancy forcing, characterize the
interactions between the buoyancy driven and wind driven circulation of the
Oregon inner shelf and quantify the fate of materials derived from SMR estuaries
and the connectivity between SMR estuaries along the Oregon coast.

Broader Impact: The principal investigator will collaborate with Lincoln County
School District teachers to develop high school curriculum material focused on
watershed transport processes, the impact of rivers on the coastal ocean, and
scientific methods used to study river, estuary, and coastal flow including
modeling and measurement methods. The curriculum will be shared broadly through
online dissemination. In addition, model predictions of current variability and
a description of the dominant forcing regimes of the Oregon inner shelf will be
provided to the Northwest National Marine Renewable Energy Center in order to
facilitate their wave energy research, development, device testing and impact
studies off the Oregon coast. A PhD graduate student will be trained under this
grant. The focus of her/his research will be on understanding the role of SMR
systems on buoyant coastal circulation off of Oregon.