* 1260476
* Changes in Public Attitudes:  A Comparison of Content Analysis of Media and Survey Results
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Howard Schuman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 27,191.00

In the mid-1940s, public opinion surveys began to gather trend data on racial
attitudes in America. There, however, is no survey data or other reliable
evidence to answer questions about attitudes prior to the mid-1940s. This study
will address this by completing a systematic content analysis of newspapers and
periodicals from 1930 until 1946 - the latter date the first year when even
minimal national trend survey data became available on white racial attitudes.
The investigator has developed an extensive set of categories and has used these
to analyze a random sample of newspaper articles newspapers over some 35 years
in order to determine what, if any, changes occurred that reflected or
influenced white racial attitudes. A second research goal is to study attitudes
in the years from 1946 to the mid 1960s. For these years, unlike the earlier
1930 to 1946 period, there are repeated national surveys to which the results of
the content analysis can be compared. This enables the investigator to
indirectly isolate the extent to which analyzing newspaper texts can contribute
to understanding changes in attitudes between the earlier 1930 to 1946 period.
Initial findings provide promising evidence of considerable change: for example,
the context analysis of newspaper articles yielded a statistically reliable
increase in the stories about black accomplishments as against reports of
alleged black crimes. This study will examine critically other areas in which
change has occurred, including shifts in attitudes about gender equality, and
continue to develop the methodology that allows one to determine the association
of findings from content analyses of newspaper articles and those based on
available national surveys over the same period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the potential to increase
understanding of attitudes toward minorities during the Depression and World War
II years. The research will also help to assess the value of content analysis of
mass media in identifying attitudinal trends among the general public, thus
complementing and supplementing the evidence obtained from sample surveys. The
attempt to compare systematically two very different types of social science
data should yield insights into the advantages and limitations of each, and
contribute to an understanding of whether and how content analysis can shed
light on attitudes when trustworthy survey data are not available or are suspect
because of limitations (for example, low response rates). The results of the
research will be disseminated through presentations and articles that cross
disciplinary boundaries, reaching historians, sociologists, communications
researchers, and others, and therefore adding to cross-disciplinary
communication and awareness. In addition, the systematic comparison of findings
from content analysis and survey data has the potential to be of value to
graduate and undergraduate students of social science research methods, and to
be of interest both to those studying social change generally and attitudes
about different types of human rights, specifically.