* 1260321
* SHINE: The Anatomy of Coronal Mass Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Timothy Howard, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 268,012.00

This three-year SHINE project aims to explore the origin and evolution of
coronal mass ejections (CMEs) by determining the basic anatomical correspondence
between transient structure observed in-situ and the source structures that give
rise to CMEs in the solar corona. Following data analysis, the project team will
study the onset of CMEs and their evolution through the heliosphere out to 1 AU
and beyond, where the team will analyze the CME components in detail with in-
situ spacecraft. The PI and Co-I will use two models to reconstruct the CME:
simple (TH) and sophisticated (ENLIL). The project will also involve processing
and analyzing data from the STEREO, SDO, SOHO, ACE, and Wind missions. Recent
breakthroughs in STEREO data processing by the project team have enabled the
measurement of solar wind transient structures (e.g., CMEs) in unprecedented
detail. During this project, the team will perform case studies of CME events
using the latest datasets, and a statistical analysis of older datasets. The
broader impacts of the work are twofold: (1) education and training of students
via international collaborations and an existing REU program; and (2)
publication of data products on online databases, publication of project results
in scientific and technical journals, and scientific presentations at
conferences and workshops. The research agenda of this project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.