* 1260514
* A Critical Test of the Nd Paleocirculation Proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,000.00

Neodymium (Nd) isotopes are increasingly used in paleoceanographic studies as
"quasi-conservative" water mass tracers. However, the limitations of this proxy
are not yet fully understood. The proposed work aims to address this uncertainty
by critically evaluating the behavior of Nd isotopes as tracers of water mass
mixing. The project, led by researchers at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory, will analyze in-hand seawater and surface sediment samples
collected along a meridional transect in the southwest Atlantic (0 to 50 degrees
S) during a GEOTRACES cruise. The sample suite will be used to test 1) whether
Nd isotope ratios deviate from expected values for mixing along circulation
transport paths, 2) whether Nd isotopes behave quasi-conservatively away from
continental margins, 3) whether seafloor features (e.g., continental shelf,
volcanic seamounts) add significant external Nd to the system, and 4) whether
the Southern Hemisphere wind zones impact Nd isotope values through aeolian
deposition. The relationship between Nd isotopes in authigenic surface sediments
and those in the overlying seawater will be calibrated for the first time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By testing an emerging tool in the study of past ocean
dynamics, this research will enable a more accurate understanding of changes in
the ocean-climate system. The project will support an early-career researcher
and a graduate student. Undergraduate students will be involved through an NSF-
supported summer internship program at LDEO.