* 1260440
* A Proposal to Continue 'A National Data Program for the Social Sciences'
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* marie cornwall
* 09/30/2016
* USD 7,368,671.00

Tom Smith Michael Hout Peter Marsden

This project supports the National Data Program for the Social Sciences (NDPSS)
to conduct the 2014 General Social Survey (GSS) and the 2014 United States
allied survey in the International Social Survey Program (ISSP). The NDPSS is a
social indicators, infrastructure, and data dissemination program. It gathers
data to (1) monitor and explain trends, changes and constants in attitudes,
behaviors, and attributes and examine the structure and functioning of society
in general, as well as the role of various sub-groups; (2) compare the United
States to other societies, by developing cross-national models of human society;
and (3) make high quality data easily accessible to scholars, students, and
others with minimal cost and waiting. The GSS is a regular, ongoing interview
survey of U.S households. The mission of the GSS is to make timely high-quality
scientifically relevant data available to social science researchers. Since 1972
the GSS (with NSF support) has conducted 28 in-person, cross-sectional surveys
of the adult household population of the U S with approximately 55,087
respondents. GSS content is wide ranging with approximately 5,416 variables
overall. The ISSP facilitates cross-national research in 48 nations that use
data collection programs modeled on the GSS.

The NDPSS has been collecting high quality, full-probability data in the United
States since 1972 and cross-national data since 1982. Using the most
scientifically rigorous of survey designs, the GSS is widely acknowledged to
represent the "gold standard" in contemporary survey research. The GSS/ISSP
surveys monitor societal change in the United States and place American society
in comparative perspective. These data are used to develop and test models of
societal change and other social processes. The GSS and ISSP have contributed to
advancing knowledge of age-period-cohort effects; changes in intergroup
relations, gender roles, family structure and values, attitudes about civil
liberties; the impact of globalization on national identity; and other social
and political aspects of society. The renewal proposal supports several
enhancements, upgrades and innovations to the GSS. These include 1) the updating
of the sample frame, 2) the linkage of GSS cases to the National Death Index, 3)
the expansion of auxiliary and aggregate-level data, 4) adding new design-
effects variables, 5) additional hypernetwork samples of congregations and
employers, 6) updating coding of occupation and industry and a new measurement
of occupational prestige, 7) expanding the ISSP and cross-national research
methods, 8) adding new modules on social media use and technological change, and
9) analyzing the GSS panel data to study gross and net change and clarify causal
connections,

Broader Impacts

The NDPSS has already had enormous impact beyond the boundaries of the survey
itself. The GSS is held as the "gold standard" by which many other survey data
collection activities are measured, and the ISSP program has led to innovations
and developments in cross-cultural and cross-national research. The user
community includes researchers, college and university faculty, graduate and
undergraduate students, business planners, the media and public officials.
Sociologists, political scientists, economists, statisticians, survey
methodologists, anthropologists, geographers, biologists, engineers,
psychologists, criminologist, legal scholars, medical/health researchers, and
business administration and management scholars use GSS data. The GSS is widely
disseminated and easily accessible, supporting research and education of groups
that are traditionally under-represented in the conduct of social scientific
research. The use of the GSS is widely documented in publications, with over
20,000 publications citing the use of GSS data. The GSS uses a state-of-the-art
interview-to-internet archiving and dissemination system that speeds access to
the interview data and allows users to access all information associated with
each variable in a database. The contributions of the GSS to the teaching of
quantitative social science analysis are unprecedented and unmatched. Its
accessibility and ease of use has added value far beyond the original data
collection efforts, and researchers continue to mine both the old and new data
to advance knowledge and test theories. The GSS and ISSP program are part of the
core infrastructure of social science research in the U.S.