* 1260371
* RAPID: Fast Mobility Particle Size Measurements during the 4th Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment (FLAME IV) Study
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Christian Carrico, AECOM Technical Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 27,624.00

This project will implement fast particle size distributions measurements during
the 4th Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment (FLAME IV) Study. The measurements will
be made with a Fast Mobility Particle Sizer (FMPS) that is (1) capable of
measuring the size range of interest for fresh smoke aerosols, (2) has fast time
response that will be useful for all burns, and (3) is capable of measuring high
concentrations. These are all characteristics of the aerosol produced by biomass
burns in the FLAME experiments, particularly stack burn experiments of
relatively short duration (minutes to tens of minutes from ignition to flame out
and smoldering). The measurements will be complementary to those of several
other investigators that include ice nuclei and evolution of secondary organic
aerosols from the burn emissions. The research will help to elucidate
fundamental physicochemical properties of biomass smoke, important to health and
climate impacts of smoke aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a unique
collaboration between private sector and academic partners that has potential to
lead to further developments in this arena. Broader impacts center on the
continuation of FLAME collaborations begun a decade ago between the principal
investigator and the other investigators on the project. Although students are
not directly supported, it is anticipated that informal learning opportunities
and collaborations with students working as part of the FLAME study will
develop. Moreover, results to date from the principal investigator's research
and work activities have been successfully integrated into the classroom in his
adjunct faculty position at Front Range Community College and into seminars
presented at regional air quality meetings and at nearby institutions of higher
learning. The project will enhance collaborations within the regional air
quality research and education community.