* 1260875
* A Study Into the Effect of Employment Conditions Upon Judicial Behavior and Performance
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,01/31/2019
* W. Bentley MacLeod, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 01/31/2019
* USD 228,000.00

In common-law jurisdictions, appellate judges construct legal rules over time by
building on previous decisions, using the facts, reasoning, and outcomes
described by previous judges to guide their rulings. In this scheme, high-
quality appellate decision-making has beneficial spillovers by helping future
judges make good decisions. As with all public officials, the performance of
appellate judges will depend in part on their conditions of employment. Across
the United States the rules for selecting, compensating, and retaining judges
vary significantly by state, with no consensus on the best way forward. This
research seeks to explore the importance of different judicial selection,
compensation, and retention schemes by measuring the effects on judge
performance of discrete changes in the rules defining these schemes.

To that end, the project will build a new data set on the employment rules for
and performance of state appellate judges. This data set will include
information from all state appellate court cases between 1947 and 1994. Changes
in employment conditions that occur as the result of state legislation are used
as "natural experiments" to tease out the relationships between employment rules
and a variety of performance measures. Employment rules include judge salary,
judge tenure status, judge retention processes, and length of term of office.
Performance measures include number and length of opinions, the linguistic
richness of opinions, the amount of research going into opinions, and the number
of subsequent citations to opinions. Higher measurements on these variables
reflect greater judge effort into writing opinions and likely greater influence
on the development of the law.

Previous research into judicial performance has relied upon much shorter time
periods, and hence could not exploit the natural variation in employment
conditions. In this project, researchers observe how individual judges alter
their behavior, and hence are able to track the causal impact of the employment
rule changes.

This analysis can assist decision makers in crafting employment conditions that
will allow for a more effective use of scarce public funds. Moreover, the rules
for re-appointment rely upon different subjective measures of performance, and
hence the project can provide insights into effective oversight of highly
skilled employees, such as state appellate judges. More generally, the research
will extend recent work in how incentive schemes can interact with intrinsic
motivation or else distort allocation of effort across multiple professional
tasks. For political economists, the results will be relevant to the study of
the incentives in different electoral systems.

The project will result in an original data set on judge employment conditions
and judge performance that will be made available to interested researchers.
This data set, and the resulting papers, will be of interest not just to
economists but to a broad array of social scientists, legal scholars, and policy
analysts.