* 1260693
* Integrative evaluation of larval dispersal and delivery in kelp rockfish using inter-generational genetic tagging, demography and oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,06/30/2017
* John Garza, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2017
* USD 922,480.00

The spatial structure and dynamics of coastal marine fish populations are
strongly influenced by the transport and recruitment of larvae. However, the
scale and patterns of larval dispersal are among the most difficult demographic
parameters to quantify in marine systems, due to the inability to tag and track
the movement of larvae. In particular, the extent of local retention of larvae
versus regional dispersal to other locations and populations is currently a
hotly debated topic in the field of marine ecology and has profound implications
for the design and effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). The research
will identify patterns of larval dispersal and use those patterns to test
predictions of dispersal generated by state-of-the-art circulation models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team brings together ecologists, geneticists,
statisticians, and oceanographers with expertise in population demography and
field sampling, mark/recapture data from genetic tags, and empirical and model-
based evaluation of oceanographic processes to answer the following questions.
1. Do observed patterns of dispersal and connectivity of larval kelp rockfish
correspond to patterns predicted by high spatial resolution regional ocean
circulation models? Model predictions will be tested empirically using larval
settlement samples. Parentage analysis will be used to verify the occurrence of
larvae derived from genetically tagged source populations. 2. Is there evidence
for local retention of larval kelp rockfish within the study area? To test the
hypothesis that local retention of juvenile kelp rockfish from source
populations is greater than expected by existing larval transport models, the
PIs will compare the proportion of recruits that are genetically identified to
have been produced from within three focal sites with the proportion of larval
production that was tagged in those sites. 3. Is the relative recruitment of
recently settled kelp rockfish to focal sites in the study region proportionate
to the relative larval production of those focal sites? The PIs will compare the
proportion of tagged recruits with the proportion of larval production generated
from tagged adults at varying spatial scales. They will use goodness of fit
models to compare expected and observed connectivity matrices under varying
hypotheses of larval dispersal. Alternatively, if the relative contribution of
focal sites to larval replenishment of themselves, one another, and more distant
populations is disproportionate to their relative production, can this
discrepancy be explained by oceanographic processes that could facilitate
particular trajectories of larval dispersal? To determine if differences in self
recruitment and connectivity can be attributed to local oceanographic features,
the PIs will examine spatial and temporal correlations between these features
and the spatial distribution and timing of recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These include three elements: graduate
and undergraduate interdisciplinary training, public outreach, and informing
fisheries and conservation managers and policy makers. Graduate training in
interdisciplinary science will be achieved through co-mentoring by PIs with
expertise in population genetics, ecology and oceanography. Undergraduates will
assist graduate students and faculty in all aspects of the study. Results will
be disseminated to the general public through collaboration with the local
University outreach center. Outreach to the fishing community will be through
their involvement in the sampling program and through workshops facilitated by
the Sea Grant advisor and the state collaborative fisheries program. Based on
the PI's relationships with state and federal agencies, managers and policy
makers will be directly informed of the results and their implications for
management decisions.