* 1260055
* Resolving the trophic connection between protistan grazers and mesozooplankton in marine food webs using amino acid-specific stable isotope analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Michael Landry, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2018
* USD 572,998.00

Intellectual merit: Energy dissipation and elemental cycling by protistan
consumers in lower trophic levels of ocean food webs are of sufficient
magnitude, based on global mean measures of the amount of primary production
consumed, to strongly alter the efficiencies of material transfers to higher-
level consumers and to export. We presently know very little about these
microbial food web steps, how they vary regionally or temporally, or how they
might be altered by climate change. Compound Specific Isotope Analysis of Amino
Acids (CSIA-AA) offers an approach for advancing our understanding of microbial
food web structure and trophic fluxes based on the trophic positions (TP) of
mesozooplankton as temporal integrators of the fluxes from direct feeding on
phytoplankton and indirect transfers via protistan microzooplankton. Preliminary
laboratory experiments to test this idea have demonstrated that the standard
application of the method, using labeled phenylalanine as the representative
source AA for the primary producer baseline and labeled glutamic acid as the
indicator AA for trophic enrichment, does not produce a measureable trophic-step
signal for protistan grazers. However, the results have also shown that an
alternative high-turnover AA, alanine, strongly enriches in protistan as well as
metazoan consumers, and leads to substantially higher TP estimates of
mesozooplankton in field-collected specimens than that based on labeled glutamic
acid.

This research project will test the hypothesis that labeled alanine provides a
quantifiable and consistent index of trophic enrichment for protistan steps in
marine food webs. The research will involve three major elements. First,
controlled laboratory experiments will be conducted with chemostat systems to
compare 15N enrichments of alanine to other AAs for a representative suite of
ciliate and flagellate grazers feeding on phytoplankton, and to evaluate the
two-step enrichment from phytoplankton via a protistan grazer to a suspension-
feeding copepod. Second, field-collected mesozooplankton from four distinct
ecological regions of the Pacific Ocean will be analyzed by CSIA-AA to test the
transfer of alanine enrichment through a metazoan trophic step (comparing
suspension feeding species to primary carnivores) and to assess how the TP index
differs with trophic structure over a broad range of ecological conditions.
Last, CSIA-AA assessments of TP for size-structured zooplankton will be
integrated into inverse models of nitrogen flows in the four regions (equatorial
Pacific, subtropical North Pacific, California Current and Costa Rica Dome) as a
major constraint for resolving and comparing fluxes through the microbial food
web over the range of ecological conditions. A properly calibrated CSIA-AA
assessment of mesozooplankton trophic position will provide a new and valuable
approach for regional intercomparisons of lower-level food web structure, for
assessing temporal and spatial trends in climate change, for ocean ecosystem
model validation, and for better understanding of lower food-web energetic
constraints on ocean fisheries.

Broader Impacts: This project will involve mentoring relationships at all levels
(postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate and K-12) with an emphasis on advancing
the scientific interests and career paths of young underrepresented women in
marine ecology and oceanography. Undergraduate researchers will be engaged in
hands-on relevant research activities as part of the Scripps Undergraduate
Research Fellowship (SURF) and CCE-LTER summer REU programs. At the K-12 level,
the investigators will work with the Ocean Discovery Institute, which brings
science and education to San Diego urban youth, and Expanding Your Horizons San
Diego, a program that provides scientific activities to girls from
underrepresented minorities. Results from the study will contribute to
understanding the mechanisms structuring the base of the food web, its
variability and resilience. The results will have important implications for
models of global biogeochemical cycling and ocean fisheries.