* 1260640
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Analyzing Aid Documentation and its Impact on Public Policy in a Conflict Zone
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Aubrey Graham, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2014
* USD 23,279.00

Under the supervision of Peter Little of Emory University, Aubrey Graham will
explore how the photographic documentation produced by international aid
agencies working in conflict zones relates to local understandings of conflict
and humanitarian effort. International aid agencies number more than 25,000
worldwide; and the images they produce has profoundly influenced international
public policy. Through novel methods that use photography, participant
observation, and interviews, this project analyzes the connections and contrasts
between humanitarian and local visual culture and practice in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) -- the site of both the deadliest
conflict since WWII and one of the world's largest humanitarian efforts.

In balancing local and aid agency perspectives through the comparison of local
visual culture and humanitarian visual culture (photographs created for aid
agencies) this project will produce data that shows how humanitarian
photographic practices and processes impact local and international
relationships. The unique mixed method approach of this project will enable it
to make transformative contributions to the fields of visual anthropology and
the anthropology of development and humanitarianism.

In addition to educating a graduate student in anthropology, this project will
also influence public policy efforts in the areas of conflict resolution,
humanitarianism, and development practice.