* 1260006
* Collaborative Research:   Gene content, gene expression, and physiology in mesopelagic ammonia-oxidizing archaea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Alyson Santoro, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 418,978.00

Intellectual Merit. How organisms respond to their physical and chemical and
environment is a central question in marine ecology. For microbes living in the
mesopelagic - the ocean's "twilight zone" - an efficient response is
particularly important to capitalize on the intermittent delivery of organic and
inorganic compounds sinking from the surface ocean. These organisms must have a
suite of metabolic and regulatory strategies used to cope with environmental
variability, but these strategies are largely unknown. Understanding when and
why metabolic genes are expressed is critical to our understanding of nutrient
remineralization in the ocean. Marine group 1 (MG1) archaea are ubiquitous,
abundant microbes in the meso- and bathypelagic and promising model organisms
for investigating these questions. MG1 archaea are chemolithoautotrophs that
oxidize ammonia for energy and fix carbon for biomass, and as such, play a
central role in the ocean's coupled carbon and nitrogen cycles. Though MG1 have
historically eluded cultivation, recent efforts have been successful at bringing
representative MG1 archaea from the open ocean into culture and demonstrating
their importance in the production of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide. This
project takes advantage of unique MG1 cultures and the recently sequenced draft
genome of one of the organisms - strain CN25 - to investigate the physiological
and transcriptional responses of MG1 archaea to variations in their chemical
environment, specifically:&lt;br/&gt;1. Comparative transcriptomics of CN25
cells grown under a range of energy availability and nitrosative stress will
identify select genes that can be used to diagnose the physiological state of
natural populations&lt;br/&gt;2. Improvements in the genomic and transcriptomic
knowledge of MG1 archaea will facilitate a thorough reinterpretation of existing
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic datasets, as well as provide a better
contextual understanding in future studies&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
conduct comparative transcriptomics of CN25 cells harvested in mid-exponential
growth and stationary phase versus starved cells. Transcriptomes of cells grown
at high nitrate concentrations and low pO2 with those grown in standard
conditions will be characterized. A strand-specific, high-density RNAseq
approach will be used to examine the expression of putative ORFs, polycistronic
operons, and small RNAs, which, in addition to gene expression profiling, has
the ancillary benefit of improving genome annotation. Finally, the investigators
will sequence the genomes of two additional MG1 strains isolated from the open
ocean, as well as single cells from environmental surveys, and leverage the
combination with the CN25 genome to reanalyze available metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic datasets. The results will define the transcriptional
response of a model mesopelagic microbe to a range of chemical environments, and
show how the physicochemical environment induces changes in gene expression and
gene content that result in greenhouse gas production. This work will rapidly
generate new knowledge of how some of the most ubiquitous, yet heretofore
elusive, microorganisms respond to geochemical variability and shape our
evolving understanding of the marine nitrogen
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The scientific and societal impact
of the project will be to elucidate the mechanisms of greenhouse gas production
in a model marine organism that is of broad interest to biological and chemical
oceanographers. Transcriptome sequencing will improve the assembly of the CN25
genome, the first genome of an MG1 archaeon from the open ocean. Both the genome
and transcriptomes will be important references for researchers using
metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metaproteomics in the ocean, as these
techniques are reliant on a knowledgebase composed of both DNA sequence and
physiology. Thus, the results add value to both existing and future studies. The
proposed research will advance education, teaching, and training for the next
generation of marine scientists by providing support for two early-career
investigators, one postdoctoral researcher, and a secondary school teacher.