* 1260201
* Testing Hypotheses about Cooperation, Conflict, and Punishment in Artisanal Fisheries
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Michael Alvard, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2017
* USD 99,634.00

The proposed research uses a game theoretical framework to test the hypothesis
that fishers generate simple institutional norms that modify the incentive
structure of pirating relative to FAD (fish aggregating device) fishing. The
research tests hypotheses about sociality in the ethnographic context of a
small-scale (artisanal) FAD fishery in the Commonwealth of Dominica, a Caribbean
island nation. FADs are simple, human-made structures designed to float on or
near the surface of the ocean, attract fish, and facilitate their capture.
Difficult to defend from free-riders (pirates in the local vernacular) because
they are placed in the open ocean, the recently (1999) introduced FAD technology
produces a classic common pool resource dilemma (CPR). In spite of the CPR
dilemma, FAD technology has now spread to most of the major fish landing sites
on Dominica. The goal of the project is to learn how fishers achieve the level
of cooperation that they do in spite of a context that structurally favors free
riding. Predictions will be tested with data collected from interviews, direct
observation, and GPS tracking of fishing trips. The large yellowfin tuna and
blue marlin now targeted with the aid of FADs are species that were difficult
for fishermen to regularly find in the past.

Small scale fisheries have a significant impact on food security and poverty
reduction in the Caribbean region. The project will have broad positive impact
by contributing to the Dominica Fisheries Division's goal to develop sound FAD
policy and practice and create a national FAD Fishery Management Plan whose
objective is the efficient and sustainable use of FADs and associated pelagic
resources. The proposed research has intellectual merit by linking aspects of
evolutionary theory, common pool resource theory and game theory to address core
theoretical issues concerning the exceptional nature of human sociality.