* 1260402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Social Categories and Military Service in a Secular State
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Aynur Onur, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 25,162.00

Indiana University doctoral candidate Aynur Onur, supervised by Dr. Nazif
Shahrani and Dr. Sara Friedman, will conduct research on the relationship
between gender equity goals, secularism, and military service in a secular
Islamic state. The researcher will focus on women who serve in the military or
who are part of military families in Turkey. Turkey is an appropriate site for
the research because Turkish women appear to consciously seek military service
to transform traditional roles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher's focal
research questions are: How and why are women in particular mobilized to
undertake military service? Do different recruitment discourses and other
strategies have different consequences for women's lives and for the larger
society? How do women reconcile military participation with personal goals? Data
will be collected through archival research, participant observation, and
interviews with a large sample (N = 192) of military women and men, women with
family ties to the military, and civilian women and
men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will comprise the
first systematic ethnographic investigation of the relationship between gender
identity and military service in a predominantly Muslim nation. Findings from
the research will help illuminate the gendered dimensions of women's military
service in other contexts, as well, and will contribute to theorizing the
relationships between state and personal ideologies. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.