* 1260680
* Quantifying the Effect of the Lunar Nodal Tide on North Pacific Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Gary Egbert, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 234,761.00

Can variations of the moon's orbit around the earth affect climate? Numerous
studies have associated bidecadal variability in observations of physical
climate and biogeochemical variables with the LNC. Particularly in and around
the North Pacific, where diurnal tide constituents are strong, these
observations point towards a significant influence of the LNC on temperatures,
oceanic and atmospheric circulation and biogeochemical cycles. Model simulations
without LNC forcing show strong internal modes of decadal variability in the
North Pacific such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. LNC forcing could
modulate these internal modes by (1) shifting variability into the bidecadal
frequency range, (2) generate resonance, or (3) synchronize their phases. This
project will test hypotheses relating LNC oscillations in tides to bidecadal
variability in climate via modulations of ocean mixing and attendant effects on
temperatures and modes of decadal climate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
globally consistent parameterization of tidal mixing, that has already been
tested in a climate model of intermediate complexity and shown to lead to
climatically significant sea surface temperature anomalies, will be implemented
in a comprehensive global climate model. This parameterization includes a new
scheme of sub-grid scale bathymetry and separately considers four tidal
constituents (M2, S2, K1 and O1) and their temporal variations due to the LNC.
The model will be used to simulate the effects of LNC oscillations of tidal
mixing on diapycnal diffusivities, temperatures, oceanic and atmospheric
circulation, and modes of decadal variability in the North Pacific. Model
results will be analyzed and compared to existing observations. Satellite
altimeter data, now available over one full LNC, will be analyzed with the goal
to improve tidal energy dissipation estimates, tidal mixing parameterizations,
and the understanding of mechanisms of barotropic energy
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&amp;#8232;Understanding forcing
mechanisms of climate change is critically important for decadal climate
predictability. In recent decades much progress has been made in identifying and
incorporating effects of aerosols, solar and volcanic variability in climate
models. However, despite a considerable literature describing observations of
the 18.6-year lunar nodal cycle in various climate variables its effect is not
included in climate models. This project has the potential to improve climate
predictions on decadal time scales particularly in the North Pacific region.
Implementing the effect of the lunar nodal cycle on ocean mixing in CCSM4, which
is one of the models used by the IPCC assessment reports, will contribute to
these international reports of significant policy relevance. The model code will
be made available to the large user community. Decadal variability in the North
Pacific affects ecosystems and societies. Improved predictability of hypoxic
events on the continental shelf of the west coast of North America, for example,
may benefit society as these events affect living systems in the California
Current Large Marine Ecosystem and many commercially important fisheries in the
region. Collaboration between a team of three PIs with different expertise,
background (global climate modeling, tides, coupled physical- biological
regional ocean modeling) and gender diversity will be fostered. A postdoctoral
researcher will be trained in climate modeling and data analysis and given
teaching opportunities. An undergraduate student will participate through a
summer internship. A session on decadal variability in the North Pacific will be
organized at the 2014 Fall Meeting of the American Geophysical Union.