* 1260929
* RAPID: When Pride Becomes Shame: Organizational Identification and Self-Presentation During Scandal
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Alicia Grandey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 04/30/2015
* USD 41,076.00

Employees vary in their organizational identification, the extent they view
themselves as personally connected to and part of their work organization. When
the organization is doing well, such identification can benefit self-concept,
motivational energy, and health, which is especially beneficial for front-line
employees because they actually feel the enthusiasm and pride they need to
express to potential clients or donors. Paradoxically, organizational
identification can become a liability if the organization becomes associated
with scandal or stigma, such that one's pride-by-association turns to feelings
of shame and betrayal. In such cases, those who are the most motivated become
those who are most threatened; how do such employees respond, and how does this
affect their health and performance?

To answer these questions, a current real-life event, the scandal at
Pennsylvania State University, provides a unique time-sensitive context. The
proposed research integrates social identity and emotion regulation theories to
more fully understand the process and outcomes of responding to an identity
threat. The researchers expect that organizational identification is likely to
influence employees health and performance via the strength of emotional
response (i.e., shame and betrayal), and emotional regulation (i.e., refocusing,
suppressing) while they work with the public. We assess whether a "climate of
authenticity" at work (i.e., emphasizing openness and honesty) buffers or
exacerbates the health and performance costs of these negative emotions from
identity threat.

This project has the potential to demonstrate generalizability of traditionally
laboratory-based models of identity and self-regulation, and to provide evidence
regarding how to protect employee well-being in organizational settings where,
too often, there is negative media and scandal. Furthermore, this project
provides important information about a way to reduce the costs of interpersonal
self-regulation to health and motivation in field settings.