* 1260210
* Decision Dynamics among Victims of Violence
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* DAVID KATERNDAHL, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2016
* USD 524,919.00

In the United States, husband-to-wife violence is widely prevalent and causes
great physical and psychological harm. One in five women has been hurt by
intimate partners in their lifetimes. Among them, 42 percent receive injuries
and 12 percent require medical care. Victims have more frequent hospitalizations
and more visits to emergency departments, outpatient clinics, and mental health
services. Despite the devastating impact that husband-to-wife abuse has on the
wives and society, there are many unresolved questions, including how women
subjected to violence arrive at decisions to leave or continue their
relationships. To improve understanding of the dynamics of women's decision
making in violent relationships, this study will document daily patterns of
violent events, perceived need for action, and the potential predictors of
action over a 2-month period for each woman. The study will recruit 150 adult
women attending routine office visits at six primary care clinics. Women who
report abuse within the past month will complete a baseline interview and a
daily telephone survey for 2 months. Daily questions will address the previous
day's violence (events, stalking, perceived escalation), household environment
(alcohol, stress, closeness, forgiveness), concerns (children, their safety,
financial independence), perceptions (desire to "move on" or "keep the family
together", ability to control violence), and perceived need for action (leaving,
coping assistance, legal assistance). Weekly telephone discussions, and end-of-
study qualitative and quantitative interviews will assess additional decision
making factors and women's sense of safety during the study. In addition,
subjects will complete baseline and end-of-study assessments of factors that may
modify perceived need for action or its translation into actual action.

This work advances our understanding about decision making in violent
relationships by applying innovative methods to study the variability of women's
decision making. This line of inquiry could have significant clinical
applications, guiding possible interventions, by identifying factors important
in decision making to abused women and explaining the variability of decision
making in violent relationships. In addition, this study advances discovery and
understanding by joining research and teaching, integrating project results into
a workshop series for medical students by promoting novel research methods. Key
innovative features include real-time reports of violent events, decision making
and triggers, use of cellular phones in data collection, and assessment of day-
to-day dynamics. Study results are broadly disseminated in journal publications,
national professional meetings, and multidisciplinary conferences attended by
policymakers and investigators. The study team has partnerships with federal
agencies (i.e. the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality), and is informing
policy development through organizations such as the American Academy of Family
Physicians. Assessing violence in real-time could empower researchers to study
violence dynamics "as it happens" rather than limiting investigation to recall
of events. There is potential for such research to improve our understanding of
decision making, while positively influencing subjects' lives.