* 1260892
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  Individual, Family and Community Impacts of Criminal Sentencing
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Cristian Pop-Eleches, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 16,000.00

Over the past 30 years, the incarcerated population in the United States has
grown by close to 300 percent. The Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that in
2009, 7.2 million adults in the United States, or 1 out of every 31 adults, were
under "correctional supervision," a status that includes probation and parole in
addition to incarceration. The wide reach of corrections activity translates
into roughly $51.7 billion dollars or 7.4 percent of state budgets in fiscal
year 2011. Despite the size of this social program in the United States, little
reliable evidence exists to quantify the costs and benefits of incarceration and
justify its widespread use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to help
address this problem through estimating the impacts of criminal sentencing at
the individual, family and community level using new data from the United
States. Original data collection efforts by the researchers have created a new
empirical dataset comprising 30 years of criminal court cases from Harris
County, Texas. It includes over 2.7 million distinct cases and 1.1 million
unique defendants. Defendants can be followed over time in the court record
data, allowing the research to consider affects on recidivism and escalation in
criminal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, unique data sharing
agreements with local county agencies will allow the criminal court data to be
linked with administrative records concerning defendants' labor market activity,
marital behavior, family formation, children's educational attainment, and
neighborhood arrest records. Linking criminal sentencing to a variety of
lifecycle behavior and intergenerational outcomes will generate an unprecedented
dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To surmount the challenge of omitted variables
bias, the research will leverage a source of plausibly exogenous variation:
random assignment of criminal court cases to judges. As criminal charges are
filed against defendants, cases are randomly assigned to courtrooms in an effort
to maintain balanced caseloads between the judges. The judges in the Harris
County criminal court system then hold significant discretion in both the day-
to-day operations of their courtrooms as well as the precise sentences delivered
to defendants found guilty of a crime. Due to the combination of randomization
and discretion, some variation in the sentencing outcome for defendants is due
to random chance. This research will seek to isolate that degree of sentencing
variation in order to make causal statements regarding the impact of criminal
sentencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance this literature's methodology, the
researchers will further refine their novel estimation technique: heterogeneous
response instrumental variables (HRIV). The HRIV model, which non-parametrically
estimates the judge's decision rule process, can reduce bias and improve
efficiency in empirical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the conclusion of
this research, the criminal court data will be archived for long-term
preservation with the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR). Efforts will also be made to make an anonymized version of the
linked data available for future work also through ICPSR.