* 1260874
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Predicting Asset Price Bubbles from Brain Activity
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* P. Read Montague, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,244.00

The research team includes researchers at Caltech and Virginia Tech with
expertise in Economics and Cognitive Neuroscience. They will study how the human
brain works when faced with the tasks that are part of buying and selling in
asset markets. They plan to use lab experiments with market designs that
encourage the formation of market bubbles, periods where the price paid for an
asset is well above the actual value of the asset. They want to determine
whether traders who buy at high "bubble" prices are systematically different
than other more cautious buyers. They will use brain imaging techniques and
analyze the resulting data to test whether neural activity can predict how large
a bubble will become and how long it will last. Because market bubbles can have
serious consequences on the broader economy, understanding more about the
possible causes of bubbles is important for financial market regulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the behavioral ecology of trader
types, predictive 'decoding' of when bubbles will form and crash, and neural
activity during bubbles. For economics, the project contributes to our
scientific understanding of bubble dynamics by helping us understand why and how
people participate in bubbles. For cognitive neuroscience, studying asset prices
is one way to advance the science of understanding how the brain computes a
complex dynamic value that changes over time depending on the reactions of
others. The combination of behavioral observation and neural measures will give
us data that will help us better understand how emotions such as 'irrational
exuberance', social influences like 'herd behavior', and momentum trading all
affect asset markets.