* 1260969
* Multicultural Initiative in Marine Science:  Undergraduate Participation at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This award provides renewed funding for a program called the Multicultural
Initiative in Marine Science Undergraduate Program (MIMSUP) for academic years
2013-2014. The program has operated at Western Washington University's Shannon
Point Marine Center (SPMC) since 1991. MIMSUP PI's will recruit eight students
annually from around the nation and will seek to identify students who would
benefit most from the high level of mentoring provided. The intellectual merit
of the proposal lies in the design of an effort that encourages students to
pursue higher degrees in ocean sciences. Students will spend two quarters in
residence taking a total of 31 quarter-credits that may be transferred back to
their home institutions. During the first quarter, students take a
laboratory/field course in Oceanography, a Current Trends in Marine Science
course that introduces them to modern investigative techniques and the potential
professional opportunities that will be available to them, and a research course
in which they plan and execute an independent project under the supervision of a
faculty member. They all participate in a program that involves training in and
application of outreach education in marine science to K-12 school children.
During the second quarter, students will take a Scientific Communication course
and two additional courses covering various marine science topics. Broader
Impacts: Results from prior funding indicate that this program is highly
successful in efforts to encourage students to pursue advanced degrees in
science. Of the 155 participants who have completed their undergraduate degrees,
15% have pursued the doctorate; 44%, the Master's degree. Overall, 68% have
pursued advanced education. Alumni contributions to the sciences include over
381 presentations at science conferences (49 best student paper awards) and co-
authorship on over 112 publications in the refereed scientific literature. The
impact of these alumni as role models for their peers will multiply the effects
of the program. Training and mentoring approaches will continue to be shared
nationally, and alumni will continue to participate in other ocean science
programs. MIMSUP students are trained in and participate in K-12 marine science
lessons in the local school system and in providing ocean science outreach
activities at local festivals serving a general audience.