* 1260455
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Conceptions of Government and Relations with the Nation-State
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* George Mentore, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 25,036.00

University of Virginia doctoral candidate Lucas de Carvalho, under the direction
of Dr. George Mentore, will undertake research on Amerindian-state relations. In
many parts of the world, there have been longstanding conflicts between
governments and indigenous people. This research will explore how these
misunderstandings emerge through a divergence between government practices and
indigenous religious and cultural beliefs. The researcher will conduct
ethnographic data collection on an indigenous group of people who live in the
Amazonian rainforest in Guyana. He seeks to understand the models used to
conceptualize the government and their role in social and political life. The
research has the potential to transform the way that anthropologists and other
social scientists have theorized the nation-state and governance. The
researcher's existing relationship to this indigenous group enables him to
engage in innovative methods of data collection such as highly immersive
participant observation that afford him to access information that has eluded
previous anthropological inquiry. More broadly, the research will improve
anthropological understandings of social and political organization and the role
of religion in social life. The project will have broader social impacts by
providing both indigenous peoples and government officials with useful models
for understanding the cross-cultural dissidence and political conflict. The
research will also influence development practice, particularly in the context
of health initiatives. Finally, the research would also broaden the
participation of an under-represented group.