* 1260344
* Service Access in Premodern Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Sharon Harlan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 404,674.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael E. Smith and a team of
urban experts at Arizona State University will compare the ways city dwellers
gained access to urban services in a sample of thirty ancient and historic
cities. Planners and city officials today wrestle with difficult decisions about
where to locate schools, clinics, parks, and other facilities. Scholars have
found that the locations of some urban services allow particular groups better
access than others. This project will identify the ways cities have organized
their services throughout history. Non-governmental institutions (churches,
guilds, neighborhood associations) have played a significant role in providing
urban services in the past. Were these services more equally distributed than
those provided by city authorities, or did governments do a better job of
equitably providing services to residents? By answering these and other
questions about services in ancient and historic cities, this project will give
scholars and planners a broader base of knowledge to apply to modern cities
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes experts from four
disciplines-archaeology, geography, political science, and sociology. The co-
Principal Investigators are Christopher Boone, Sharon Harlan, and Abigail York,
with Senior Scientists George Cowgill and Barbara Stark. They will use concepts
and methods from these and other fields to produce a broad picture of urban
services in the past. The team will select cities from each of fourteen early
urban traditions, ranging from ancient Egypt to Medieval Europe. For each city,
the team will digitize historical or archaeological maps that portray housing
and service facilities. The maps will then be analyzed spatially in a common
framework using the methods of Geographical Information Science to show how the
locations of service facilities relate to neighborhoods and the residences of
elite and commoner families. The target services include shops/commercial
services, religious services, and public assembly places. The team will also
study historical or archaeological records for each city to reconstruct its
social, economic and political patterns. This contextual information will be
coded and analyzed in a common framework, and then the team will compare it to
the results of the spatial analysis to determine what kinds of cities,
political, and economic systems produce more equal service access for urban
populations.&lt;br/&gt;This project has three primary intellectual merits: (1)
this will be the most rigorous comparative study of premodern cities yet
undertaken; (2) the joint work of a team of scholars from four different
scholarly disciplines will produce a particularly broad and comprehensive
analysis of urban services; and (3) the application of methods and concepts
derived from the analysis of modern urban services to a sample of past cities
will produce results that are directly comparable to our knowledge of services
in contemporary cities. This is a particularly important topic for the rapidly
growing cities in the developing nations.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
study include training and mentoring for two graduate students and a group of
undergraduate interns including Hispanic students. In addition, the scientific
knowledge we gather and systematically code about premodern cities will inform
research and policy on the role of services contemporary urbanization in two
ways: (1) it will provide a large comparative sample of cities for scholars and
planners to draw on; and (2) it will provide a long-term historical perspective
on cities, services, and urban change.