* 1260928
* Increasing College Enrollment Through Fast Track Acceptances and Targeted Mentoring By Guidance Departments and Admissions Officers
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Bruce Sacerdote, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 599,972.00

The United States ranks 12th in the world in the fraction of 25-65 year olds who
have completed four years of college, though as recently as 1990 the US ranked
first in this measure (Cascio, Clark &amp; Gordon 2008). Likewise, the U.S.
Department of Education has declared that increasing the college attendance and
completion rate nationwide is a major policy goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops, implements, and tests a series of interventions to increase
college enrollment among New Hampshire (NH) high school seniors. The study
centers on whether seemingly small costs, such as the time to complete an
application or to learn about the application process is an impediment to high
school seniors applying to college. The steps needed to complete an application,
the SATs (Scholastic Assessment Test) and the FAFSA (Free Application for
Federal Student Aid) are both new and somewhat involved to many students. Do
perceived or mental costs present a barrier to college entry? To address this
question the investigators will identify students who have the academic ability
to complete a college degree, but who have failed to file a college application
by the winter/spring of their senior year. After identifying target students,
the researchers will implement a set of interventions to motivate these students
to complete the college application process, file the FAFSA, and to enroll in
college in the following fall. By generating additional enrollments, the
anticipated outcome is that many of these students will persist in college and
complete a four-year degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the causal impact
of the interventions, students in the target audience will be randomly assigned
to one of three treatment groups or to a fourth control group. The control group
will not receive any of the interventions in the study. High school transcripts
for each student in the treatment group will be collected and sent to the
admissions staff at an applicable NH public college, university, or community
college for screening. For qualified students, the admissions staff will
generate a letter indicating that the student has a strong probability of
admittance if they choose to apply. These letters will then be used to
administer three treatments. In the first treatment, students will be mailed the
letter directly from the admissions staff notifying them of their strong
probability of admittance. In addition, the letter will provide information
regarding the benefits to college attendance and instructions for completing the
college application and FAFSA. The second treatment will be identical to the
first treatment; however, students will also receive a phone call from a member
the admissions staff from the relevant college or university. The admissions
staff member will discuss the benefits of attending college and will offer
assistance in completing the application and the FAFSA. For the third treatment,
the student's high school guidance counselor will be offered overtime hours to
present the letter and to facilitate the student in completing the college
application and the FAFSA.&lt;br/&gt;Short and long run outcomes for students in
the three treatment groups and the control groups will be compared using data
from the National Student Clearinghouse and the NH public college and university
system. Short run outcomes include application rates to public colleges and
universities. Long run outcomes include college enrollment, persistence and
completion. The operative theory of change to be tested is whether high school
seniors will significantly alter their college going plans based on a "fast
track" letter indicating a strong probability of acceptance to their local
college or university. The researchers hypothesize that the letters will be
salient and motivational in getting the students to update their beliefs about
their own ability to attend college.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
are developing a policy road map for expansion of college going and completion
rates. Research findings will contribute to a better understanding of how to
increase college access for disadvantaged students and students who are the
first in the family to attend college. Men in the U.S. are falling behind women
in academic achievement and college completion. Many college going interventions
appear to assist women more than men, which further widens the gap. The research
will also shed light on gender differences in college going and attainment as
well as generate hypotheses about why such interventions work differentially by
gender