* 1260428
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:   Effects of Stress on Onset of Middle Childhood among Aka Foragers and Ngandu Horticulturalists
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Courtney Meehan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2016
* USD 21,363.00

Current theory proposes that human childhood is an assessment phase where
children use their experience with risk or unpredictability (e.g., stressors) to
shape future life history strategies. This suggests that timing of developmental
transitions may depend on experience in the preceding phase. Doctoral student
Courtney Helfrecht (Washington State University), under the guidance of Dr.
Courtney Meehan, tests the hypothesis that early experience of stress has
significant effects on age of onset for middle childhood and its biological
correlate (adrenarche) among Aka foragers and Ngandu horticulturalists of the
Central African Republic (CAR). Initial data indicate that middle childhood is a
culturally-defined phase associated with changes in cognitive and social
abilities. This research builds from that with three additional goals: 1)
assessment of cultural and environmental stressors; 2) determination of
chronological age of onset for middle childhood and adrenarche; and 3)
evaluation of which stressors affect timing of onset for both middle childhood
and adrenarche. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative study is among the first
to empirically examine this relationship using observational, hormonal,
interview, demographic, and cross-cultural data. An initial collection of hair
samples provides population profiles for timing of adrenarche using hair hormone
analysis, conducted via collaboration between Washington State University and
The George Washington University. A second collection allows tracking of
biological development and a repeated measure of experienced stress (cortisol).
By investigating the interaction between stress, biology, and culture, we move
toward understanding the factors associated with developmental plasticity and
the timing of life history events, as well as their contributions to the
evolution of human childhood. The results of this study will be valuable to
multiple fields, including biocultural anthropology, child development, and
cognitive psychology. It will further add to ethnographic data on childhood
among two small-scale societies and foster continued collaboration with the
University of Bangui. This grant will help to advance the scientific training of
a promising graduate student.