* 1260745
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Deciduous tooth emergence, nutritional status, and weaning and feeding decisions in the Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* Debbie Guatelli-Steinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2016
* USD 25,078.00

This research investigates how prenatal and postnatal nutrition relate to dental
eruption and, in turn, the role of the developing dentition in mothers' weaning
and feeding decisions. Weaning age is a critical life history characteristic
because of the recognized relationship between breastfeeding and inter-birth
intervals, and, ultimately, mothers' lifetime reproductive success. Links among
weaning age, maternal condition, and infant nutrition and growth have been found
in both non-human primates and humans. In addition, human mothers use infants'
growth and developmental status as a cue when making weaning and feeding
decisions. This research, by doctoral student Jennifer Spence (Ohio State
University), under the guidance of Dr. Guatelli-Steinberg, addresses a
relatively unexplored yet significant question: how the developing dentition is
involved in these relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using anthropometric
assessment and ethnographic methods, this research 1) employs a reliable
technique of gauging gestation duration to accurately evaluate the association
between prenatal maternal nutritional status and postnatal infant nutritional
status, and the timing of deciduous (primary) tooth emergence; 2) determines the
extent to which the timing of deciduous tooth emergence is related to the age at
which the weaning process begins; and 3) investigates how the presence of
deciduous teeth affects mothers' weaning and feeding decisions. It is
hypothesized that both maternal and infant nutrition are associated with the
timing of deciduous tooth emergence, which is in turn predicted to influence
weaning and feeding decisions. This project is set among Ribeirinho populations
in the eastern Brazilian Amazon, an area characterized by nutritional stress and
with variation in weaning and feeding practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is part of a STEM initiative familiarizing underserved public-school
students with the social sciences, particularly anthropology. The project
promotes collaboration with Brazilian non-academics through inclusion of local
women in data collection and academics through a university seminar. A campaign
is planned to create and disseminate nontechnical material in local communities
to encourage good nutrition and dental health.