* 1260270
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Trauma and Insecurity:  Understanding Sources of Stress, Resilience, and Mental Health
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Craig Hadley, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,182.00

The researcher, Bronwyn Nicole Kaiser, under the supervision of Dr. Craig Hadley
will explore how stress is manifested and negotiated under situations of
extraordinary duress. A growing group of anthropologists and others have
theorized that everyday stressors (poverty, social relationships, and other
cultural obligations) have more important impacts on mental health than
previously thought. This perspective contrasts with theorizing among other
disciplines, which regard trauma and disasters as central forces driving
distress. This project will test these contrasting theories in Haiti, where
people have long suffered from many daily hardships because of poverty, but have
also experienced trauma because of the recent earthquake. Using a mixed method
ethnographic and biocultural approach, the researcher will investigate the links
between stressors, mental health outcomes, and physiological stress through an
ethnographic exploration of distress, coping, and resilience.

The study contributes to the debates in anthropology and the social sciences
more broadly about stress and coping, mental health and resilience. The project
has strong potential to inform work in global mental health broadly by
rigorously testing links between sociocultural and physiological phenomena to
understand the salient manifestations of suffering and distress. The project
thus provides a particularly timely contribution to debates both within
anthropology and of general scholarly and public interest.

The project will contribute to the training of a female doctoral student, and
through the dissemination of findings to healthcare providers and policymakers,
will help to inform health care provision, particularly among historically
disadvantaged groups.