* 1260696
* Data Synthesis and Evaluation of the Salinity Influence on Mg/Ca Paleothermometry in the Low Latitudes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Lea, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2016
* USD 366,804.00

Foraminiferal magnesium to calcium ratios (Mg/Ca) are an important and widely
used tool in studies of past ocean temperatures. Recent research suggests that
variations in salinity could have a greater influence on Mg/Ca paleothermometry
than previously believed, with significant implications for interpretations of
paleotemperature data. The magnitude of that influence, however, remains under
debate. The proposed work, led by researchers at UC Santa Barbara, aims to
resolve this problem using a three-pronged approach to quantify the influence of
salinity on foraminiferal Mg/Ca: 1) analysis of sediment trap and core-top
samples from three regions with large salinity gradients (Arabian Sea, Bay of
Bengal, and northwest Africa); 2) synthesis of available sediment trap, core-
top, and plankton tow data from low latitudes; and 3) assessment of secondary
diagenetic effects on foraminiferal Mg/Ca in high-salinity regions. Comparative
and multivariate techniques will be used to evaluate the magnitude of the
salinity influence relative to other known influences (e.g., temperature,
seasonality, seafloor dissolution) on foraminiferal
Mg/Ca.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to increased confidence in
reconstructions of past temperature and, consequently, in model assessments of
climate sensitivity. Knowledge and data sharing will be facilitated by the
development of a searchable foraminiferal Mg/Ca database. The project will team
a senior faculty member with a junior faculty member who is a member of an
underrepresented group, and will provide support for a post-doctoral researcher.