* 1260388
* SHINE:  Collaborative Research: Time-dependent coupling of the solar corona and inner heliosphere: Interfacing LFM-helio with MAS
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jon Linker, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2017
* USD 108,988.00

This proposal seeks funding for the development and validation of a new
sophisticated numerical model that would follow Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs)
from their birth in the solar corona, through interactions with the ambient
solar wind, and out to 1 AU. The finished model will combine two established,
well-recognized codes, "MAS" (MHD Around a Sphere) to model the solar corona out
to about 30 solar radii and "LFM Helio," an adaptation of the LFM code
originally developed for magnetospheric simulations, that would follow the
propagation out to 1 AU. Specific tasks to be completed include: 1) Steady-state
MAS/LFM-helio coupling to obtain the ambient solar wind configuration throughout
the corona and inner heliosphere prior to CME initiation; 2) Time-dependent
coupling allowing seamless propagation of the CME structure through the
interface between the coronal and inner heliosphere domains located at
&amp;#8764; 30 RE; 3) Vetting of the resultant coupled model by performing
corona-inner heliosphere simulations, investigations of CME interaction with the
ambient solar wind and each other, and comparisons with heliospheric
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If a major CME was to hit the earth it could have
major consequences on everything from GPS satellites to the terrestrial power
grid. Hence, understanding how CMEs propagate from the Sun to the Earth is
perhaps the most important aspect of space weather forecasting. A female PhD
student would be trained under this project.