* 1260169
* Multispecies connectivity: Comparative analysis of marine connectivity and its drivers for the coral reefs of Hawaii
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Brian Bowen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2017
* USD 665,062.00

The exchange of individuals among populations, termed connectivity, is a central
element of population persistence and maintenance of genetic diversity, and
influences most ecological and evolutionary processes. To date, field studies of
marine connectivity have necessarily focused on one or a few species at a time,
providing little understanding of both the extent of variability in connectivity
across a whole community and what factors drive that variability. This project
will address these questions with population genetic datasets of a diverse
marine fauna sampled across the Hawaiian Archipelago. By combining these genetic
data with extensive oceanographic, ecological and historical data, this project
can potentially transform our understanding of the basis of the genetic
structure of populations and the processes influencing genetic patterns. This
project will provide unique, and new, knowledge to basic marine ecology and the
science of Ecosystem Based Management while incorporating the latest analytical
and simulation approaches.

The results will be novel on several fronts: 1) advancing our understanding of
community genetics and associated statistical techniques; 2) achieving true
integration of genetic, ecological and oceanographic data over large spatial
scales for many species simultaneously using a World Heritage Site; the Hawaiian
Papahânaumokuâkea Marine National Monument; 3) factoring historical effects into
connectivity studies; and 4) providing information on the location of barriers
to connectivity, the sources and sinks of individuals and the physical processes
influencing ecological patterns at a community level. This project will result
in a quantum leap for both the conceptual and empirical understanding of marine
connectivity and the utility of population genetic data in basic and applied
marine science.

This project will also provide unique insights for both management and the
general public through an established science-management partnership that
reaches >14,000 people annually, a radio talk show, and through exhibits at the
Waikiki Aquarium and Telus World of Science Center that is expected to reach
over 800,000 visitors each year. Additionally, the University of Hawaii has one
of the most culturally diverse campuses in the country from which to draw
students and assistants. The principal investigators have an established track
record of recruiting minority students, and this project will develop a
combination of skills in molecular genetics, quantitative analysis, statistics,
and landscape genetic techniques to further their career options in STEM
disciplines.