* 1260080
* Eddy-Driven Subduction of Particulate Carbon During the North Atlantic Spring Bloom
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Amala Mahadevan, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2014
* USD 235,893.00

Traditionally, export of organic carbon from the surface layer of the ocean has
been measured and modeled in terms of the sinking flux of particulate organic
carbon (POC). But, a large fraction of the organic carbon pool consists of small
particles that do not sink at a significant rate. Analysis of backscatter,
fluorescence, temperature and salinity in glider profiles obtained from the 2008
North Atlantic Bloom (NAB08) study reveals that small, neutrally buoyant
phytoplankton cells are transported downward along sloping isopycnal surfaces in
intrusions that show distinctly different water mass characteristics from the
surrounding water. Such features are also seen in a high-resolution, three-
dimensional model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will explore eddy-driven subduction as a
contributory mechanism to the biological pump of the North Atlantic. Unlike the
sinking of large particles or large-scale subduction on seasonal time scales,
the contribution in this case, is due to downwelling or subduction associated
with eddies and fronts on scales of 1-10 km, not usually resolved in global
carbon cycle models. Specifically, the team will: (1) characterize the mechanism
for eddy-driven subduction and relate it to the flow field, via vorticity,
density stratification and frontal gradients, wind, and heat fluxes; (2) trace
the pathways for vertical flux, identify the age and origin of features that
convey the POC from the mixed layer to depth, ascertain the ubiquity of these
features, their frequency in space and time, and the depth to which they
transport carbon; and (3) quantify the flux of POC through eddy-driven
subduction, relate it to the surface POC distribution and concentration and to
time scales of remineralization, subduction and sinking, and then compare this
POC flux to estimates for export of large POC during the North Atlantic bloom.
These goals will be achieved through the detailed analysis of the NAB08 data set
in conjunction with a three-dimensional process based modeling study that will
help to examine the mechanisms and relate the transport of POC to the
characteristics of the dynamics and surface POC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This work will address an important question with broad potential
implications for carbon export (including export of dissolved organic matter),
air-sea exchange of CO2, oxygen budgets, and ventilation of the thermocline on
short time scales. It will support a postdoctoral investigator and host a
visiting student from Hamburg University for a period of 6 months through the
WHOI Guest Student program. Both the PI and CoPI will continue to be involved in
outreach activities through local museums and avenues for teacher training.