* 1260490
* Collaborative research:  Adaptation of key N2-fixing cyanobacteria to changing CO2
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* David Hutchins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,498,385.00

Intellectual Merit. This study will employ a novel combination of experimental
evolution techniques and state-of-the-art molecular methods to yield unique
insights into adaptive changes in the keystone marine cyanobacteria
Trichodesmium and Crocosphaera in response to selection by high CO2 Several
studies have suggested that N2-fixation rates of the biogeochemically-critical
cyanobacteria Trichodesmium and Crocosphaera may increase dramatically in the
future high CO2 ocean, but these have all used the same limited set of cultured
isolates and considered cells only briefly acclimated to elevated CO2. The
investigator's new results, however, demonstrate that a broad diversity of high-
and low-CO2 adapted ecotypes exists within each diazotroph genus. Furthermore,
in a preliminary four year experimental evolution study with Trichodesmium, the
PIs observed large adaptive responses following 500-700 generations of selection
by high CO2- but in a completely unexpected way. All of the six replicate high
CO2-adapted cell lines exhibited strong constitutive up-regulation of N2
fixation rates. These very elevated N2 fixation rates continued, even though the
cultures have were switched back to low-CO2 conditions for many months.
Expression of the nif operon and N assimilatory genes was also up-regulated in
these cell lines, as is expression of many intergenic regions of the genome. The
investigators hypothesize that constitutive up-regulation of cellular N2
fixation systems may be a common adaptive response of both Trichodesmium and
Crocosphaera under extended selection by elevated CO2. This project will test
this hypothesis in a four-year experimental evolution study to determine the
adaptive responses of both high- and low-CO2 specialized ecotypes of these two
diazotrophs to increased CO2. The investigators will grow representative high-
and low-CO2 adapted ecotypes from each genus in well-replicated cell lines at
380 ppm and 750 ppm CO2 for up to 1000 generations. Periodically, they will
perform "switch" experiments to measure N2 and CO2 fixation rates and growth
rates of high CO2-selected cell lines grown briefly (one week) at low CO2, and
vice versa. These switch experiments will allow screening for cell lines which
exhibit adaptive changes in phenotypically-expressed rate parameters, such as
those observed in the preliminary Trichodesmium study. Evolutionary mechanisms
in the CO2-selected cell lines will be examined by comparison of changes in
their genomes, transcriptomes, and proteomes over time relative to reference
genomes, using frozen samples archived monthly during the preceding selection
period. Examination of these molecular and biochemical changes will be
coordinated with an in-depth array of physiological and biogeochemical analyses.
This combined approach will allow an evaluation of potential adaptive mechanisms
in diazotrophic cyanobacteria ranging from indel, duplication, single nucleotide
polymorphism, and transposition mutations to altered putative non-coding RNA
expression, protein expression, and post-translational protein modifications,
and then allow the investigators to link these mechanisms directly with their
potential impacts on ecosystem-level biogeochemical processes like N2 and CO2
fixation. Finally, the research team will determine how long term selection by
high CO2 affects the iron and phosphorus requirements of Trichodesmium and
Crocosphaera, since constitutive up-regulation of N2 fixation would also have
major implications for limitation of diazotrophs by these two critical nutrients
in the future high CO2 ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will support graduate student dissertation work at USC and WHOI, as well as
research activities by under-represented undergraduate biology majors. Public
education and communication efforts for this project will be enhanced by an
annual series of public outreach and professional colloquia sponsored by our
USC-funded "2020" initiative intended to integrate scientific and societal
responses to climate change. The biggest scientific impact of this project may
well be the development of a pioneering new approach combining marine science
and evolutionary biology, in order to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the
adaptive responses of N2-fixing cyanobacteria and the key biogeochemical cycles
that they control to changing ocean chemistry and climate