* 1260232
* Collaborative Research: A framework to characterize inhalant siphon flows of aquatic benthos
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Peter Jumars, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 292,920.00

The inhalant siphon flows produced by benthic invertebrates such as clams
through suspension feeding and respiration can directly affect a wide range of
physical and chemical processes in benthic marine ecosystems. This process is
energetically costly and influences the feeding and reproductive biology of the
individual. Moreover, understanding siphon flows at multiple scales are widely
used not only to address questions of flow fields for other aquatic organisms
and exchange processes, but have direct impacts on a variety of engineering
problems such as designing sewers. Despite the importance of these flow fields
in biology, relatively little research has been conducted on this topic. For
this study, the PIs have modeled the flow outside the siphon entrance of several
important benthic marine and have found radically different results from those
commonly assumed. Given these findings, the PIs propose to test the results of
their numerical simulation on inanimate physical models, and then verify their
accuracy using live organisms.

The proposed numerical modeling will examine and predict effects of several
parameters including inhalant siphon wall thickness, siphon height, disturbances
caused by exhalant flows, and sensitivity to ambient flows. Predictions will be
initially tested by using inanimate analog models. To provide a broad ecological
framework, the PIs will then focus on five model suspension feeders, each of
which have been extensively studied, and include a species of benthic shrimp, a
tunicate, a soft shelled clam, the parchment worm, and a tube dwelling amphipod.
This suite species will provide a broad description of the intake flow as each
feeding system span nearly all the range of Reynolds numbers observed in animals
that produce siphon flows. The results of this study will improve our current
understanding the effects of organismal intake flows on near bed processes such
as vertical fluxes of organic and inorganic nutrients, an important aspect of
benthic ecology. Direct deliverables will include verified quantitative models
of inhalant flows of marine benthos, connecting form and function and detailing
fluid mechanical costs of operation.

The PIs will partner with the staff of Centers for Ocean Sciences Education
Excellence (COSEE) to produce a pair of educational webinars on fluid flows.
This series of webinars are targeted toward high school teachers and university
professors, and will use concept maps to demonstrate how mathematics, biology,
and fluid dynamics can be integrated to answer broad oceanographic questions.
Both PIs will continue graduate training in interdisciplinary science and will
incorporate examples of the proposed work in their undergraduate and graduate
teaching.