* 1260872
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: A False Balance? Exemplars, Affect, and Media Coverage of Controversial Risk
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Katherine McComas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,097.00

A prominent journalistic norm is to provide balance when reporting on
controversial risk issues, even when scientific evidence and support between two
risk interpretations is significantly uneven. While journalists present two
sides of a controversial topic, howeever, their use of affective exemplars
(pictures with captions that provoke an emotional response) may be uneven, such
as placing an exemplar to only one risk interpretation. To date, studies have
found that affective reactions can inform on risk, lead to greater recall of
risk-related information, as well as significantly bias peoples' perception of
risk severity, frequency, and probability, such that their perceptions differ
greatly from those of risk managers, scientists, and other experts. Such
studies, however, have been done in the context of one-sided messages and
stories unrelated to controversial risk. This proposal investigates the
potential role news reporting plays in distorting people's risk perception
surrounding controversial risk topics by surveying journalists and testing
message strategies intended to improve readers' understanding. The researchers
hypothesize that for risk controversies where the evidence supports only one
side of a two-sided news article, uneven placement of a negative affect-inducing
exemplar might lead people to primarily recall the side that is supported by
little or no evidence. This is important because journalists who believe they
are presenting a "balanced article" on a risk controversy might unknowingly
influence their readers to largely process and recall only one side of a two-
sided message. Moreover, the ease with which readers recall such information
(i.e., the availability heuristic) might influence their risk perception to
greatly differ from expert estimates.

By examining potential sources of distortions in people's risk perception and
testing message strategies to improve these perceptual distortions, the research
provides empirically informed message strategies that not only aid risk managers
and health officials but also open up important discussions on journalism
practices that potentially misinform audiences on risk.