* 1260768
* IRES: Behavioral Ecology and Conservation of African Carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 249,966.00

Technical abstract.

IRES funds will permit four advanced undergraduates and four junior graduate
students each year to spend a summer with my team in Kenya, conducting research
on African carnivores. IRES funds permit students to utilize comparative
methods, and to undertake projects designed to acquire new and useful
information about the carnivores inhabiting the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem. IRES
funds also permit continuance of a training partnership with three Kenyan
scientists and one young American PhD-level biologist; this team of trainers
enables IRES students to address a broad array of research questions about the
behavior, conservation and physiology of African carnivores, ranging from the
evolution of their cognitive abilities to anthropogenic effects on their stress
physiology. Opportunities to participate in this IRES project are widely
advertized, and students are selected based on a set of criteria that include
scholarship, creativity and diversity. Undergraduate participants will be
selected from a huge national pool, and graduate student participants will be
selected from a smaller local pool. Pairs of undergraduate and graduate students
will be linked by topical research focus, and they will work closely with
specific Kenyan trainers. All Kenyan trainers are closely affiliated with the
Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS); initial training activities will take place at KWS
HQ and at the KWS Training Institute. IRES students will then be transported to
the Masai Mara National Reserve, in southwestern Kenya, where four of them will
be housed at each of our two tented research camps. Students will spend several
weeks developing and executing their field research projects in the Mara,
working closely with Kenyan trainers and Kenyan students. While in Kenya, IRES
students will also receive explicit training in science writing, and present
their work orally at the Carnivore Researchers Conference held each year at KWS
HQ. The research opportunities we offer to students are unparalleled, not only
to investigate the biology of several carnivore species that remain very poorly
understood, but also to make important contributions to behavioral ecology,
stress physiology and conservation biology. In addition to providing support for
one graduate student program assistant, IRES funding will profoundly influence
the professional development of eight top American students each year, and offer
them extraordinary opportunities to learn a wide array of field research skills
in a spectacular natural setting. IRES students will receive training in, and
conduct research projects investigating, both the basic and applied biology of
African carnivores. The economic well-being of Kenya is intimately linked with
conservation of African carnivores, but our ability to conserve these animals is
often limited by how little we know about their basic biology. Guided by Kenyan
trainers whose professional lives are dedicated to the conservation of African
wildlife, IRES students will gather data to allow important improvements in the
management policies used in Kenya's national parks and reserves. IRES
participants will learn a great deal about African life and culture, and about
the complexities associated with carnivore conservation in a developing nation.
This IRES experience will thus contribute significantly to the development of a
new generation of global scientists who are united in their desire to understand
and protect the natural world.

Non-technical abstract. This international research training program allows
advanced undergraduates and junior graduate students to spend extended periods
conducting field research on free-living African carnivores in Kenya, building
on a strong long-term program of carnivore research in the Masai Mara National
Reserve. Several students each year will undertake projects designed to acquire
new and useful information about the carnivores inhabiting the Mara-Serengeti
ecosystem, and to develop strong, long-lasting professional relationships with
Kenyan scientists. A strong team of American and Kenyan trainers will help
students address a broad array of research questions about the behavior,
conservation and physiology of African carnivores, ranging from the evolution of
their cognitive abilities to effects of human activity on their stress
physiology. Pairs of undergraduate and graduate students will be linked by
topical research focus, and work closely with local experts. While in Kenya,
students will receive explicit training in science writing, and present their
work at an annual conference on carnivore biology sponsored by the Kenya
Wildlife Service. The research opportunities offered to students here are
unparalleled, not only to investigate the biology of several carnivore species
that remain very poorly understood, but also to make important contributions to
behavioral ecology, stress physiology and conservation biology. The knowledge
acquired in this research should facilitate conservation of African carnivores,
and thus contribute to the economic well-being of Kenya, which is intimately
linked with revenues from eco-tourism. This research program will also
contribute significantly to the professional development of a new generation of
global scientists who are united in their desire to understand and protect the
natural world.