* 1260961
* Inflation and Redistribution: Research on the Origins and Implications of Money as a Unit of Account
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Matthias Doepke, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2017
* USD 180,952.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Inflation and Redistribution: Research on
the Origins and Implications of Money as a Unit of Account&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: SES - 1260961&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Doepke,
Matthias&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In advanced economies, assets and liabilities that
specify future payments (such as mortgages, loans, deposits, and government
debt) are usually denominated in fixed nominal units of the local currency. For
example, the owner of a U.S. government bond stands to receive a series of
interest payments and a principal repayment in fixed dollar terms. Similarly,
U.S. fixed-rate mortgage borrowers owe a series of payments that are fixed in
dollar terms as well. The use of money as a unit of account for assets and
liabilities matters, because it implies that unanticipated changes in the value
of the unit of account (i.e., inflation or deflation) lead to wealth
redistribution between borrowers and lenders. For example, unanticipated
inflation lowers the real value of all nominal assets and liabilities, implying
that lenders lose and borrowers gain.&lt;br/&gt;The project examines the origins
and implications of money's role as a unit of account for assets and liabilities
from theoretical and quantitative perspectives. The research has four different
components. The first component is theoretical, and aims to explain why economic
agents choose to use money as the unit of account for assets and liabilities (as
opposed to, say, indexing future payments to inflation). A theory of this kind
can also be used to understand the history of the use of money as a unit of
account, the role of government debt in promoting the use of money a unified
unit of account, and the economics of currency unions. The second component
examines the role of redistribution effects for the political economy of
inflation, and thereby contributes to a positive theory of inflation. The third
component considers the possibility of higher inflation in the United States in
the near future, and uses a quantitative general equilibrium model with a rich
life-cycle structure to assess the effects of such an inflation shock on
macroeconomic aggregates and welfare. The model allows for financial constraints
and has an explicit housing market, so that the interaction between inflation
and real estate prices can be examined as well. This component of the research
will enhance our understanding of the temptation to use inflation to erode
government debt, as well as the distributional and macroeconomic implications of
such a policy. The last component of the proposed research focuses on the
disinflation episode in the United States during the 1980s, and uses panel data
from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to document the impact of surprise
deflation on household wealth. Given that individual mortgage histories can be
constructed for households in the SCF panel, this research will provide insights
into the impact of stabilization policies at the level of individual households,
and enhance our understanding of the wider macroeconomic effects of such
policies.&lt;br/&gt;In sum, the project deepens our understanding of monetary
policy and its consequences, as well as the design of monetary institutions and
currency systems. The implications for optimal currency areas will help clarify
the costs and benefits of a unified currency, an issue which recently has
received a lot of attention due to the debt crisis in the Euro zone. The
political-economy aspect of the proposal will help clarify the feedback between
institutional features of an economy such as the design of the pension system
and monetary policy.