* 1260411
* Branding and Product Differentiation in Markets with Advertising
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Jesse Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 460,880.00

This award funds research in empirical microeconomics. The project makes two
major contributions.&lt;br/&gt;First, it evaluates the extent to which the large
price premium attached to national brands in consumer packaged goods markets
reflects a lack of information or sophistication on the part of consumers. By
bringing together comprehensive data on consumer purchases with novel survey and
demographic data, the researchers are able to estimate how the market shares,
prices, and characteristics of goods sold would &lt;br/&gt;change if all
consumers were fully informed about the relative merits of the goods on the
grocery store shelf. Using this information they are able to inform important
policy questions in consumer protection, product regulation, and competition
policy. The novel methodologies they develop are be useful beyond the products
studied in this research; the results will inform broader debates about the
effect of consumer information on market
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the research provides a framework for
studying the effect of advertising competition on advertising prices and
consumer welfare, with a special focus on online media markets. As media, and
especially news media, move to new online platforms, important questions have
emerged about whether advertising-funded online media will supply informative
news from a diverse range of viewpoints. We will use industry data on online
advertising markets to study the effect of competition for advertisers and
consumers on the ideological orientation and diversity of online news media, as
well as to study questions about online content delivery beyond the news. Our
study will provide some of the first large-scale evidence on the strength of
advertising competition online and will be relevant to emerging policy debates
about the regulation and financing of online journalism.