* 1260073
* EAGER: A Hybrid Photosynthetic Electron Transport Chain Based on Graphene Oxide
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Paul Falkowski, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2013
* USD 94,270.00

1260073 Vittadello

Several approaches for biological and biomimetic energy conversion systems have
been proposed. In particular, the possibility of using photosynthesis to produce
hydrogen from biological resources is attractive, and both natural
microorganisms and semi-artificial devices are being investigated within various
national and international programs. The approaches of semi-artificial device
research being followed are aimed at a photoelectrochemical system based on PSII
and PSI, which are natural photosystems, and hydrogenase. The original model,
proposed in 1979, entailed the use of particles floating in solution in the
presence of redox mediators. New strategies proposed by the research team of
Professor Michele Vittadello of CUNY Medgar Evers College and Professor Paul
Falkowski of Rutgers University involve the immobilization of PSII and PSI CCs
(core complexes) and hydrogenases onto electrodic surfaces. So far, no one has
published a full working device using isolated core complexes.

Vittadello and Falkowski propose to demonstrate the possibility by assembling a
viable photosynthetic hybrid system for water splitting based on graphene oxide
(GO), core complexes of natural photosystems PSII and PSI, and Pt as a catalyst.
Single-layered GO provides an ideal chemical ?canvas? for the self-assembly of
photosynthetic proteins. The residual oxygen-containing chemical species include
hydroxyl, carboxyl, epoxy, and ketonic functional groups concentrated at the
edges of graphene quantum islands. The degree of oxidation can be used to
control electron/hole transport properties. Although preliminary results for the
PSI-GO and PSII-GO have been attained, the basis for this EAGER proposal is the
attempt to demonstrate that photoinduced vectorial electron transfer is possible
in triads comprised of PSII CCs, GO, and PSI CCs in a direct or facilitated
fashion, giving rise to a supramolecular hybrid electron-transport chain with
minimized overpotentials, on the model of the natural photosynthetic Z-scheme.
The investigators are well qualified for conducting this project given their
background knowledge in photosynthesis, electrochemistry, biophysics,
biochemistry, materials science and engineering. The research team includes
Senior Research Associate Kamil Woronowicz and is in an excellent position to
expand the collaborative effort in semi-artificial photosynthesis for hydrogen
generation. The investigation of GO-protein interactions is highly
transformational for bionanotechnologies with potential applications in multi-
enzyme catalysis for fuel production and chemical synthesis, and protein
purification for drug development. The successful proof-of-concept will lay the
foundation for further studies. The vibrancy of the topic will help leverage the
ongoing effort of the investigators in the STEM educational area, through the
unique institutional expertise available at Medgar Evers College and at the
Rutgers Energy Institute.