* 1260777
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Sample Size Bias in Judgments of Averages
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Andrew Smith, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/28/2015
* USD 49,150.00

This project focuses on a phenomenon of quantitative cognition called sample
size bias, which occurs when people make judgments of averages. Specifically, as
the number of items in a set increases, people judge the average to be greater.
For example, the average of a set of ten numbers is judged to be greater than
the average of five numbers -- even when the two sets have the same average. But
sample size bias also occurs for conceptual dimensions such as risk. For
example, the average heart-attack risk of ten people is judged to be greater
than the average heart-attack risk of five people. The core of this project is a
series of empirical studies in which a cross-section of people judge several
kinds of averages under a variety of conditions. These studies have two
purposes. The first is to test a theory that assumes that set size automatically
activates an analog representation of magnitude in the brain, which in turn
affects the representation and judgment of the average. The second is to see
whether the sample size bias affects other kinds of judgments about averages,
including judgments about one's own experience and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is important for a number of reasons.
First, the theory being tested has the potential to help integrate sample size
bias with similar phenomena from distinct areas of research including judgment
and decision making, perception, and the neuroscience of quantitative cognition.
Second, this research will help identify real-world contexts in which people's
judgments of averages are likely to reflect sample size bias. For example,
surveys often ask people to make judgments about what is average or typical for
them or their peers (e.g., the average number of times they use health services
per year). It is important to know whether such judgments are likely to be
systematically biased and how such biases might be corrected. Finally, this
project will provide high quality research training and experience to a diverse
group of undergraduate and master's-level students at California State
University, Fresno and Appalachian State University. This in turn will prepare
them to succeed in doctoral studies in any of a variety of areas, cognitive and
social psychology, judgment and decision making, and management science.