* 1260970
* I-Corps:  Dynamic Decision Support for Emergency Managers
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The decision support software developed through this project represents a new
tool to aid decision makers in making informed, efficient decisions. The
software tool builds on earlier research that explored interactions among
technical systems, organizational processes, and physical and social conditions
that affect information flow in managing risk and uncertainty. The design
approach develops practical decision models using Bayesian networks and
influence diagrams to assess uncertain conditions, based on systematic
identification of interdependencies among the component technical,
organizational, and knowledge systems that characterize urgent operating
environments. It integrates technical skills in computer programming and
simulation design, grasp of business dynamics and marketing, and understanding
of context, policies, and constraints of emergency management. This decision
support module identifies options available for action, given actual constraints
and near-real time information from multiple sources, and calculates the
probability of success of each option, based on the collective judgment of
experienced emergency managers. This decision support tool addresses problems of
scalability and simultaneity in information flow processes that have hindered
inter-organizational decision making in large-scale, regional disasters.
Modeling potential outcomes can systematically enable managers to compare a
broader range of options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successfully developed, this
dynamic decision support tool may have a transformative effect on how
communities manage risk. As the number, type, and severity of disasters increase
in a global society that depends increasingly on large-scale systems in
transportation, power generation, communication, and gas, water and wastewater
distribution, the cost and consequences of failure in these socio-technical
systems escalate exponentially. Managers may need improved tools to monitor
these interdependent operating systems simultaneously, and adjust and adapt the
balance between demand and resources available to manage sudden surges in demand
from extreme events. This technology has the potential to benefit communities
through helping local governments, nonprofit organizations, and small businesses
increase their capacity to manage their continuing exposure to risk, but reduce
losses by more informed, effective decision making.