* 1260535
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Reconstructing Seasonality, Woody Cover, and Habitat Heterogeneity in Modern and Ancient East African Environments with Stable Isotopes.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Thomas Plummer, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2015
* USD 25,200.00

The evolutionary history of the human lineage during the Plio-Pleistocene (~3 to
1 million years ago) is often linked to climatic and ecological change. This
time period is well represented in the fossil and archaeological records in East
Africa and includes some of the most important evolutionary and adaptive shifts
in human evolution. While global climate history is relatively well understood,
identifying local environmental change is critical for explaining why these
developments occurred. Rainfall seasonality and local-scale variation in
vegetation across space may represent fundamental drivers of evolutionary
change; however, few empirical records are available to evaluate this
perception.

The first aim of this study by doctoral student Scott Blumenthal, under the
supervision of Dr. Thomas Plummer at CUNY, is to collect soils and mammal teeth
from modern Ugandan environments to test the hypothesis that variation in
rainfall seasonality and vegetation cover within and between habitats can be
identified with stable isotopes. Sampling will be conducted in national parks
and reserves in Uganda, including a wide range of environments, from forests to
grasslands. This will provide a template for reconstructing these environmental
conditions in the fossil record. The second aim of this study is to use stable
isotope analysis of fossil soils and teeth from Plio-Pleistocene deposits of the
Homa Peninsula, western Kenya, to produce a local environmental record through
time, and evaluate hypotheses linking local environmental variability with human
evolution. This under-studied but fossil- and artifact-rich region provides a
geographically, geologically, and ecologically unique perspective on hominin
evolution.

The proposed research will foster international collaborations with researchers
and institutions in two East African countries. Collaboration with the Ugandan
Wildlife Authority will provide opportunities to develop projects with the aim
of adding ecological monitoring with stable isotope analysis to existing
conservation management techniques. This project also will contribute to the
education of an undergraduate intern, in addition to enhancing the graduate
training of the co-PI.