* 1260638
* Ethnography, Oral History, and Network Analysis of Trader Behaviors and Institutions in India, Kenya, and South Sudan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Nitesh Chawla, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 83,845.00

Dr. Rahul Oka and Dr. Nitesh Chawla of the University of Notre Dame will
investigate the causes, consequences, and complexities of trader behaviors and
the effects of external forces (political stability, trade friendliness, and
business opportunity) on trader network transformations in India, Kenya, and
South Sudan. Using ethnography, oral history, and Social Network Analysis, they
will develop anthropological research tools that are sensitive to temporal and
spatial specificities but which are scalable, transferable, and predictive. The
result will be a cross-culturally valid model of the effects of political
connectivity and social networks on human behavior in economic exchange
relationships that can be used to understand how different types of trader
networks affect local and regional economies.

The researchers will collect data on trader and political networks for a sample
of 60 traders in India, Kenya, and South Sudan. Two methods will be used to
collect and analyze the data: a) qualitative ethnography and oral history of
individual traders and their relationships, and b) quantitative network analyses
of these networks over 20 years. The combined analyses will enable a better
understanding of how traders differentially placed politically maintain or
develop their commercial activities and how these affect larger trader networks
and economy.

Findings from this research will improve theoretical understanding of the scope
and impact of trader-politician alliances and their outcomes. It will also
provide valuable tools for development efforts, specifically in assessing
potential responses to external interventions in local and regional economies.
This research will enable theory building within both anthropology and network
science on the underlying causes and consequences of trade and its impact on
societies. The project also will provide research experience for American
undergraduate and graduate student through fieldwork, inter-disciplinary
analyses, and professional presentations/publications, and establish a cross-
disciplinary collaboratory between American and international scholars.