* 1260659
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Intergenerational effects of maternal stress in pregnancy: Epigenetic Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Christopher Kuzawa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,524.00

Humans have evolved to be biologically responsive to the environment in which
they grow and develop. One environment of increasing interest is the
intrauterine environment, since this represents a period when fetal biology is
directly influenced by maternal biology, which itself is shaped by a woman's
lifetime of experiences. Interestingly, women with higher stress hormones in
pregnancy tend to give birth to babies with altered stress physiology and
increased risk of developing disease in later life. While these associations
have now been documented in a number of populations, the specific aspects of
maternal environmental experience that shape stress physiology, as well as the
molecular mechanisms that underlie the intergenerational transmission of stress
experience, remain poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to clarify
these issues, this study by doctoral student Zaneta Thayer (Northwestern
University), under the guidance of Dr. Christopher Kuzawa, addresses the
following aims: 1) Determine what aspects of maternal social environment are
associated with stress hormones during pregnancy; 2) Evaluate whether the
mother's stress hormones predict stress physiology in their offspring during
infancy; and 3) Investigate whether changes in offspring epigenetic markings,
which modify patterns of gene expression, are responsible for the
intergenerational transmission of stress physiology. Data will come from a
socioeconomically- and ethnically-diverse sample of pregnant women living in
Auckland, New Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this project will
help clarify whether infants inherit a biological but non-genomic imprint of
maternal stress experience. It thus will make an important contribution to our
understanding of how inequalities within society, which shape exposure to social
stressors, can shape disparities in biology and health across generations.
Additionally, this project supports training and professional development of an
underrepresented minority female graduate student. The Co-PI has organized
outreach events for local midwives, obstetricians and public health
practitioners in New Zealand to report study findings of potential value to
these professionals and their populations.