* 1260995
* Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Clifford Will, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,397.00

The likely detection of gravitational waves from astrophysical sources will open
a new window for astronomy and provide new tests of Einstein's theory of general
relativity. Interpreting the observations and advancing this new field will
require accurate theoretical predictions for the wave signal from a given
source. This project will make use of a method known as Direct Integration of
the Relaxed Einstein Equations (DIRE), that has been developed by the PI and his
students at Washington University, which solves Einstein's equations
systematically in a procedure known as the post-Newtonian approximation
(appropriate for systems where the velocities are small compared to the speed of
light). Using this method, it will be possible to study the detailed motion and
radiation from the inspiral of compact binary systems (double star systems
containing neutron stars or black holes) to a high degree of accuracy. Post-
Newtonian methods will also be used to study unusual aspects of the curved
spacetime surrounding rotating black holes, related to the existence of the so-
called "Carter" constant of the motion, and to calculate the recoil velocity
experienced by black holes formed from compact binary merger. Ways to use
gravitational-wave data to test alternative theories of gravity in new regimes
and to measure astrophysical and cosmological parameters will also be studied.
In particular, a detailed analysis of gravitational radiation from compact
binary inspiral in a class of "scalar-tensor" alternatives to general relativity
will be carried out, together with a study of data analysis strategies for
placing the best possible bound on this class of theories. The possibility of
testing general relativity in the strong-field vicinity of the massive black
hole in the center of our galaxy using future adaptive optics infrared
interferometry will be analyzed by studying orbital perturbations of stars in
close orbits near the hole caused by other stars in the central region, by a
possible distribution of dark matter, and by tidal distortions of the stars.
This will involve a mixture of analytical post-Newtonian calculations and
numerical N- body simulations.

The work on equations of motion, gravitational waveforms and analysis of
gravitational-wave data will impact the emerging field of gravitational-wave
astronomy. The work on recoil velocities may contribute important insights that
could impact astrophysical modeling of the growth of massive black holes in
galaxies, as well as the interface between post-Newtonian theory and numerical
relativity. The work on testing general relativity near the galactic center
black hole could impact the development of advanced instrumentation for
observational infrared astronomy. Education and training of students will be
integrated into the research program.