* 1260753
* Topics in Matching
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Andrew Postlewaite, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,198.00

This award funds new economic theory on matching in environments with incomplete
information. Matching models use techniques from game theory to study situations
in which two partners must be 'matched' in order to make a trade. Examples
include matching workers to employers and matching students to schools.

The project has two parts. The first part studies agents' incentives to invest
in productive characteristics. In many situations, the value of a match depends
on investments the partners have made before their match. For example, the value
of a match between a teacher and a school depends on the teacher's education,
training and experience. It also depends on the physical equipment and
facilities available at the school. Both parties must invest before the match,
but they may not have incentives to invest if they fear that their future
partners will take advantage of their investment through the well-known 'hold up
problem'. Here, the PIs will consider how specific bargaining protocols and
property rights can lead to efficient investments.

The second part of the research considers the implications of stability of
matching outcomes under incomplete information. There is a large literature that
uses matching models to analyze a broad variety of applications. The commonly
employed solution concept in these applications is the core. The use of the core
as a solution concept incorporates the stability of a proposed matching between
workers and firms; if the proposed outcome is not in the core we would expect
the outcome to be upset by the pair that could jointly improve their
circumstances. This argument, however, relies on an assumption of complete
information. The PIs develop a concept that defines pairwise stability in
incomplete information environments. They investigate the robustness of various
models to incomplete information and consider many-to-one matching problems.
This project provides better foundations for the large applied literature in
matching.

Existing theories of matching have had substantial broader impact through their
application to market design. These methods are used to match students to
schools, medical graduates to residencies, and transplant donors to recipients.
The new theory may improve the economic performance of these mechanisms.