* 1260191
* Identity, Networks, and The Origins of Participatory Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Cheol-Sung Lee, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 180,518.00

SES-1260191&lt;br/&gt;Cheol-Sung Lee&lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how intellectuals'
activities under authoritarian regimes shaped labor issues after nations
transitioned to democracy in four distinct historical contexts. Specifically,
this research explores how activists' strategies to either go underground or to
cooperate with authoritarian elites had lasting impacts on the subsequent
trajectories of democratization. Based on comparative historical evidence from
four recently democratized developing countries, the study assesses three types
of solidarity and one absence case: participatory solidarity in Brazil, top-down
solidarity in South Korea, clique-based solidarity in Argentina, and co-optation
(lack of solidarity) in Taiwan. Qualitative interviews with key leaders who once
engaged in these activities are expected to provide thicker and deeper data
about the cases. Overall, this exploration of activities under pre-
democratization structures will explain the paths and forms of labor politics in
the post-authoritarian era. The study's novel theoretical approach will improve
our understanding of the divergent trajectories of democratization. Its focus on
the dynamic formation of civic leaders' networks and identities in informal
communities will also bridge organizational approaches to understanding
contention with the broader literature on democratization. Finally, this
research will contribute to highlighting the historical evolution of the "social
foundations" of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will contribute to new social scientific knowledge by providing theoretical
insights into the different forms and qualities of democracy. This approach will
provide stronger explanations of post authoritarian labor-based initiatives and
their contributions to democratization and welfare states than have previous
studies. Moreover, this research has the potential to inform not only
researchers but also civic leaders and policy-makers about the importance of
developing ties to civil groups and community organizations in order to build
durable and broad democratic bases. Insights into the historical paths of
difficult times in other societies may provide leaders of contemporary American
communities with new ideas and perspectives regarding their strategies of
mobilization and community participation.