* 1260350
* Testing the impacts of vital effects and mineralogy on the "clumped isotopes" signatures of modern benthic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Rosemarie Came, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2019
* USD 276,630.00

The carbonate "clumped isotope" (&amp;#8710;47) paleothermometer is a new,
rapidly developing tool for reconstructing past ocean temperatures. Unlike the
&amp;#948;18O paleothermometer, this emerging proxy approach can determine
temperature without relying on assumptions about seawater &amp;#948;18O. The
proposed research will advance the development of the clumped isotope technique
using modern marine sediments collected at varying depths and known temperatures
in the Florida Straits. Led by an investigator at the University of New
Hampshire, the project will undertake critical studies to determine whether the
clumped isotope proxy is subject to "vital effects"; whether the
&amp;#8710;47-temperature relationship depends on carbonate mineralogy; and,
through collaboration with researchers at Yale and Johns Hopkins Universities,
whether apparent variations in the relationship may be explained by inter-
laboratory differences. The results will reduce the uncertainty of the
&amp;#8710;47-temperature relationship and generate several species-specific
clumped isotope proxy calibrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By refining the
clumped isotope paleothermometer, this research has the potential to further our
understanding of how ocean-climate conditions have changed in the past. In
particular, a benthic foraminifer clumped isotope paleothermometer will allow
reconstruction of deep water temperature, which is a high priority goal in the
field because of its relevance for understanding changes in ice volume and
thermohaline circulation through time. The project will provide support for an
early-career female investigator as well as research opportunities for students
at the graduate and undergraduate levels; in particular, the project will
involve students from UNH's McNair Scholars Program, which encourages students
from underrepresented groups to pursue doctoral degrees.