* 1260911
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Empirical Tests of Asymmetric Information in the Pharmaceutical Retail Market
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Anne Fitzpatrick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 22,647.00

This award funds research conducted by doctoral candidate Anne Fitzpatrick under
the guidance of Dr. Rebecca Thornton. The project seeks to determine the role of
pharmaceutical retailers in the sale of counterfeit drugs. The research will
ascertain whether retailers know which drugs within their stock are counterfeit,
and whether they can make different purchasing decisions and avoid purchasing
counterfeit stock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes several rounds of
data collection at over 500 drug vendors that sell anti-malarial drugs in an
area where malaria is a serious public health problem. An audit study will
determine the prevalence of counterfeit drugs and whether or not the vendors are
aware they are selling counterfeits; the study achieves this goal by comparing
purchases from anonymous shoppers to purchases from shoppers who announce that
their purchases will subjected to quality testing. A randomized controlled trial
will be conducted as well; this trial will test the effects of an incentive
scheme that gives the retailers incentives to avoid counterfeits. Economic
theory predicts that the incentive scheme will have the desired effect, so the
project also tests key hypotheses about seller incentives to provide quality
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project comes from the
eventual use of the research results. The project could result in a workable
solution to curb the worldwide sale of counterfeit pharmaceuticals.