* 1260660
* RUI:  Representative Bureaucracy and Improving Health Care for Female Veterans
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Julie Dolan, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2019
* USD 118,174.00

This research explores how the values of front-line health care providers in the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) affect the delivery of health care to female
veterans. The VA recently required that all of its medical facilities expand
health care services to female veterans and simultaneously provide a more
private environment for women seeking care in its hospitals and clinics.
Compliance is uneven across the 140+ VA medical facilities in the United States
and this project explores the impact that female physicians have on moving their
facilities towards compliance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
project is to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the conditions under
which female physicians use their discretion to implement policy to improve the
health care experiences of female veterans. The PI will conduct interviews of
Veterans Health Administration employees in two select facilities to gauge their
attitudes toward compliance, their commitment to the policy, and their efforts
to better serve the most quickly growing segment of the VA's clientele. The PI
expects that female physicians who identify with female veterans will do the
most to improve the quality of care for these women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although scholarship suggests that
female bureaucrats are more likely than their male colleagues to deliver policy
benefits to women in the population, virtually no research directly engages or
interviews these women to reach such conclusions. This project forges new ground
by interviewing front-line health care providers to gauge their efforts to
improve the health care experiences of female veterans. It employs a new
theoretical construct for better understanding the ways in which gender shapes
the implementation of public policy. The proposed interviews will greatly expand
our understanding of the role women play in delivering public policy that
benefits women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As a Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project, the research provides training
opportunities for students. The project also has policy implications; the
findings may inform the VA about ways to improve the health care experience for
female veterans.