* 1260692
* Collaborative Research: Use of Triple Oxygen Isotopes and O2/Ar to constrain Net/Gross Oxygen Production during upwelling and non-upwelling periods in a Coastal Setting
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2017
* USD 421,210.00

The marine biological pump is one of the primary pathways via which
anthropogenic carbon dioxide may be sequestered from the atmosphere and exported
to the deep ocean as organic carbon. While the link between nutrient supply and
high primary productivity in upwelling regions is well established, factors
controlling the organic carbon export efficiency of upwelling ecosystems are not
well known. Scientists from the University of Southern California and Pomona
College plan to determine the factors that control the rates and magnitudes of
two components of biological production, Net Community Production (NCP) and
Gross Primary Production (GPP), as well as particulate organic carbon export
efficiency, at the San Pedro Ocean Time Series, a coastal site in the California
Borderland during periods of minimal and high upwelling velocity over a 2-year
span. At this site, past and ongoing observations of hydrography and carbon rain
will provide an historical context for interpreting results and mechanisms at
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rates of NCP and GPP will be quantified at different
upwelling intensity, using dissolved oxygen to argon (O2/Ar) ratios and the
oxygen triple isotope composition of dissolved oxygen (O2). The export of
organic carbon will be established using 234Th (thorium) profiles in the water
column, coupled with floating sediment trap deployments, and the development of
a carbon isotope balance for the water column. Upwelling will be characterized
using non-steady state budgets for atmospheric 7Be (beryllium) input and its
depth-integrated decay, as well as estimating rates based on remote measurements
of wind stress curl and budgets for dissolved inorganic carbon and silicon.
Application of the O2/Ar ratio and the oxygen triple isotope approach will
require depth-integrated profiles of these tracers to evaluate the impact of
upwelling on mixed layer inputs and use of non-steady state models during
seasonal transitions in upwelling. The comprehensive data set to be obtained
should provide insights into the organic carbon export efficiency under variable
upwelling regimes and help to relate the satellite-based measurements of
chlorophyll to the organic carbon export of these highly productive
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One graduate and one
undergraduate student from the University of Southern California and two
undergraduate students from Pomona College would be supported and trained as
part of this project.