* 1260816
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  The Effect of Interspecific Hybridization on MHC Diversity in Wild Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Todd Disotell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2015
* USD 31,226.00

In the 'arms race' against pathogens, having less common immune genes can be
advantageous. Infectious agents may have evolved to evade the defenses of the
more common varieties, making organisms with rare variants more likely to
survive. In primates, like all vertebrates, many proteins essential to the
immune system are encoded by the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC), which
is involved in resistance to pathogens such as HIV and tuberculosis. The
advantage of having rare forms has made the MHC gene complex one of the most
diverse regions in the human genome. Recently, researchers found that at least
one variant of the MHC entered the human gene pool when the ancestors of some
modern humans interbred with an extinct hominin. The novel form's rarity may
have facilitated the introduction and spread of the MHC variant through the
population.

To better understand the effects of hybridization on MHC, this research by
doctoral student Christina Bergey (New York University), under the guidance of
Dr. Todd Disotell, focuses on a natural experiment in which two species of
baboons successfully interbreed in Ethiopia. Using the latest DNA sequencing
techniques, MHC loci are genetically typed and thousands of neutral markers from
individuals across the hybrid zone are utilized to test whether MHC alleles are
able to transfer and spread widely throughout the parental population. The
Ethiopian baboon hybrid zone offers an ideal opportunity to explore the
influence of selection and hybridization on MHC diversity in an appropriate
primate model.

The study increases our understanding of hybridization, a phenomenon that has
affected our lineage numerous times. It also provides evolutionary context to
primate MHC variation, which has behavioral, immunological, and biomedical
importance. DNA sequences are deposited in publicly available databases and all
software is made freely available online and released under open source
licenses. Since increasing public understanding of evolution is an essential
goal of anthropological research, new forms of outreach to publicize the results
also are employed in the conduct of the project.