* 1260699
* Modelling the Transport Revolution and the Industrial Revolution in England
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Dan Bogart, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 295,831.00

There have been significant improvements in transportation infrastructure and
technology over the last three hundred years. Our ancestors in the late 1800s
did not have air-travel, internal combustion engines, and the inter-oceanic
canals that people enjoy today. Transportation was even more difficult in the
early 1700s because of poorly made roads, a lack of inland waterways, and the
absence of steam power. How significant were these transport improvements to
economic development over the last three hundred years?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
was in the 1700s that modern economic growth began with the Industrial
Revolution in England. Changes in technology, like the advent of the steam
engine, and the growth of manufacturing employment in cities allowed wages to
begin their slow increase that continues to this day. Improvements to England's
transport infrastructure and technology are possibly crucial factors underlying
the Industrial Revolution. There was an expansion in river navigation and road
infrastructure in the mid-1700s and by the early 1800s a canal network was
created. The application of steam power in the 1830s further revolutionized
transport leading to steam ships and railways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
relationship between transportation improvements and the Industrial Revolution
is much discussed by economists studying history and economic growth but there
is no consensus on the magnitudes and the mechanisms of change. The importance
of transport change goes beyond historical studies. It is well known that highly
productive cities and regions can co-exist with less productive ones. Why is
this so? Why does economic development not happen everywhere even when
institutions are similar? One theory states that differences in the financial
and time cost of reaching markets causes differences in development. History
offers a unique context to study such theories because researchers can examine
large-scale changes in infrastructure and communications
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes use of advances in
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) software to examine how transport
improvements influenced the Industrial Revolution in England. Using GIS, it is
now possible to precisely model the transport cost and travel time between any
two locations provided there are digital maps of the transport network. The
project will build on existing GIS maps of waterways and railways compiled by
the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure in the
U.K. and it will create new GIS maps for turnpike roads, pre-turnpike roads, and
ports. The maps will be dynamic displaying the transport network (road, water,
or rail) at all points in time, say 1700, 1750, or
1850.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic GIS maps will be used to estimate
shipping costs and travel times between all English cities in every year from
1700 to 1870. Shipping costs and travel times will be utilized to estimate the
rate of productivity growth across the transport sector including the cost
savings associated with the spread of good roads, canals and railways. The
project will also estimate the "social saving" from transport innovations. The
social saving of canals, for example, is measured by the added cost of shipping
goods by road instead of by canal. This project will be the first to estimate
the social saving using more precise measures of transport costs and traffic
flows between cities. Moreover, it will assess each city's cost of accessing
markets and study the effect on its wages and adoption of technologies, like the
steam engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted under this grant --
which is jointly funded by the Economics Program and the Geography and Spatial
Sciences -- is complementing theoretical and empirical work focusing on the
links between market access and economic development in more recent time
periods. The GIS maps of transport networks will be made available to the public
and will constitute a valuable set of resources for diverse scholarly and
educational purposes. Lastly, there is a potential impact on policy-making. If
it is established that market access influences technology adoption then policy
interventions related to transport may be able to accelerate productivity or
change its spatial distribution.