* 1260134
* Assimilation rates of dissolved organic carbon by  photomixotrophic estuarine phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* James Pinckney, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2017
* USD 355,659.00

Phytoplankton, traditionally viewed as primary producers at the base of aquatic
food webs, provide an energy source for higher trophic levels. However, some
phytoplankton species function as both primary producers and heterotrophic
secondary consumers. Phytoplankton that are photosynthetically competent but
also take up and assimilate organic compounds are classified as facultative
mixotrophs or, more simply, photomixotrophs. Unfortunately, we currently have
few estimates of the proportion of the phytoplankton community that function as
photomixotrophs, their rate of secondary production, or their temporal variation
in abundance. Current paradigms about trophodynamics in marine systems do not
consider this potentially important alternative pathway for energy flow for
phytoplankton. The implication is that we may be missing a significant,
fundamental process that affects carbon cycling and trophodynamics in estuarine
systems. Furthermore, changes in the DOC composition due to anthropogenic
alterations may result in changes in phytoplankton community structure and
possibly promote the proliferation of harmful algal bloom species. In terms of
ecosystem function, even moderate rates of photomixotrophy could potentially
alter our current understanding of phytoplankton productivity, overall C
turnover, competitive interactions, and energy transfer in estuarine
environments. This project will use a novel approach to provide quantitative
measures of the in situ rates and magnitudes of facultative heterotrophy in
natural, estuarine phytoplankton communities over seasonal time scales in a
representative estuarine ecosystem. The project will utilize a unique 14C
radiolabeling technique to quantify the in situ assimilation rates of DOC by
estuarine photomixotrophs and estimate the amount of DOC converted to
phytoplankton biomass by photomixotrophy over seasonal time scales. This
information will provide new insights into carbon dynamics in estuaries, the
contribution of DOC to estuarine food webs, and the importance of
photomixotrophy in determining the structural and functional characteristics of
estuarine phytoplankton communities.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. The research will provide new insights into the potential
importance of an alternative source of C (DOC) and pathway for phytoplankton
production. Successful demonstration that a significant fraction of the
production of estuarine phytoplankton is by photomixotrophy would have major
implications for the way we currently view C flow in these systems. The project
has a reasonable likelihood of altering the current paradigms for estuarine
primary productivity as well as providing new evidence for mechanisms of
competitive interactions between phytoplankton species in mixed, natural
assemblages. The study will also provide first-order approximations of labile
DOC turnover by phytoplankton and will be one of the few measurements ever
obtained for an estuary. Research results will contribute to an improved
knowledge of relevant and underlying ecophysiological, organismal, and
community-level processes involving carbon cycling in an estuarine environment.

BROADER IMPACTS. This project will address the broader impacts criterion of
advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning. The project will provide support for a graduate student, summer
support for an undergraduate assistant, and involve upper level undergraduates
as lab interns. Undergraduate interns, recruited from the Marine Science Program
at USC, will participate in sample analyses and learn to operate laboratory
instrumentation. Furthermore, the field bioassays will be added as a module in a
required Marine Science undergraduate field course, MSCI 460 - Field & Lab
Investigations in MSCI.