* 1260870
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:   Abstraction in Decisionmaking and Message Effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Sahara Byrne, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 10,966.00

The negative health outcomes associated with some behaviors, such as cigarette
smoking, occur far into the future and are therefore perceived as abstract.
Messages that seek to communicate these outcomes face two challenges. First, the
recipients of these messages are not focused on these long-term, abstract,
consequences. Second, the messages often threaten freedom of choice and generate
psychological reactance, so the individual seeks to reestablish control by
rejecting the messages. This series of studies extends the theoretical
relationships between risk perceptions, abstraction, threat to freedom of
choice, and message effectiveness by testing the proposition that when high risk
messages are processed more abstractly, at a high construal level orientation,
they are more effective because the individual is focused on long-term, abstract
health goals and because psychological reactance is lower. Specifically, this
project will develop, test, and validate a mobile device game that can shift the
user to a high construal level orientation, thereby improving the effectiveness
of high risk messages. This approach is interdisciplinary, integrating the
domains of communication, psychology and human computer interactions.

Mobile persuasive applications are used to guide people toward making desirable
behavioral choices, such as stopping cigarette use, eating healthier food,
managing money, recycling their water bottles, participating in community
volunteer opportunities, exercising, and completing homework. This work will
help to guide practitioners and designers of these applications, increasing
understanding of what types of cognitive tasks and messages will most
successfully increase message effectiveness and desired behavioral choice.
Overall, this study contributes to increasing our understanding of how to
develop and deliver messages so they have their intended effect.