* 1260710
* RUI: Iron-oxidizing Bacteria from the Okinawa Trough Deep Subsurface Biosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Craig Moyer, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2017
* USD 302,818.00

ABSTRACT Intellectual Merit. Communities of Fe-oxidizing Bacteria (FeOB) are
common at sites of hydrothermal venting and are known to form complex
communities in microbial mats, hydrothermal sediments, oceanic crustal basalts
and borehole fluids (among others) that are iron-rich and low in oxygen. Studies
from sites around the Pacific Ocean have found the Zetaproteobacteria to be
ubiquitous members of these FeOB communities. Previously, borehole fluids from
the Southern Mariana Backarc have been shown to support several novel and
distinct lineages of endemic Zetaproteobacteria. Sampling from the deep
subsurface at the Iheya North hydrothermal field (IODP Expedition 331) explores
this deep subsurface FeOB biodiversity and has resulted in multiple enrichments
using both microaerophilic and anaerobic culturing conditions.
Zetaproteobacteria have been detected at levels up to 13% of the total bacterial
community from these subsurface core samples. This project expands post-cruise
analyses to focus on assessing these FeOB subsurface communities using a
combined single cell genomics, community-level metagenomics and a FeOB directed
cultivation approach. This approach will allow insights into the exclusive
physiology and metabolism of these Zetaproteobacteria thereby demonstrating key
features as to how they survive, compete and grow within these complex
subsurface microbial communities. A comparative analysis (from an evolutionary
standpoint) to determine the unique differences between subsurface
Zetaproteobacteria and those living above the seafloor surface is an integral
part of this effort.

Broader Impacts. A better understanding of Zetaproteobacteria is of central
interest to scientists interested in areas of earth science and oceanography
because they illustrate how microbes can influence geochemical cycling and
mineral deposition. Furthermore, morphological structures similar to those
produced by Zetaproteobacteria can still be identified 100's of millions (and
possibly billions) of years back in the rock record, making them of
paleontological (and potentially of exobiological) interest. As knowledge of
extant populations grows, it is possible they will also help to inform us of
environmental change in past Earth history. From a practical standpoint, these
organisms might be thought of as 'micro-machines', spinning out threads of iron
oxyhydroxide that coalesce in unknown ways. These oxides are known to be highly
reactive with a range of other metals, organic compounds, and nutrients, thus
impacting many other biogeochemical cycles. In particular, this study allows the
opportunity to compare and contrast a known monophyletic class of
Proteobacteria, to study the differences between subsurface and supersurface
lineages of Zetaproteobacteria, thereby yielding fundamental clues into
microbial biogeography. A wealth of educational outreach opportunities will be
made possible by this work, including graduate education, research experiences
for undergraduates, and teacher training.