* 1260964
* Pathways to Economic Opportunity and Intergenerational Mobility:  Evidence from United States Tax Records
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Raj Chetty, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 424,020.00

Many Americans embrace the ideal of "equality of opportunity", believing in the
ideal that ones' economic opportunities should not depend on the parents to whom
they happen to be born. While numerous researchers have been interested in the
drivers of intergenerational mobility and economic opportunity, previous studies
have often been hindered by a lack of available large datasets linking parents
and their children. As a result, there is much currently unknown about equality
of opportunity in the US: To what extent does the US offer equality of
opportunity today? How does this vary geographically? What pathways do people
use to move up the income ladder? And what types of policies can increase the
use of these pathways and further increase income
mobility?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to answer these questions
by conducting a comprehensive analysis of intergenerational income mobility by
linking parents to children in a comprehensive dataset comprising the vast
majority of US workers and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
approach these questions in three stages. First, they will provide a descriptive
analysis of intergenerational mobility in the United States. This includes
calculating rates of mobility by fine geographic areas and studying the factors
correlated with mobility, such as attending public higher educational
institutions, starting a business, or strong local labor markets. The aim of
this descriptive work is to motivate not only the subsequent work, but also to
make these statistics accessible to future researchers so that others can study
their own hypothesis about drivers of intergenerational mobility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the PIs will study several potential pathways of
mobility in detail with the aim of quantifying the causal impact of these
factors on income mobility. These pathways will depend on the first stage of the
research, but the researchers suspect, for example, that access to low-cost
higher educational institutions may be one important channel for upward
mobility. To this aim, they will evaluate whether the cost of higher education
is a barrier to mobility for disadvantaged children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project aims to explore which government
policies (e.g. education tax credits, business incentives, etc.) are most
effective in stimulating upward mobility. The broader goal of this study is to
help policymakers design policies that promote equality of opportunity; hence,
the PIs intend to contribute to an analysis of economic policy that focuses not
only on the current generation, but identifies the impact of policies on the
well-being of future generations.