* 1260746
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hierarchical Item Response Models for Cognitive Diagnosis
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Li Cai, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2014
* USD 11,596.00

Cognitive diagnosis models have received increasing attention within educational
and psychological measurement. The popularity of these models largely may be due
to their perceived ability to provide useful information concerning both
examinees and test items. However, the validity of such information may be
undermined when diagnostic models are misspecified. This project focuses on one
aspect of model misspecification: violations of the local item independence
assumption. It examines potential causes and consequences of such dependence,
with particular attention to those causes unrelated to the attributes a
diagnostic test is intended to measure. The project proposes and evaluates a
hierarchical diagnosis model as an alternative to traditional diagnosis models
in which nuisance dependence is ignored. This model maintains the desirable
properties of existing models while allowing for greater complexity in the
underlying response process. Importantly, the model may be estimated
efficiently, even for models with a large number of nuisance latent variables,
using an analytical dimension reduction technique described by Gibbons and
Hedeker (1992).

There is growing interest in extracting model-based diagnostic information from
assessments in order to provide more useful feedback to stakeholders. Up to this
point, however, the question of whether traditional cognitive diagnosis models
fit real test data has been somewhat neglected. This project examines the issue
of model fit and presents a model that may better account for certain causes of
misfit than the traditional diagnosis models. To the extent that the proposed
framework better accounts for the structure of real test data, its application
will contribute to improved test development and lead to more valid model-based
diagnostic inferences, such as the classification of test takers according to
cognitive attributes or skills. This, in turn, is expected to enhance decision
making, as better diagnostic information may allow for more effective (or better
targeted) delivery of instructional strategies or clinical interventions. The
results from this project will benefit the psychometric practice in any social
and behavior science discipline that involves testing and measurement. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is provided to enable
a promising student to establish a strong, independent research career.