* 1260916
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Crust-Mantle Coupling through Combined Analysis and Modeling of EarthScope Seismic, Geodetic, and Geologic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Matthew Fouch, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 146,971.00

This collaborative research effort is integrating seismological, geodetic, and
geological information from EarthScope to investigate hypotheses regarding the
present-day structure and evolution of the Great Basin region of the western
United States. Initial discoveries enabled by the EarthScope program and
prototype studies in this region have led to new and potentially related
hypotheses that echo prominent research themes in observational and theoretical
dynamics of the continents and their margins: (1) the evolution and control of
subducting slabs on the mantle flow field, (2) the stability of the lower
lithosphere against convective loss, and (3) the nature and extent of
subhorizontal decoupling horizons within the lithosphere. The primary motivation
for the current is the need to reconcile recent geophysical, geodetic, and
geological findings in the Great Basin region directly related to these themes.
Beneath the central Great Basin, seismic imaging reveals a cylindrical mass of
higher than average wavespeeds east of the actively subducting Juan de Fuca
plate near the zone of weakest azimuthal anisotropy in the western United
States, along with a swirl-like pattern of fast polarization directions. When
considered with other regional geophysical and geologic patterns, hypotheses
that may explain these observations include mantle flow around a lithospheric
keel, toroidal flow driven by the sinking of the Juan de Fuca slab, mantle
downwelling driven by a lithospheric drip, and a number of other possibilities.
Recent geodetic data for the Great Basin reveal transient changes in geodetic
velocities, which when considered with other local geologic patterns, are
consistent with the hypothesis that an active decoupling horizon exists, perhaps
localized along the Moho or some other deep decoupling zone beneath the Great
Basin. Further, relative to a dynamic model that matches Quaternary rates and
orientations of deformation, a time-averaged strain rate solution obtained from
campaign and continuous GPS shows a contractional dilatation anomaly in the same
vicinity as the geodetic and seismic anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;The collocation of
such a broad range of geophysical, geodetic, and geologic anomalies beneath the
broadly extending Great Basin is unlikely to be coincidental, yet combined they
defy conventional models of a classic extensional tectonic regime like the Great
Basin. Understanding the relationship between these processes through a
comprehensive series of hypothesis testing can transform our general insight of
lithospheric dynamics. This project is focused on conducting a comprehensive
suite of new investigations to test hypotheses focused on linkages between
mantle flow, lithospheric decoupling, and lithospheric destabilization for the
Great Basin region. This effort is utilizing new results developed through
analyses of EarthScope USArray Transportable Array (TA), EarthScope Plate
Boundary Observatory (PBO), and EarthScope Geology data. Specific datasets
include seismic imaging (tomography, anisotropy, and receiver functions),
continuous GPS, seismotectonics, and patterns of historic and late Quaternary
seismic strain release in the upper crust. Results from these analyses will
provide the required data for a series of new 3-D and 4-D numerical models
developed within this project. This research is inherently integrative, and thus
constitutes an important opportunity to combine results from different
components of the EarthScope program for a tectonic setting that historically is
among the best known and most enigmatic in the world. &lt;br/&gt;From a broader
impacts perspective, this project represents a new multidisciplinary effort
combining four separate Earth science disciplines to draw recent EarthScope-
enabled discoveries into a holistic view of Great Basin evolution. Data
collected and analyzed for this project will be distributed publicly to the
scientific community. The project is enabling the training of several young
scientists in multidisciplinary research. The PIs are coordinating with the
EarthScope National Office and IRIS to provide findings and discoveries from
this project in several forms, including an IRIS Active Earth module that looks
into the Basin and Range from the surface through the upper mantle and will
serve as an illustration of how continental-scale tectonic forces shape present-
day surface deformation and deeper dynamics.