* 1260555
* Collaborative Research:  Catching the quake: Investigating samples from the JFAST expedition for evidence of the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 04/30/2016
* USD 176,062.00

This proposal seeks to understand how shallow slip occurred during the Tohoku
earthquake by determining the frictional strength of the fault before the
rupture initiated and during slip. Using samples collected from the fault during
IODP exp 341 (JFast), the PI?s will undertake:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Organic
thermal maturity measurements to identify the rupture plane and quantify the
frictional temperature anomaly induced by coseismic slip.&lt;br/&gt;2)
Microstructure observations to identify and characterize the fault that hosted
the earthquake, including the identification of textures that indicate
frictional weakening.&lt;br/&gt;3) Friction measurements to constrain the
steady-state frictional stress of the faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results
are crucial for understanding tsunami genesis in shallow subduction zones and
will provide critical information for tsunami prediction and hazard mitigation.
Importantly, only direct observation and measurement of the fault physical
properties can determine these parameters. &lt;br/&gt;The Tohoku quake was a
surprise, previous work had indicated that such a quake was unlikely in region,
especially one in which large amounts of slip occurred in ?weak? shallow
accretionary prism sediment. Understanding this quake requires understanding
frictional characteristics of rocks in fault zone. There are three plausible
scenarios:&lt;br/&gt;First, the fault could have undergone dramatic frictional
weakening during rapid slip resulting in very low stress coseismically.
Alternatively, stress prior to the earthquake was low and changes on the fault
were small coseismically, with slip driven by stress transferred from the deeper
part of the fault Finally, slip could have propagated through a velocity-
strengthening region of the fault with little fault weakening on
average.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Information relating to how a
major (and unexpected) tsunami-generating quake was hosted in shallow sediments.
A better understanding of tsunamigenic earthquakes has great societal
importance.