* 1260237
* Collaborative Research:  Community-Based 3D Imaging That Ties Clinoform Geometry to Facies Successions and Neogene Sea-Level Change
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Gregory Mountain, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2018
* USD 791,150.00

The primary goal of this project is to constrain the complex forcing functions
tying evolution and preservation of the margin stratigraphic record to base-
level changes. These processes include eustasy, climatic and paleooceanographic
variations, tectonism, compaction and rates of sediment supply. Existing
borehole data will provide lithostratigraphy, geochronology and paleobathymetry.
Geomorphology revealed by horizontal slices (among other 3D imaging tools) will
identify diagnostic features such as river systems, shorelines, delta channels,
sediment failure scars, etc., none of which can be resolved in existing 2D
seismic data to the degree required to map shifting shallow-water depositional
settings in the vicinity of clinoform rollovers. For the general benefit of a
broad user community the PIs will coordinate and acquire a 3D seismic data
encompassing the three IODP drillsites on the inner-middle shelf of the New
Jersey (NJ) continental margin on R/V Marcus Langseth. Data will be made
available to the engaged scientific community to use as the foundation of
follow-on, PI- driven proposals that improve understanding of factors shaping
the NJ margin in particular, and that imprint the sedimentary record at
continental margins in general. 3D seismic imaging can now be applied to the NJ
margin to put these sampled records in a spatially accurate, stratigraphically
meaningful context. Such imagery will allow researchers to map sequences around
drill sites with a resolution and confidence previously unattainable, and to
analyze their spatial/temporal evolution. Objectives include: 1) establishing
the impact of known Ice House base-level changes on the stratigraphic record; 2)
providing greater understanding of the response of near-shore environments to
changes in elevation of global sea level (with special relevance to the current
relentless rise), and 3) determining the amplitudes/timing of global sea-level
changes during the mid-Cenozoic, which should help humanity put anthropogenic
base-level change in a proper long-term context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will collaboratively engage the
scientific community and generate widely accessible data for all users. Students
and early-career scientists will be mentored and involved in the cruise. The PIs
will produce exhibits and/or lectures hosted by the Rutgers Geology Museum.
Since the source of the sedimentary record offshore New Jersey fed a similar
pulse of sediments into the Gulf of Mexico, increasing knowledge of the
evolution of the NJ shelf may help improve strategies for hydrocarbon
exploration in the Gulf.