* 1260803
* Neutral-data Comparisons for Massive Multiple Testing in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Dan Spitzner, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 10/31/2015
* USD 119,999.00

This project contributes to ongoing efforts to understand the Bayesian approach
to data-analysis, which since at least the 1990s has continued a profound
expansion into mainstream statistical practice. The central concept is a novel
assessment of evidence in Bayesian hypothesis testing and model-choice
procedures, called a "neutral-data comparison," whose mechanisms dampen
sensitivity to the choice of prior distribution and consequently expand the
possibilities for powerful use of subjective information, especially vague
subjective information, in statistical analysis. The objective of the project is
to develop neutral-data comparisons into a comprehensive analysis tool. To this
end, the project will develop theory and practical-minded neutral-data
comparisons methodology for such model-choice problems as variable selection,
model-based clustering, and nonparametric clustering. Special strategies for
massive multiple-testing will be developed, to which neutral-data comparisons
contribute a novel framework for eliciting dependencies within the discrete
portion of the prior distribution. The project is guided by an applied interest
in developing Bayesian methodology for life-course analysis in the social
sciences, paralleling the established "optimal matching" technique for
clustering life-course trajectories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bayesian approach
to statistics identifies a critical role of subjective information in
quantitative analysis. The value of Bayesian results for substantive questions
has been noted by researchers in the social sciences. Neutral-data comparisons
are valuable in this context because their underlying theory interprets
subjective information in a way that expands the possibilities for its
meaningful and efficacious use in statistical hypothesis testing. They have
furthermore been shown to exhibit exceptionally strong performance in problems
that involve massive numbers of hypothesis tests, which arise commonly and with
increasing frequency in today?s information-rich, analytically sophisticated
era. The project will contribute new, powerful techniques to a number of
analysis methodologies that are widely used in the social sciences, as well as
to specialized methodologies that aim to understand variability in sequential
information obtained from life histories.