* 1260898
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  The Effect of the Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science (MITES) Program
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Lawrence Katz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 33,928.00

This research investigates policies that could increase the supply of college
graduates educated in a science, technology, engineering, or math (STEM) field,
either by encouraging students to undertake a STEM major, or by increasing the
retention of such students. In particular, this project will measure the
efficacy of one program, the Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science
(MITES), in increasing STEM participation and educational attainment. MITES is a
summer program held annually at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
that has been serving at-risk, high-achieving high school students for over 30
years. This project will conduct a rigorous, randomized evaluation of the MITES
summer enrichment program in order to assess the effect of MITES on the
educational attainment of its participants, as well as whether MITES increases
interest in STEM fields. The objective of the study is to give the strongest
possible evidence on the impact of the MITES program, and provide a breakthrough
in the effort to identify the barriers to STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating the impact of MITES is necessary and
valuable, both for the administration of the program itself and to further the
understanding of how to encourage educational attainment and participation in
STEM among underrepresented student populations. The MITES program is resource
intensive and has significant capacity constraints. With so much need in the
community of underserved students, it is important to be sure that universities
are reaching out and offering enrichment opportunities as efficiently as
possible. An evaluation can help illustrate the impact of MITES relative to
MIT's other programs, as well as which groups benefit most. Finally, estimates
of the impact of MITES could help other universities and partners systematically
adopt a similar program design and serve more students in
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adds to a growing literature that
rigorously evaluates education interventions. The target population of high-
achieving, at-risk students has been largely overlooked, despite documented lags
among such students in college completion, STEM participation, and quality of
the college of matriculation (Adelman 2006; Pallais and Turner 2006). In
addition, a recent literature emphasizes the importance of the period
immediately preceding college applications in influencing the choice to apply
to, enroll in, and complete college, and the choice to apply for financial aid
(Bettinger et al. 2009; Carrell and Sacerdote 2012; Avery and Kane 2004). This
research project explores how interventions during this sensitive time can also
impact a student's choice of major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to conduct an
in-depth impact evaluation of the MITES program, the researchers will randomly
assign a subset of MITES applicants to either participate in a summer enrichment
program implemented through the MIT Office of Engineering Outreach Programs
(OEOP), or to be part of a comparison group. Using data from the OEOP, the
National Student Clearinghouse, surveys, and social networking websites, the
researchers will identify the causal impact of the OEOP's programs on education
investment decisions and STEM participation in particular. The study will
measure changes in the educational attainment of subjects, including: the
quality of the college of matriculation, as estimated by college rankings; the
proportion of students who complete a degree; the average amount of time taken
by students to complete a degree; a student's cumulative college GPA; and
whether a student majors in a STEM field. This project will make an important
addition to the research on educational interventions that strive to increase
the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields and higher
education.