* 1260255
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Experience of Food Insecurity in the  Sociocultural Context
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,162.00

University of Florida doctoral student Douglas A. Monroe, supervised by Dr.
Clarence C. Gravlee, will undertake a six-month investigation of food
insecurity. Globally, food insecurity is driven largely by food scarcity, but in
the United States some people suffer from food insecurity even though food is
abundant. The project will address four related exploratory questions: (1) How
do African Americans who vary in terms of their economic resources, neighborhood
context, and household composition experience food insecurity over time?; (2) in
what ways does food insecurity mediate their dietary behaviors?; (3) what
social, physical, and macro-level forces influence food insecurity?; and (4)
what sociocultural and environmental factors distinguish African Americans who
experience food insecurity from those who do not?

To address these questions the Co-PI will recruit a sub-sample of 32 African
Americans who were randomly selected to participate in a broader epidemiological
study and conduct a series of in-depth ethnographic interviews over the course
of six months. At two-month intervals the Co-PI will visit respondents and
elicit information about their household and neighborhood food environments,
experiences of food insecurity, coping strategies, and also assess their dietary
behaviors using a mixed methods approach. By conducting three interviews with
each respondent over the study period, the Co-PI will be able to track seasonal
variation and identify the corresponding variables associated with food
insecurity.

Applying an ecological framework to the study of food insecurity and focusing on
the sociocultural dimensions of food will help to explain differences in food
security status among African Americans. The results will serve to disentangle
the experience of food insecurity from food insufficiency, generate new
hypotheses about the causes and consequences of food insecurity, and identify
variables that should be considered in future research.

Tallahassee represents a locale with substantial interest in neighborhood food
environments as they relate to food security and nutritional health. Various
organizations and community-academic partnerships such as the Tallahassee Food
Network (TFN) and the Health Equity Alliance of Tallahassee (HEAT) have promoted
sustainable food, urban gardening, and better nutritional health. Through the
dissemination of its findings, this project will improve the representation of
historical underrepresented groups in food security studies and increase the
scientific knowledge of scholars, policymakers, and community organizations such
that they can advance their goals and activities.