* 1260202
* Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Renu Kumar, Minneapolis Community and Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 599,538.00

Minneapolis Community and Technical College, a uniquely diverse and urban
Minnesota college, is providing a pathway to student success in science and
technology through the MCTC Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Scholars (S-STEM) program. This program helps create a more diverse, better-
prepared STEM professional community by enabling not only eligible
underrepresented, underserved students to succeed in science and technology, but
also by enabling other high achieving students to further their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous NSF awards at MCTC have a strong
history of student success; 89% of students participating in the S-STEM program
graduate, transfer to a baccalaureate program, or are on track for graduation or
transfer. This new support is enabling the institution to strengthen and improve
its efforts by stepping up recruiting, serving more students, creating alumni
support group and incorporating new campus resources. Improved recruiting
strategies include leveraging digital resources, student clubs, and campus
events concurrently to increase the pool of qualified applicants. New campus
resources to be incorporated include integrated advising, tutors linked to
courses, new student interest groups in STEM, and the MCTC Undergraduate
Research Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MCTC S-STEM project is creating a
more diverse, better-prepared STEM professional community by enabling
academically talented, financially needy students to succeed in science and
technology. The creative and successful design of this project is based on
combining scholarship monies with peer cohort and faculty mentoring support. The
commitment of accomplished faculty from STEM disciplines, relevant
administrators, financial aid staff, and student support staff, as well as top-
notch facilities, support services, long-standing connections with baccalaureate
institutions, and outstanding contacts in the local STEM industry make the
program sustainable. Furthermore, the MCTC S-STEM Scholars program is also
serving first-generation students, low-income students, students of color, and
other high achieving students. In so doing, it is helping to prepare a diverse,
well-qualified workforce that can strengthen both the regional and global
economy. The results of MCTC S-STEM are reported via the MCTC website and
faculty presentations at local and national conferences. The program is also
leaving a lasting legacy by creating a network of program alumni to support STEM
students, by increasing the diversity of students earning degrees in STEM
fields, and by enhancing support services that benefit future generations of
STEM students.