* 1260983
* Investigating the timing and consequences of Pleistocene megafaunal population collapse in the Neotropics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 412,500.00

At the end of the last ice age, 15,000 years ago, the Americas had many species
large mammals (Pleistocene megafauna) that were more diverse than those of the
modern Serengeti. About that time, they quickly became extinct. There is much
controversy about why animals such as big cats, elephants, horses, camels and
ground sloths suddenly disappeared. Some scientists blame climate change, while
others blame the arrival of human hunters. In the last few years,
paleoecologists have developed a new way to investigate the population
fluctuations of these extinct mammals: they count microscopic spores that were
produced long ago, grew only on large amounts of dung, and are now preserved in
lake sediments. The sudden disappearance of these spores in sediment cores is an
excellent indicator of the disappearance of the Pleistocene megafauna. In this
proposal, scientists will investigate the timing of the megafaunal population
decline at sites in Panama, Brazil and Peru, and compare them with very detailed
records of past climate change, and with the archaeological record. By doing so,
scientists will be able to determine if climate change or the arrival of humans
most likely caused the mass extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end of the last
ice age was the most recent time when climates warmed almost as rapidly as under
modern conditions, and there was huge instability in precipitation regimes.
Investigating the potential link between extinction events and abrupt climate
change has clear relevance to modern concerns. To observe which, if any, climate
changes triggered population reductions or recoveries thousands of years ago,
has repercussions for agricultural policy as well as conservation. Similarly,
establishing whether the largest mammalian extinction event in the last 6
million years can be assigned to human actions is relevant to how we perceive
our relationship to the natural world. Finally, the project will train students
in paleoecology and produce materials for dissemination to large audiences.