* 1260744
* Intermediation, Information, and Diversity in Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Mihai Manea, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 276,120.00

Networks are ubiquitous in economic and social contexts. Individual decisions
and welfare are affected by local connections, as well as by global network
architecture. The research funded by this award investigates how the networks in
which agents interact influence outcomes in a variety of market and group
activities. There are three distinct projects. The first two investigate the
impact of network structure on trade intermediation and information diffusion.
The third project examines what network features are essential for the
persistence of diversity in socially influenced choices.

The first project studies intermediation in networks. The theory suggests that
the seller's profit depends not only on the number of middlemen along the path
of trade, but also on the complete collection of competing paths of access to
buyers offered by each middleman. The seller prefers to trade along paths that
entail local competition among intermediaries with similar resale values.
Trading paths do not necessarily minimize intermediation or maximize welfare. A
decomposition of the network into layers of intermediation power characterizes
equilibrium resale profits. Local competition is exploited within layers and
hold-up problems arise in transactions across layers. This research has
implications for combating organized crime and illegal trade, preventing
corruption in hierarchical structures, and efficient production in supply
chains.

The second project investigates how information (technological innovations,
research ideas, news and gossip) is priced and diffused across the links of a
network. In contrast to the research on intermediation, the information good is
non-rival; any player who gets possession of the good may subsequently replicate
and resell it to an arbitrary number of uninformed neighbors. The positions of
the initial sources of information in the network affect the profits that actors
accrue from acquiring and reselling the information and shape the diffusion
process. Sellers compete for customers and establish individual spheres of
influence in the network. The main objective is to prove that profits are
confined within the blocks of a certain network partition. Links with endpoints
within the same block constitute bottlenecks and play an important role in
extracting profits. Links bridging across blocks are not critical in connecting
the network and impose negative externalities on sellers.

The third project considers a setting where players situated in a network need
to take actions or form opinions that conform with a majority of their
neighbors. Unanimous coordination on any particular action constitutes an
equilibrium. Many networks also feature equilibria with diverse action choices.
The aim of this research is to characterize the networks for which diversity is
robust to the introduction of stochastic mutations in the best response dynamic.

The tools and methods developed in this research will provide broader impact by
allowing firms and policymakers to better understand how network relationships
affect market outcomes.