* 1260813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Financial Circuit Breakers:  Theory and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Jacopo Magnani, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/28/2015
* USD 25,925.00

Although now widespread in financial markets, circuit breakers -- mandated halts
in trading when prices fall very rapidly -- remain quite controversial among
researchers. The research adapts recently developed techniques from the theory
of financial market runs and from continuous time random processes, in order to
build a theoretical model that clarifies the potential benefits of circuit
breakers. The focus is on runs on a financial market induced by fear of
liquidity shocks. Theoretically, a temporary trading halt may eliminate the
inefficiency caused by early liquidations when fundamentals are good. A circuit
breaker operates by providing agents with time to learn about the fundamentals,
when private incentives to wait for better information are insufficient. The
other proposed contribution, perhaps more important, is empirical. The
laboratory experiments to be conducted will be informed by the new theoretical
model. More specifically, the experiments will compare laboratory financial
markets with and without circuit breakers in two different parametric settings:
one where circuit breakers theoretically should succeed in restoring financial
stability and another where circuit breakers are expected to fail. These
predictions are drawn from a model based on rational agents. The current project
will analyze whether they are robust to the actual behavior of human subjects.

The broader impact includes the ongoing policy debate on the regulation of
financial markets. Circuit breakers are now widespread, but are not yet
supported by a scientific consensus. Using the tools of game theory and
experimental economics to redesign circuit breakers can lead to important
welfare gains, especially in this time of financial instability. The study will
highlight the key determinants of the effectiveness of circuit breakers, such as
the quality of the information available to the market participants and the
investors' psychology.