* 1260631
* Political Communication and Accountability in Uganda
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 316,982.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many developing economies, poor social and
economic outcomes are attributed in part to political decision-making that is
unresponsive to the needs and preferences of citizens. Weaknesses of governance
structures and social welfare in turn are associated with fragile security
outcomes and economic failures that may in turn have implications for US
economic and security interests. In light of these adverse outcomes, large
amounts of development aid has been provided by the United States to bolster
democracy and governance interventions in developing areas. We focus on one such
intervention implemented by the Parliament of Uganda and the National Democratic
Institute (NDI) with support for the US National Endowment for Democracy (NED).
The intervention seeks to improve accountability by opening a new channel of
communication between Members of Parliament (MPs) and their constituents,
allowing citizens to send messages to MPs via an SMS platform in parliament.
Uniquely the intervention is structured with a random assignment of MPs into
treatment and with a random assignment of the cost of communication facing
voters. The experimental structure provides an unprecedented opportunity to
assess the political effects of citizen communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit lies in
contributions to our understanding of the effects of the structure of channels
of political communication on political behavior. The study contributes to
debates on the role of technology in political participation, assessing how the
channels and price of access affects the types of bias in the information
politicians receive; the role of cost in the ability of politicians to extract
signals from constituent communication; and the impediments to political
communication. Taking advantage of a unique collaboration with the National
Democratic Institute and the Ugandan Parliament, this study combines a strong
identification strategy with extraordinary access to data, including face-to-
face surveys with Members of Parliament and a sample of their constituents, and
all direct communication between politicians and constituents. The study is one
of the few field experimental studies to operate at the level of national
political elites, pushing the frontiers on the use of experimental methods to
address theoretically motivated questions of elite level politics. In addition,
the study pushes the frontiers of research using mixed methods by piloting the
use of an approach to formally integrate qualitative tests (from intensive
analysis) with quantitative tests (from an extensive analysis) in a Bayesian
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results of this research are
likely to affect institutional choice in Uganda and possibly elsewhere.
Critically, the results are relevant for the Ugandan Parliamentary Commission
which needs to decide how to develop the system. More broadly, while there is
much enthusiasm for interventions of this form, the Uganda experience to date
suggests that actual take up can be low. This research will provide evidence on
effectiveness as well as an analysis of the impediments to success that can help
guide US and other democracy supporting interventions. The study is specifically
designed to examine whether an unmediated and impersonal IT-based communication
channel can increase the access of marginalized populations. While many
stakeholders hope changes will be for the good, a key motivation of this study
is precisely to be able to assess biases and impediments to communication from
marginalized populations. The study strengthens capacity among US and
international researchers as well as among practitioners. This is achieved
through continuous interactions with practitioners, through collaboration with
developing country researchers, and through the involvement of graduate students
at Columbia University in experimental design and implementation.