* 1260798
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Dynamic Network Models for the Scalable Analysis of Networks with Missing or Sampled Joint Edge/Vertex Evolution
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,140.00

Interest in the collection and analysis of dynamic network data has increased
dramatically over the last decade. This growth coincides with technological
developments, such as computational resources and the Internet, that allow for
improved measurement, collection, and modeling of inter-temporal network data.
Examples of social networks include structures of friendships, job leads, or
emergency information ties among individuals; joint ventures among firms; and
alliances among nations. Modern data collection through sensors (e.g.,
cellphones), surveys, and database systems has allowed for larger and more
detailed dynamic network data collection than was possible in past decades;
however, even with improved measurement tools there exists a persistent problem
of missing data, either by design (e.g., sampling) or out of design (e.g.,
machine failure). Thus, the collection of data on large dynamic networks often
results in missing data, which requires new methodology for estimation and
simulation. This doctoral dissertation research project will employ
computational methods, exponential family theory, and a latent missing data
framework to develop models that will be evaluated with real-world empirical
cases. The project consists of several linked activities. The research will
extend current missing data techniques employed in the statistical analysis of
social network data to the context of dynamic networks with and without vertex
dynamics. Several competing likelihood-based missing data methods under the
framework of multiple imputation will be developed. In addition, the research
will evaluate these missing data models through a series of simulation
experiments to compare the efficiency, scalability, bias, accuracy, and
predictive accuracy of these missing data techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will improve and extend the current state of the art in missing and
sampled data methods for dynamic network models. These methods will allow
improved inference and prediction for dynamic social network processes (e.g.,
online social networks, disaster response networks, etc.), problems of immediate
importance to sociologists, statisticians, computer scientists, demographers,
epidemiologists, and public policy researchers. The test cases used within this
research are drawn from real-world cases of interest to the greater public, so
these methods should enhance the work of practitioners in hazards research,
public health, and public policy. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, support is provided to enable a promising student to
establish a strong, independent research career.