* 1260853
* Collaborative Research: The Negative Effects of High Frequency Trading and Transparency in Dynamic Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Andrzej Skrzypacz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 153,546.00

This award funds research on the design of dynamic markets under conditions of
asymmetric information. The designer has a limited set of instruments, and once
the design is established the market operates as a competitive market. The goal
of the project is to determine how restrictions on the timing of market
transactions or mandating transparency about market buy and sell offers affect
market outcomes and the overall efficiency of trade in the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four distinct components. The first
compares efficiency of market outcomes for different designs that differ in
terms of how frequently the market is open for trades. For example, the team
compares outcomes in markets in which buyers make continuous offers to outcomes
in markets where after the first offer there is a lock-up period during which no
trades can be made. The research establishes conditions under which this kind of
trade restriction improves the overall functioning of the market. The second
component considers the pros and cons of transparency of past offers in dynamic
markets. The research demonstrates that market equilibria are very different
when past rejected offers are public information. Less transparency results in
more efficient trade. The third component considers possible government
interventions in markets with dynamic adverse selection. The results suggest
that a policy of holding periodic auctions and subsidizing some initial trades
can improve market efficiency. The final component considers competition between
marketplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides broader impact by
shedding new light on the consequences of high-frequency trading, transparency
of order flows and certain market institutions found in financial markets. The
results will be useful for evaluation of government policy, from regulation of
financial markets and competition between marketplaces to a direct intervention
by purchases of assets in so called 'frozen' markets to re-establish liquidity.