* 1260910
* CAREER: A Simulation Environment for Studying Aging and Degradation of Structures and Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Wilkins Aquino, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 17,838.00

Abstract :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Degradation of structures and materials in the
civil infrastructure is one of the main challenges that engineers face today.
This CAREER project will develop an advanced simulation environment for modeling
degradation of structures and materials using a multi-physics approach and
object-oriented design. To limit the scope of the project, the simulation
environment will be developed in the context of a specific application:
corrosion in reinforced concrete structures. This research project will
integrate fundamental theories and computational tools to model the complete
corrosion-induced damage process in reinforced concrete. The approach to be
followed include the description of the coupled multi-physics phenomena (i.e.
heat and mass transport, electrochemistry, and mechanical damage) through
nonlinear systems of coupled partial differential equations and the
implementation of numerical methods such as finite elements for the solution of
these systems of equations. The processes involved in corrosion-induced damage
have been studied separately in the past, but a holistic approach that allows
for modeling the complete corrosion degradation process is still lacking. The
proposed research will develop new knowledge for reliably coupling moisture,
heat, and ionic transport, generation of corrosion products, and the ensuing
mechanical damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
stems from the development of a holistic and multidisciplinary approach for
studying degradation of structural systems. Moreover, the simulation environment
developed in this research will serve as a virtual laboratory for studying
complete life cycles of structures, facing one of the modern challenges of
computational mechanics. Deterioration of infrastructure deeply affects our
society. Invariably, all structures degrade over time and it is imperative that
we learn how to predict changes in the safety limits of structures. The
realistic assessment of reduction in structural capacity using a holistic
approach is still needed. This research project addresses these issues from the
context of corrosion in reinforced concrete, but uses a general approach easily
expandable to other deterioration mechanisms found in structures such as
aircrafts, cars, nuclear containers, dams, space vehicles, etc. In addition, the
multi-physics framework used in this research and its implementation using an
object-oriented design will serve as paradigm for the solution of complex
problems found in other engineering and science areas such as biology, physics,
chemistry, materials science, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Degradation of
structures is intrinsically a multi-phenomena process, which requires
multidisciplinary thinking. Students involved in research and classes related to
this project will have to gain knowledge from a variety of areas such as heat
and mass transport, physical chemistry, solid mechanics, and computational
methods for the solution of partial differential equations. The object-oriented
design approach adopted in this research will allow for easy expansion and
adaptation of the software to other deterioration mechanisms found in other
areas of engineering and science. The proposed simulation environment will be
open source and available to the research and practicing community. The
educational component of the project encompasses curriculum expansion,
internships at a national laboratory, and outreach programs. The project aims at
increasing the number of Hispanic students that pursue engineering and science
degrees. The Hispanic population in the US is growing at an expeditious rate,
while the number of Hispanic students that pursue engineering degrees is
currently very small.&lt;br/&gt;