* 1260205
* 2013 Cardiac Arrhythmia Mechanisms GRC, February 17-22, 2013, Ventura, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Mario Delmar, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,000.00

1260205&lt;br/&gt;Delmar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The main
objective of this Gordon Research Conference (GRC) is to serve as a vehicle for
scientific dialogue between and among experts and trainees interested in the
fundamental mechanisms of cardiac arrhythmias, which are a leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in the industrialized world. The conference has taken
place every two years since 2003. Thanks in part to support from the NSF, this
conference has become the premier forum for free and informal exchange of novel,
unpublished and high impact information in this field. This GRC is a unique
stage for interdisciplinary discourse, networking, and creative design of new
research. Great strides in the understanding of cardiac arrhythmias have
resulted from the marriage of cardiac electrophysiology with biomedical
engineering. Novel approaches to study cell/tissue/organ electrical behavior
will be discussed in the conference, including new imaging modalities, tissue
engineering, single-molecule fluorescence microscopy, scanning ion conductance
microscopy, optogenetics, intracardiac and epicardial electrode mapping, MRI and
computer modeling, among others. Other presentations will discuss novel
experimental biological models (zebrafish, stem cells, and novel transgenic
animals) that provide exciting platforms for implementation of advances in
engineering. Additional talks will focus on the mechanisms of arrhythmias at the
systems level, an area where MRI and computer modeling have merged with clinical
cardiology to gain insight into the origin of arrhythmias in humans. The meeting
brings together outstanding senior investigators and promising young scientists
at the forefront of research, with expertise in cell/molecular biology,
electrophysiology, biophysics, biomedical engineering, instrument design,
mathematical biology, systems biology and clinical cardiology. No other existing
conference provides a comparable forum where experts and trainees in biomedical
engineering share the floor with those interested in the biology of the cardiac
rhythm for informal and in-depth discussion. The educational value of this
framework is extremely high, well recognized and as such, well sought-after by
trainees and mentors alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
conference has broad and substantial impact. Cardiac arrhythmias are a major
cause of mortality and morbidity in the developed world. Yet, the mechanisms of
deadly arrhythmias remain to be elucidated. Basic research is desperately
needed, so that new avenues of understanding can be opened, for future benefit
of the population at risk. One of the keys to success for this GRC is the
fostering of an informal, friendly environment that facilitates open discussion.
The conference is, from beginning to end, an exercise in dissemination of high
impact science, and in training of new investigators. Trainees find this an
ideal environment to network with peers and faculty. Seniority barriers are
easier to tear down, providing the perfect environment for bi-directional
teaching and learning. The interdisciplinary nature of the conference allows a
student of one discipline to interact closely with an expert in a parallel
field, facilitating discovery of common interests and hopefully, the joining of
ventures. The organizers have consistently placed great effort to increase the
participation of minorities (in fact, the present Chair is Mexican-American).
Participation of women has increased progressively as well. In case the meeting
becomes oversubscribed, the priority is given to women and minorities. Several
approaches have been implemented to foster scientific exchange between trainees
and faculty. The requested financial assistance will help increase the number of
women and minority participants, particularly at the junior
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this Gordon Research Conference is the
only one of its kind that brings together experts and trainees in engineering
and biomedicine for a dynamic educational experience based on the free exchange
of novel data, and the development of new ideas, with one common goal: to
increase our understanding of the mechanisms that regulate the heart beat.