* 1260520
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   Marginalized Women and Development in South India
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Cole, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 15,236.00

Kimberly Walters (University of Chicago), under the supervision of Dr. Jennifer
Cole, will research how individuals who engage in socially stigmatized work
leverage international debates about exploitative labor practices. This proposal
examines a group of marginalized women in Hyderabad, India as they attempt to
not only secure international development funds but to also negotiate a new role
for themselves in the ongoing project of Indian nationalism. Walters' research
will explore the development industry's influences on culture change and ways in
which recipients of "development" turn such initiatives to their own purposes.
Her ethnography will problematize the binary between "empowerment" and
"victimization" that has polarized various NGOs and other organizations that
work with marginalized women, and question the widespread claim that women
remain in these social stigmatized occupations only out of economic coercion,
and demonstrate ways in which international rehabilitation efforts are
entrenching conservative gender roles in India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Walters
will collect data through (1) ethnographic observations among community-based
organizations (CBOs) and at public events in which these workers collectively
represent themselves; (2) interviews with both NGO personnel who seek to
"empower" women within this work and those who alternatively seek to
"rehabilitate" them; with leaders who interface between the development industry
and workers; with workers who are the targets of development strategies; and
with politicians, police, and judges who control the allotment of social
services that Indian citizens require; and (3) written and visual materials
through which multinational organizations, NGOs and unions represent themselves
to various publics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of Walters' research will
be relevant to public health officials and to the Indian legal system, which is
presently considering various legislation related to labor reform of labor
practices.