* 1260909
* Settlement System and Landscape Dynamics: An Integrated Archaeological and Geomorphological Study
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Donald Schwert, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 145,163.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Jeffrey Clark and Donald
Schwert will lead a multidisciplinary team in research designed to address
critical issues of human migration, colonization, and subsequent cultural
development in the central Pacific. Undertaken from the perspective of human
ecodynamics, this project is a case study of an island environment and its
prehistoric human occupation that bears on larger questions of human-environment
co-evolutionary relationships. Integrated archaeological, osteological,
geomorphological, and pedological studies will investigate the complex, dynamic
relationships between human populations and their environments on the island of
Ofu, Manu'a Group, American Samoa. The project will provide tests of core
elements of the conventional model of central Pacific prehistory and the origin
of Polynesian peoples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conventional model holds that
the colonists of central Polynesia were Lapita peoples from islands to the west.
"Lapita" refers to a people or group of peoples that shared a "cultural complex"
for which a distinctive dentate-stamped pottery is diagnostic. Lapita colonizers
came to the region perhaps 3000 BP and were farmers and fishers who relied
heavily on exchange of valued resources between communities. Since Lapita
populations were the first to arrive in the Central Pacific, they are regarded
as ancestral to later Polynesian populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
researchers are increasingly calling this model into question on a set of
issues, and Samoa is strategically situated in terms of both geographic location
and previous research to allow for critical tests of those issues. Project
investigations will be conducted at three locations on Ofu shown to possess, or
hold potential for, early cultural deposits: Va'oto, Coconut Grove, and Ofu
Village. Because landscape change influenced settlement systems,
geomorphological modeling of the paleo-landscapes will be carried out in
conjunction with excavations. The project has four objectives: 1) establish the
time of human colonization; 2) construct and test models of the human settlement
distribution; 3) test a set of models for landscape evolution; and 4) construct
a model of the geomorphological dynamics of the Ofu coast. Each objective will
be addressed through the testing of a set of hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in the
intersection of archaeological, biological, geological, and pedological evidence
to evaluate multiple working models of island colonization and subsequent
adaptation. The overarching goal is to construct a new model of the human
colonization and subsequent settlement system in the context of a changing
environment during the first millennium BC. This model will have applicability
to coastal environments on other islands throughout the central Pacific. The
results of the research will make an important contribution to the understanding
of Samoan and Polynesian prehistory, human prehistory and colonization impacts
more generally, and human ecodynamics in the broadest sense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the conduct of "community archaeology," local
community members will be engaged with the scientific team to create cultural
heritage knowledge relevant for professional and local stakeholders, alike. The
project will serve to educate graduate and undergraduate students from the US,
American Samoa, and Independent Samoa, many of whom are from backgrounds
underrepresented in the sciences.