* 1260423
* US Efforts to Influence Government Policies on Human Trafficking
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Judith Kelley, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,658.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the efforts of the US
government to influence countries around the world to fight human trafficking.
The project's intellectual impact is to improve our understanding of diplomacy
and of how the international community can encourage governments to undertake
domestic reforms through different strategies such as persuasion, shaming and
economic pressure. The project thus contributes to core questions about power
and mechanisms of influence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US has a strong program
against trafficking in persons: every year since 2001 the US State Department
has reported publically on the efforts of countries around the world to combat
human trafficking. The reports themselves are similar to other State Department
reports on freedom of religion or human rights, but they differ in one important
respect: the issuance of a grade for each country. The State Department uses the
reports and the grades to shame and praise countries and issue recommendations,
and, backed by national legislation, to threaten recalcitrant states with
sanctions. In each country, US embassy staff engage with officials, non-
governmental and intergovernmental organizations, and encourage countries to
create national anti-trafficking action plans, pass laws, or build shelters. The
US also requires national authorities to provide data about their efforts, and
criticizes them if they do not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After ten years, opinions
of the program are mixed. This project examines the global reactions to the TIP
program and its contribution to promoting some of its recommended anti-
trafficking policies in countries around the world. Has the US been able to
advance its preferred policies and if so, which states have been most or least
responsive, what strategies have worked and which have backfired? The project
will rely on multiple sources and methods. The author has gathered over 9000
documents related to diplomacy, news and organizational reports and has also
built a database of about 500 relevant NGOs around the world. The research will
combine quantitative analysis with content analysis of documents, extensive
interviews, and case studies to trace the developments on the ground. The
project will proceed at three levels. Level one seeks to explain variation in
how countries react to receiving bad grades. Level two focuses on a sub-
component of US efforts to push for domestic anti-trafficking laws, and will use
both a global quantitative study and a detailed analysis of 26 countries for
which the documentary record on the issue is particularly rich. Level three goes
deeper using only 7-8 countries to analyze the effect of the entirety of US
efforts in the context of other local and international actors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will be twofold. First is the
practical policy impact: Trafficking is a human rights tragedy that destroys the
lives of more than 2.4 million men, women and children every year. Because data
on trafficking are still unreliable, this project cannot assess whether the
current policy solutions reduce trafficking volume, but it can assess whether
diplomatic efforts are succeeding in getting countries to bolster their anti-
trafficking efforts and offer prescriptions for improvements. This can be
relevant far beyond the specific focus of this project to other efforts to
promote policies such as democracy, human rights and various political reforms.
The second impact is on education: The project will involve students in teaching
and research opportunities, and disseminate project findings widely through
conferences, lectures, publications and, with the PI in a school of public
policy, also concerted policy engagement.