* 1260180
* Collaborative Research:  Completing single- and cross-hole hydrogeologic and microbial experiments: Juan de Fuca Flank
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Keir Becker, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2016
* USD 112,733.00

In 2010, IODP exp. 327 launched series of experiments based on instrumentation
placed in 6 boreholes (Holes 1026B, 1027C, 1301A, 1301B, 1362A, and 1362B) on
and near the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JDFR). The experiments were designed to examine
hydrological and biological processes in basaltic ocean crust. Major issues to
be addressed include overall permeability, the magnitudes, velocity and
directions of fluid, solute,and heat transport,constraints on the fluid storage
properties of crust, determining how fluid reservoirs respond to seismic
perturbations, and investigating the variability, diversity, and metabolism of
resident microbial populations. This project will recover sensors and samplers
in the instrumented boreholes(CORKs),access data and samples, collect biological
incubators placed at depth within the boreholes, and seal the CORKs. All of
these activities are needed for the completion of the JDFR
experiments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once the data and samples are retrieved, the
PI's will develop new numerical models for the hydrology (permeability,
thickness and extent of permeable zones, connectivity, direction of flow, and
anisotropy) of ocean crust based on the results of flow tests. T sensors will
enable thermal structure to be determined in conjunction with flow parameters.
DNA will be analyzed via ?16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes as well as select full-
length Sanger-style sequencing and gene fingerprinting techniques.? The PI's
will look at diversity, shared species, emergence and disappearance of groups.
Metagenomic work will be done on some samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts include training of 4 shipboard educators, with an emphasis on
recruiting underrepresented groups for these positions, teacher workshops, and
special training for undergraduate and graduate students and post-docs. Research
team includes grads, undergrads, and post-docs.