* 1260417
* Damage Sensing by the Bacterial Nucleotide Excision Repair Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 07/12/2012,11/30/2014
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2014
* USD 130,021.00

Intellectual Merits. Duplex DNA, the information repository of the cell, is
easily damaged. Cells have evolved several pathways that mount biochemical
responses to the presence of such damage. One of these is the nucleotide
excision repair (NER) pathway, which is distinguished by the ability to process
a chemically diverse set of damage. In bacteria, the first steps in NER are
performed by three proteins: UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. A large body of work has
described the components that mediate NER and details of how they operate. The
UvrA/UvrB ensemble recognizes damage and cooperates with UvrC and other factors
to restore the original sequence. The structure of this large ~300 kDa UvrA/UvrB
damage sensor and processor is unknown and this has stymied experiments to
understand its mechanism of action. The goal of this project is to obtain a
structure-based understanding of nucleotide excision repair. The specific aims
address the following questions: 1) How does UvrA employ ATP to sense damaged
DNA? and 2) How do UvrA and UvrB cooperate to process DNA damage? This work
extends on the structure of UvrA and the first-ever view of the UvrA/UvrB
ensemble. Understanding the structure and function of the NER pathway is
important because of its central role in maintaining the integrety genetic
information against damage and its role in DNA replication, gene expression,
evolution and cellular processes such as apoptosis, senescence and
tumorigenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The investigator developed
an integrated multi-disciplinary teaching and research program in biochemistry,
cell biology and structural biology targeting juniors, seniors and doctoral
students. Lecture materials include elements from current and past research. In
addition, the investigator tutors undergraduate biochemistry majors. A large
group of talented undergraduates has trained in the investigators laboratory.
The science is interdisciplinary and involves molecular biological, biochemical,
biophysical, and structural approaches. Results are published in peer-reviewed
journals. Research materials are made available to the scientific community in
several ways, including depositions in the Protein Data Bank.