* 1260005
* Scholarships for Preparing the Global Engineer for Tomorrow's Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 06/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of the GE-STEM program at Tennessee State University (TSU) is to create
an environment that supports the transformation of academically talented, yet
financially needy students into Global Engineers (GE). The program has three
academic pathways designed to equip 60 engineering students with the technical,
professional and life-language learning skills required to succeed in tomorrow's
workforce and in competitive graduate engineering programs. These pathways are
aligned with strategies advocated by the National Academy of Engineering:
Research, Retention, Responsibility, and Readiness. The project is creating a
synergistic environment that leverages the success of existing on-campus
professional development programs, and TSU's six federally funded programs
focused on STEM student research success and ensure the project's
sustainability. This synergy is supported by an advisory board with six
directors of the STEM funded projects to share best practices and interchange of
ideas to increase STEM student recruitment, retention, and graduate rates, and
with local and regional support of middle Tennessee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GE-STEM project provides scholarships to students during their sophomore and
junior years. GE-STEM scholars complete a formalized rotational research or
professional development program through a global experience to better prepare
for a professional engineering career. The professional development program
provides students mentoring, peer-tutoring and pre-college counseling
opportunities. Senior GE-STEM scholars who enroll in professional development
programs are involved in organizing on-campus academic mentoring and tutoring
sessions. GE-STEM scholars enrolled in the optional research programs are poised
to engage in senior level research and enroll in competitive graduate
educational programs. The research experience allows sophomore and junior level
students to perform research activities in state-of-the-art facilities on topics
such as nano-technology, vehicle human performance, visualization, sensor
networking, material science and robotics. GE-STEM scholars present or publish
their research and professional development experience and demonstrate their
global learning via language competency or a foreign exchange experience. A Six-
Sigma approach allows the GE-STEM project to monitor and control student
academic success quantitatively.