* 1260368
* Collaborative Research:  Isotopic Fractionation in Snow (IFRACS)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Peter Blossey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2017
* USD 216,438.00

This collaborative project seeks to improve understanding of precipitation
processes in mixed phase orographic clouds and the variation in the isotopic
signature of snowfall that is associated with aerosol effects on cloud
microphysics. The study will use measurements and modeling of the isotopic
content of water vapor, cloud water, and snow at the Desert Research Institute's
(DRI's) Storm Peak Laboratory (SPL, altitude 3210 m) to test the hypotheses
that: 1) variations in the isotopic composition of snow associated with riming
and riming inhibition are significant; and 2) the isotopic composition and
chemistry of cloud droplets near cloud base and falling snow are sufficient to
resolve the relative roles of vapor deposition and riming in snow growth.

Model simulations with a new isotope-enabled version of the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model will be used to test observation-based inferences on
snow formation by riming and vapor deposition, the altitudes at which they
occur, and the effects of variation of aerosol concentration on the isotopic
composition of snowfall. The sensitivity of the isotopic composition of snowfall
to aerosol-induced changes in the rimed mass fraction will be evaluated with
model simulations over a range of aerosol concentration based on observational
case studies representing a variety of meteorological and synoptic conditions
during wintertime storms at SPL.

Intellectual Merit: Riming of ice crystals in wintertime orographic clouds
significantly enhances their water content and the amount of water deposited in
snowfall. The isotopic composition of precipitation at a given location reflects
local cloud processes as well as the history of upwind condensation, evaporation
and mixing. In the work, the impact of aerosol-induced changes in mixed phase
orographic clouds on the isotopic content of snowfall will be explored.
Inhibition of snow growth by riming due to aerosol-induced reduction of cloud
droplet size has been observed in wintertime storms at SPL.

Broader Impact: The contribution of isotope-enabled microphysical models to the
WRF community during this project will allow for broader application of these
methodologies in studies of general circulation and the water cycle. The
isotopic signal recorded in glacial ice has been used as a proxy record of past
climates. Low-level riming over glacial ice may contribute to a component of the
isotopic signal that is independent of global temperature. This project involves
the participation and training of graduate students from DRI and Harvard in the
field program and modeling studies. During the field experiment season, SPL will
host atmospheric science field courses from the University of Wisconsin, North
Carolina State University, and the University of Colorado for undergraduate and
graduate students. As part of this work, a series of lectures will be presented
to each of these classes on the use of isotopic signatures in environmental
science. Reports on SPL research projects have appeared on CNN, NBC, National
Public Radio, National Geographic Explorer, local television stations, in
newspapers across the U.S., and the NCAR EOL Channel
(http://tinyurl.com/ISPAscience). SPL is integrally involved in the Steamboat
Weather Summit of meteorologists from television stations around the country.
These activities will coincide with the winter field study at SPL and a talk on
this work will be presented at the Weather Summit. The investigators will also
present a community lecture in Steamboat Springs and an "open house" at SPL to
share the scientific motivation of this research. Finally, a curriculum
developed to provide middle school students with hand-on learning focused on
meteorology and climate will continue with the project and have classes observe
weather balloons launches during the field study.