* 1260026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Analyzing Health and Environmental Risk in the Ecuadorian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Margaret Wiener, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,748.00

University of North Carolina doctoral student Amelia Fiske, under the guidance
of Dr. Margaret Wiener, will explore how the categories used by those auditing
and investigating the environmental and health impacts of extractive industries
reflect perceptions that emerge from their methods of data collection and
analysis. The researcher will conduct an ethnographic study of oil production in
the northeastern corner of the Ecuadorian Amazon, which for the past 40 years
has been the site of intensive oil operations. Oil extraction has increasingly
become associated with environmental and health risks (pollution, agricultural
runoff, reports of cancer, reproductive difficulties, etc.) for many people in
this area of the Amazon. In response to the concerns associated with oil, state,
non-governmental, and scientific entities have gathered to conduct numerous
investigations trying to study the consequences of oil production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how notions of environmental
and health risks develop through the tools used to ascertain, measure, and
present those risks. The investigator proposes to follow residents, activists,
and educators as they engage in three kinds of practices in particular: emergent
forms of educational tourism; environmental monitoring training; and community
mapping projects. Concentrating on these three very different practices will
allow the investigator to elicit how environmental and health risks are
identified, given shape, and contested in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project offers a rethinking not only of what is understood as environmentally
harmful and health adverse by various actors, but also enables an investigation
of the consequences of various practices of measurement, documentation, and
training. By disseminating its results to policy and industry officials in
Ecuador and the United States, the project contributes to enhancing the public's
scientific and technological understanding of energy policy and extractive
industry development.