* 1261721
* CIF21 DIBBS: The Data Exacell
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Michael Levine, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 8,914,035.00

The Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC) will carry out an accelerated,
development pilot project to create, deploy and test software building blocks
and hardware implementing functionalities specifically designed to support data-
analytic capabilities for data intensive scientific research. Building on the
successful Data Supercell (DSC) technology which replaced a conventional tape-
based archive with a disk-based system to economically provide the much lower
latency and higher bandwidth data success necessary for data-intensive
activities, PSC will implement and bring to production quality additional
functionalities important to such work. These include improved local
performance, additional abilities for remote data access and storage, enhanced
data integrity, data tagging and improved manageability. PSC will work with
partners in diverse fields of science, initially chosen from biology, astronomy
and computer science, who will provide scientific and technology drivers and
system validation. The project will leverage current NSF/CI investments in data
analytics systems at PSC. Those investments include DSC, Blacklight (an SGI
UV1000 with 2×16TB of hardware-enabled cache-coherent shared memory), and
Sherlock (a YarcData ?Urika? graph-analytic appliance which also supports a
globally accessible shared memory), both very capable for data analytic
applications. Their tight coupling to the pilot storage system will allow
synergistic development of analytical capabilities with development of
increasingly sophisticated mechanisms for data handling. Working with the new,
multi-petabyte data store, they will constitute a system specifically optimized
for data intensive work as contrasted with conventional HPC systems. Blacklight
will be upgraded with more powerful technology, specifically architected to
satisfy the more demanding needs of data analytics in years 3,4. When
successful, PSC will engage the NSF to consider larger-scale deployment aiming
at exascale capacity.