* 1261154
* IRES: Nanofibrous Materials Challenge
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Derrick Dean, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 04/30/2017
* USD 244,144.00

Technical &lt;br/&gt;This program will provide the international research
experience to a group of at least 18 U.S. students at the Institute for
Nanomaterials, Advanced Technology and Innovation at the Technical University of
Liberec (CxI&amp;TU-Liberec), Czech Republic. It is a premier institution in
Central Europe heavily involved in nanofibrous materials (NFMs) research and
commercialization of nanofiber electrospinning technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;Nanofibers can demonstrate superior mechanical, optical and transport
properties providing critical advantages to a variety of applications. The high
surface area to volume ratio provides both a multitude of ways to interact along
the fibers? length and the corresponding mechanical flexibility to bend into
many different configurations at nanoscale. As a result of their nano-enabled
unique properties, nanofiber-based materials have a wide range of applications
in areas such as high performance filtration, energy generation, conversion and
storage, wound healing and tissue engineering, and others. However, the
potential for growth of the NFMs market is still hindered by limited ability to
create the materials and structures with predictable complex, macroscopic
architectures and desirable electronic, mechanical, and physiological
properties.&lt;br/&gt;During the program, the IRES trainees from the University
of Alabama at Birmingham will be able to participate in the operations of a
largest nanofibrous materials enterprise in Europe. They will address the
current challenges in nanofiber science and technology through: (I) the
advancement of our basic understanding of all aspects of nanofiber properties
and fabrication processes in order to direct the assembly of NFMs into desired
configurations; and (II) the development of new processes for assembling NFMs
networks and hierarchical architectures for demanding applications.
&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the outcomes of this IRES program will help to
create a new generation of highly trained global workforce to significantly
advance the knowledge base in NFMs. In a long-term, this IRES program will
facilitate a broader synergistic coupling between domestic and international
research and industrial groups within the NFMs domain by bringing new
collaborators and facilitating multiple international links between the
researchers and students in related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of this IRES program is the emerging area of
nanofibrous materials (NFMs). This large class of nanomaterials shows superior
mechanical, electronic, and physiological properties that can provide critical
advantages in a variety of energy, biomedical and environmental applications.
The global market for NFMs is expected to rise above $4 billion by year 2017.
There are currently over a hundred of companies in the NFMs business, and recent
breakthroughs in NFMs are transforming many areas of science and engineering
(for example, the first successful demonstration of NFM-based tissue engineered
tracheal implant). However, the potential for growth of the NFMs market is still
hindered by limited ability to make these materials with predictable complex,
macroscopic architectures and desirable set of properties.&lt;br/&gt;This IRES
program will provide the unique international hands-on experience in NFMs to a
diverse group of U.S. undergraduate and graduate students at the Institute for
Nanomaterials, Advanced Technology and Innovation at the Technical University of
Liberec (CxI&amp;TU-Liberec), Czech Republic. It is a premier institution and a
largest nanofibrous materials enterprise in Central Europe. &lt;br/&gt;The IRES
trainees from the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will explore the
approaches to ?green? processes that can be used for the NFMs fabrication. The
major challenge here is not only obtaining right formulations, but to develop
the environmentally safe and economically feasible processes that can be
transferred from a simple laboratory system to commercial NFMs equipment
available at the host institution. The IRES trainees will also gain important
international cultural sensitivity experience expanding beyond the each
participant?s institution through the social activities and interactions with a
diverse international student population at CxI&amp;TU-Liberec. IRES
undergraduate participants will also broaden their vision of global perspectives
for a person with Masters or PhD degree in science and engineering. By providing
IRES trainees with such training via experiential international modalities, we
will empower them with a comprehensive set of capabilities in strategically
important technological areas.