* 1261694
* ISMAR 2012 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Blair MacIntyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 7,065.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 8 graduate students
(about half of them from U.S. institutions) along with senior members of the
community (faculty and industry researchers) in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop)
to be held in conjunction with and immediately preceding the 2012 International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR 2012), which will take place
November 6-8, in Atlanta, and which is organized by the IEEE Computer Society
with academic sponsorship from the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).
For over a decade, ISMAR (and its forerunner events, IWAR/ISAR and ISMR) has
been the premier international conference on research into the science,
technology, applications and uses of Mixed Reality (MR) and Augmented Reality
(AR). The proliferation of powerful mobile hardware has opened up new avenues of
research into MR and AR while enabling corporate and consumer applications on a
wide scale. Across this spectrum fascinating new types of user interfaces,
technologies, and concepts are beginning to emerge. The field is highly
interdisciplinary in nature, bringing together technologists, educators,
humanists, artists and social scientists, among others. ISMAR is one of the
largest meetings devoted to the advancement of mixed reality, augmented reality,
virtual reality, and human-computer interaction with the physical world, and
encourages six different submission types: Papers and Posters, Workshops,
Panels, Tutorials, Demonstrations and Contests. Because of the diverse fields
relevant to mixed and augmented reality, ISMAR content is organized in two
tracks: The Science &amp; Technology (S&amp;T) program and The Arts, Media and
Humanities (AMH) program. The top papers are often extended, reviewed, and
submitted for publication in the prestigious IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics. More information about the conference may be found at
http://ismar.vgtc.org/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the first Doctoral
Consortium held in conjunction with an ISMAR symposium. The goal is to provide
the students with an opportunity at a critical time in their careers to present
their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of academic and
industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral research plan and
progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers within the ISMAR community.
To these ends participants will be asked to prepare both a technical
presentation and a poster describing their work. A pre-event social dinner on
Sunday evening will allow the attendees (students, mentors and organizers) to
get to know each other. On Monday morning the attendees will meet for an
informal breakfast at 8:00 AM, after which each student participant will have 50
minutes devoted to his/her research, beginning with a presentation for
approximately 30 minutes followed by about 20 minutes reserved for an extensive
discussion with the other graduate student participants and the senior
researchers. The discussion will be facilitated by the Doctoral Consortium co-
chairs and mentors, with the goal of addressing the strengths and weaknesses of
the research, challenges and issues, implications of the results, potential
suggestions for additional approaches or follow-on work, and career guidance
related to the student's work and area. The posters will be on display during
the main ISMAR conference poster sessions (in which the students will be
expected to participate), and will be marked as being part of the Doctoral
Consortium. All results from the Consortium, including the procedures followed,
will be archived in an ISMAR 2012 DC binder as a reference for the next year's
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The organizers will take steps
to achieve a diversity of research topics, disciplinary backgrounds,
methodological approaches, and home institutions among the students to ensure
that they meet people outside their own specific area. Factors such as gender
and ethnicity will also be taken into account, with an emphasis on including
underrepresented groups. To further increase diversity up to half the student
participants may be invited from abroad but NSF funds will be used to support
the 4 expected students from U.S. institutions of higher learning plus one
international student; the organizers will work with colleagues in Europe and
Asia to secure other funding for the remaining international students.