* 1261657
* Photochemical Modeling in Support of CONTRAST (CONvective TRansport of Active Species in the Tropics)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ross Salawitch, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This project is an important part of the Convective Transport of Active Species
in the Tropics (CONTRAST) experiment scheduled for January and February 2014,
with NSF/NCAR GV flights based out of the island of Guam. This effort includes
flight planning and photochemical modeling to provide near real time
interpretation of data during the campaign, and post-mission modeling and data
interpretation afterward. CONTRAST is designed to measure the chemistry and
transport of reactive chemical species into the tropical Tropopause Transition
Layer (TTL) over the Western Pacific warm pool area. The sources, chemistry, and
transport of trace gases and their degradation products into the lower
stratosphere in this region during the boreal winter season can substantially
impact the chemistry of the lower stratosphere. The CONTRAST mission is
organized in collaboration with two partner projects: ATTREX (the Airborne
Tropical Tropopause Experiment--a NASA project utilizing the high altitude
Global Hawk (GH), and CAST (Coordinated Airborne Studies of the Tropics)--a
project sponsored by the British National Environment Research Council using a
BAe-146 aircraft. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of CONTRAST are
to: (1) Characterize the chemical composition at the level of convective outflow
over the Western Pacific during the deep convective season; (2) Evaluate the
budget of organic and inorganic bromine and iodine in the TTL; and (3)
Investigate transport pathways from the oceanic surface to the tropopause. The
results of this effort will increase understanding of halogen budgets and
impacts on stratospheric ozone depletion. It will also improve the development
of process-oriented chemistry/climate models and their validation.