* 1261202
* Excavations and Geophysical Survey at the Early Historic Town of Talapada, India
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2018
* Monica Smith, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 194,749.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Monica L. Smith and a team of
colleagues from the United States and India will conduct three field seasons of
research at the archaeological site of Talapada in eastern India to investigate
the role of towns in urbanizing environments. Talapada was occupied in the Early
Historic period (4th century BC to 3rd century AD), an era marked by momentous
change in the Indian subcontinent that included the development of Buddhism, the
first extensive use of writing, and the emergence of cities.

Talapada is a recently discovered site surrounded by a massive encircling
rampart that is an exact replica, at one-quarter size, of the fortification wall
at the nearby urban center of Sisupalgarh where Smith and colleagues have
previously worked. Investigations at the site of Talapada present an opportunity
to evaluate how towns interacted with the region's dominant center. Talapada's
inhabitants clearly were engaged in some political linkages as exhibited in
rampart construction. However, the variability of artifact types at the site
suggests that the town was not simply a small-size version of Sisupalgarh and
that the inhabitants may have generated and sustained their own distinctive
economic, social, and ritual traditions. The research will particularly focus on
Talapada's relationship with its larger neighbor before and after the "Kalinga
War" of the third century BC in which the region was briefly conquered by a
larger neighboring state.

The project will be the first in India to utilize the same methods of
investigation, including geophysical survey and excavations, to examine sites of
different sizes in the Early Historic period. The excavations will provide data
on artifacts and architecture, as well as generating a comprehensive series of
radiocarbon dates to identify the stages of the site's development over time. In
conjunction with the excavations, the team also will utilize non-destructive
geophysical survey to trace subsurface architectural features in neighborhood-
sized areas at Talapada to examine social and spatial configurations that also
will be compared with Sisupalgarh.

The intellectual merit of the project is encompassed in its investigation of
towns as intermediate-sized population centers in an urbanizing landscape.
Through survey and excavation, the project will enable the analysis of the
social, economic, and political developments of South Asia's Early Historic era
from the perspective of ordinary people. The data will be structured for
comparison with other archaeologically known regions in which the inhabitants of
long-lived towns and cities created flexible networks of interaction that
enabled them to thrive even during periods of regional conflict.

The broader impacts of the research project include significant international
collaboration between Indian and US researchers and students; provision of data
for theses and dissertations for both Indian and US students; training of
students in archaeological field techniques and analysis; and provision of
resources for university classes and public presentations.