* 1261997
* NEMB 2013: Nano-/Microfluidics in Biology and Medicine: Analysis, Diagnostics and Therapeutics, February 4-6, 2013, Boston, Massachusetts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Ram Devireddy, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2013
* USD 6,000.00

PI: Devireddy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET - 1261997
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes support for the ASME 2013 2nd Global
Congress on Nanoengineeing for Medicine and Biology (NEMB) to take place
February 4-6, 2013 in Boston, Massachusetts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NEMB
2013 mission is to bring together leading experts in biology, medicine, nano-
materials, and engineering so as to review experimental methods, synthetic
methods, results, models, computations, analyses and innovative methodologies
for quantifying and treating medical disorders using engineering approaches. The
combination of engineering and biology with a strong focus in medicine will be a
hallmark of the planned event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on
the aim of enabling the participation of invited keynote speakers in Track 2:
Nano-/Microfluidics in Biology and Medicine: Analysis, Diagnostics and
Therapeutic by defraying their registration and travel costs. Technical
contributions in Track 2 will consist of oral and poster presentations,
including plenary and invited keynote talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
Track 2 in NEMB 2013 will highlight research elucidating fundamental
physicochemical mechanisms associated with microfluidic and nanofluidic
phenomena as well as novel microfluidic and nanofluidic techniques for
diagnostic, medical, biological, pharmaceutical, environmental, and chemical
applications. Track 2 coverage spans a broad range of disciplines and topics,
including protein chip, DNA chip, cell chip, lab-on-a-chip, bio-MEMS, biosensor,
micro/nano mechanics, microfluidics, high-throughput screening technology,
medical science, genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics, medical diagnostics,
environmental monitoring and
micro/nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring
together a diverse group of researchers and provide a cross-disciplinary forum
enabling new research collaborations and synergistic interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstracts presented at the conference will be published on
a CD and made available to the participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
track chairs and plenary speakers are women. And accommodations for woman with
small children and persons with disabilities have been ensured.