* 1261424
* Collaborative Research: Shallow-sea hydrothermal systems:  Micron-scale sedimentary sulfur cycling and its impact on ocean processes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Gregory Druschel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2015
* USD 101,734.00

The influx of reducing (i.e., anoxic) fluids through deep-sea and shallow-sea
hydrothermal systems into the ocean plays a major role in determining ocean
chemistry and its evolution over geologic history. The interface between
hydrothermal fluids and the overlying cool and well-oxygenated seawater is
characterized by intense thermodynamic disequilibrium, driving a suite of
biogeochemical reactions, which in turn further shape ocean chemistry. These
reactions generate strong geochemical redox gradients transitioning from the
marine water column into the sediments beneath along the interface with reducing
hydrothermal fluids. These gradients provide a framework where microbial
communities live, evolve, shape, and are shaped by their local geochemical
environment. However, the link between the metabolic activity of these micron-
sized microorganisms and the resulting geochemical signatures (typically sampled
at approximately cm-scale resolution) remains elusive, in large part because of
the difficulty of extracting sufficient material for geochemical analyses at
small scales (~1-100 microns). Yet, it is precisely this fine-scale geochemical
variability that directly impacts biogeochemical activity. This research takes
advantage of recent advances in analytical techniques that allow for geochemical
and stable isotopic measurements at a spatial resolution as small as ~1-10
microns. Samples come from accessible shallow-sea hydrothermal systems in the
Mediterranean Sea, where diverse sulfur cycling has been previously identified
and steep redox gradients make it possible for micron-scale measurements to
sample across a wide range of geochemical environments. In addition, a 20+-year
record of observations allows the results to be put into a rich geochemical
context. Goals are to generate an unparalleled high-resolution geochemical and
isotopic characterization of sulfur cycling in shallow-sea hydrothermal systems
and use the resulting data to calculate the thermodynamic drivers for diverse
biogeochemical reactions. The data will also allow the evaluation of the role of
ambient geochemistry on isotopic fractionation during sulfur biogeochemical
cycling and application of results to understanding variations in the isotopic
composition of sulfur species in marine sediments through time because sulfur
isotopes are one of the principle means to reconstruct paleoenvironmental
conditions over Earth history. Broader impacts of the work include undergraduate
and graduate student training in the field and laboratory. Cross training in
different laboratories will also deepen the integration of research and
education. This project also involves international collaboration with Sicilian
and German scientists.