* 1261977
* The structure and dynamics of generative innovations: An organizational genetics approach
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Youngjin Yoo, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 01/31/2017
* USD 285,876.00

This project puts forth organizational genetics as a novel theoretical and
empirical approach to understand the structure and dynamics of generative
innovations. Generativity refers to an overall capacity to produce unprompted
change driven by a large, varied, and uncoordinated audience, as seen in digital
ecosystems such as Apple, Youtube, Android and Wordpress. In such ecosystems,
most innovations are accomplished by third-party individuals who often go beyond
the design intent of the original innovators. Using data from highly generative
innovation contexts, the researchers seek to understand how combinations of
existing technological components that act as genetic elements (i.e., genotypes)
can give birth to the incredibly rich and dynamic varieties at the product level
(i.e., phenotypes). Each individual innovation is characterized as a co-
expression of a certain set of existing components (referred to as "technology
genes") in the similar way system biologists characterize the structure and
dynamics of cell behaviors though a co-expression network of genes. Furthermore,
the ways in which mutations in technology genes can cause changes in the co-
expression network, which in turn causes changes in the behavior of the digital
product is explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such evolutionary analysis of
generative innovations ultimately allows an understanding of how distributed
organizations can produce generative innovations without a traditional
organizational structure that centrally governs and coordinates innovation
activities. More specifically, the research contributes to the organization
literature by developing new evolutionary model of organization design for
innovations and to the open innovation literature by showing the structural and
dynamic patterns of open innovations through interactions among third-party
developers. Additional important methodological contributions are in the
advancement of an analytical approach to analyze big data to understand complex
and multi-level, socio-technical phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
digital artifacts from open ecosystems have become an important part of the
economy, very little is known about the generativity of such artifacts.
Understanding the mechanisms of generativity can empower organizations in
several ways: first, they can become more innovative by using existing artifacts
to design new digital artifacts; second, it can help organizations create
innovation opportunities based on effective exploitation of digital platform
that prompts uncoordinated interactions among heterogeneous and distributed
innovators; and finally, understanding generativity can not only help
organizations in product design and innovation, but also in related contexts
such as viral marketing. These findings will be of interest not only to firms
and innovators, but also to policy makers and the media as well.