* 1261117
* IRES: International Research Experience for Students in Computational Nanoscience
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,133.00

The aim of this proposal is to create a platform for international research
experience in computational nanoscience for US students at McGill University.
Computer simulation of the properties of materials at the nanoscale is
developing in an unprecedentedly fast pace, and it has become one of the most
important area of research connecting theory to experiment and modeling to
technological applications. The truly interdisciplinary nature of computational
nanoscience provides an excellent environment for undergraduate and graduate
research by exposing students to the forefront of scientific challenges and
technological innovations. The students will use a linear scaling atomistic
approach to simulate the time-dependent behavior of molecules, solids, and
nanostructures in time-dependent external fields. The approach allows simulation
of electron and ion dynamics in systems containing thousands of atoms,
incorporating the effect of electromagnetic fields by coupling the time-
dependent Maxwell and Schroedinger equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
computational nanoscience international research experience for students project
will teach advanced material simulations and modeling for the next generation of
researchers. This proposal is cross cutting between physics, chemistry, material
science and engineering - integrating novel computational approaches to simulate
the interaction of materials and electromagnetic fields. The simulations are
overarching a wide range of problems including bond breaking by laser pulses,
Coulomb explosion, modeling quantum interference transistors, radiation induced
damage in graphene, electron holograms and quantum transport. The computer codes
and simulation tools developed by the students in the framework of this project
will be available for education and research and will be used to train students
at Vanderbilt and McGill.