* 1261331
* CAREER: Development of Novel Polymer Electrolytes - Synthesis and Applications in Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Chulsung Bae, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,928.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The goal of this CAREER project is to build an
interdisciplinary materials research and educational program by developing a
novel class of polymer electrolyte materials that will be useful for fuel cell
applications. Although proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are touted
as efficient, reliable, and environmentally friendly energy sources, broad use
of this promising technology has been limited by insufficient development of
polymer electrolyte materials that can overcome the shortcomings of Nafion, the
current state-of-the-art proton exchange membrane (PEM). To prepare new PEM
materials that can outperform Nafion in fuel cell operation, Professor Chulsung
Bae of the Department of Chemistry at University of Nevada Las Vegas will (a)
develop a new synthetic strategy of PEMs that take advantages of both partially
fluorinated ionomers and aromatic main-chain polymers, and (b) carry out a
systematic study of the relationship between polymer structure and membrane
properties. This approach will generate a sulfonic acid group that is much
stronger than the aryl sulfonic acid typically found in currently available
aromatic polymer ionomers, and create PEMs of a diverse range of structures that
can allow better understanding of the molecular-level structure property
relationships. Due to the multidisciplinary nature of fuel cell research
program, students working under this CAREER project will be exposed to
interactions with experts in synthetic chemistry, materials characterization,
and engineering and thus be given an appreciation of the multiple aspects of a
major research undertaking and the many potential paths available for graduate
research and future careers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Fuel cells, which convert the chemical energies stored in
fuel directly into electrical energy, are expected to be a key technology for
meeting energy needs in the twenty-first century. The goal of this CAREER
project is to combine different fields of chemistry and materials
science/engineering and create novel materials that will provide molecular-level
insight into material property and play a key role in the development of
commercially viable fuel cell technologies globally. Owing to the exciting and
multidisciplinary nature of fuel cell research, this CAREER project will attract
participants from a wide range of areas, contribute to the infrastructure and
programmatic basis for research and education opportunitiese.g., graduate
student training, graduate mentoring of undergraduate research assistants,
classroom demonstrationsand create an academic/private industry partnership as a
possible career path for students. In addition to basic research and education
programs for students, building a bridge between the PI's fuel cell research and
the general public's increasing concern about global climate change and gradual
desire for clean alternative energy production will enhance scientific literacy,
broadening the impact of this research on the society.