* 1261004
* EAGER: Mycoplasma-related Endobacteria of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi: Life History and Evolutionary Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Teresa Pawlowska, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2017
* USD 278,868.00

This project will investigate the biology of MRE and transform understanding of
ecosystem functioning in similar ways as the recognition of the role of AM fungi
in plant ecology transformed the understanding of plant community dynamics.
Furthermore, if MRE are indeed parasites of Glomeromycota, then understanding
how their ancient asexual fungal hosts dealt with parasite pressure will become
a pressing issue of general interest. Finally, identifying forces that drive MRE
population dynamics will be important for understanding genome evolution in MRE
and their Mycoplasma relatives. The project includes opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, including research experiences in
microbiology, molecular genetics, and bioinformatics. Undergraduates will be
recruited through the Microbial Friends & Foes REU and the Cornell Office of
Undergraduate Biology, and high school students through BOCES. More than half of
the students mentored by the PI have been from groups underrepresented in
science. The PI works with the Cornell Office of Academic Diversity Initiatives
to create training opportunities for minority undergraduates.

The goal of this project is to understand the life history and evolutionary
genomics of the newly discovered mycoplasma-related endobacteria (MRE) of
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi (phylum Glomeromycota). AM fungi and their
endobacteria are components of a complex symbiotic association that also
includes the majority of terrestrial plants, and may be one of the most common
multi-partner symbioses on the planet. AM fungi colonize roots of land plants
and assist in the uptake of mineral nutrients in exchange for plant-assimilated
carbon. Thus, AM fungi are pivotal in shaping the structure and function of
terrestrial ecosystems. While the biology of MRE is largely unknown, they are
distributed in all major lineages of Glomeromycota and exhibit substantial
genetic variability within individuals of their AM fungal hosts. This pattern is
inconsistent with evolutionary theory in that mutualistic endosymbionts are
predicted to be genetically uniform within a host. Consequently, it is
hypothesized that MRE are parasites and that their genomes exhibit features
consistent with a parasitic lifestyle. This project will integrate the ecology
and evolutionary genomics of MRE to elucidate their role in the Glomeromycota.
(1) An assessment of the effects of MRE infection on host fitness will reveal
whether MRE are parasites or mutualists. (2) Sequencing and de novo assembly of
MRE genomes will enable inferences about MRE metabolic features. (3) Elucidating
forces that drive MRE population dynamics will reveal mechanisms responsible for
MRE genome evolution.