* 1261150
* IRES: Student Participation in Photonuclear Physics Research at MAX-Lab, Sweden
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Grant O'Rielly, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2016
* USD 249,695.00

This IRES award provides undergraduate students associated with the University
of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Bridgewater State University, Bristol and Cape Cod
Community Colleges in Massachusetts as well as other colleges throughout the US
Northeast, with the opportunity to participate in an international collaboration
in experimental nuclear physics research at the MAX-lab facility located at Lund
University in southern Sweden. This three-year award will support six students
each year who will each spend 8-10 weeks during the summer at MAX-lab as a part
of the collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;The project PI will travel with the students to
Lund each summer to supervise and coordinate the student?s individual project,
and will monitor their progress throughout the summer. Each student will also
receive supervision and mentoring from members of the MAX-lab nuclear physics
group as well as other members of the collaboration. The students will be
involved in all aspects of the research being performed at MAX-lab, including
equipment set-up, calibration, data taking and data analysis. Each student will
write a project report and will have the opportunity to present the results of
their efforts at local seminars and national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;The
experiments the students will be involved in are being conducted by the
PIONS@MAXLAB Collaboration. They make use of the MAX-lab Photon Tagging Facility
together with the BUNI, CATS, DIANA and xSAL detector systems at MAX-lab to
study the process of pion photoproduction from the proton and neutron. These
measurements will provide data that are currently missing from the world?s
database of this fundamental nuclear process. The results obtained will be
compared with the predictions from theoretical models describing this process
and will help address the question of describing the behavior of the proton and
neutron in terms of the underlying quark structure.&lt;br/&gt;The student
participants will receive training and mentoring from experienced international
researchers that will help prepare them to operate successfully in a global
environment. The connections developed through their efforts will help support
on-going international cooperation. The project PI has demonstrated dedication
and success in mentoring women students, an underrepresented group in
experimental nuclear physics, and is committed to broadening the opportunities
for women and underrepresented minorities in this project?s research plans.