* 1261942
* Measurement of OVOCs, NMHCs, and Halocarbons Aboard the NSF-GV Aircraft during CONTRAST (CONvective TRansport of Active Species in the Tropics)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,744.00

In this project, quantitative measurements of volatile organic compounds (VOC)
utilizing the HAIS TOGA-GV instrument on the NCAR GV aircraft will be obtained
as part of the Convective Transport of Active Species in the Tropics (CONTRAST)
experiment proposed to take place during January and February 2014 from the
island of Guam. CONTRAST is designed to measure the chemistry and transport of
reactive chemical species into the tropical Tropopause Transition Layer (TTL)
over the Western Pacific warm pool area. TOGA-GV measurements include a suite of
volatile organic compounds C-2 (VOCs), including: oxygenates, non-methane
hydrocarbons, halocarbons, and some nitrogen and sulfur containing species. The
sources, chemistry, and transport of trace gases and their degradation products
into the lower stratosphere in this region during the boreal winter season can
substantially impact the chemistry of the lower stratosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trace gas concentrations measured in this campaign can
influence atmospheric chemistry and climate and will provide a method of
chemically describing transported air masses. Specific data will be obtained
for: tracers of oceanic emissions and anthropogenic and biogenic activities,
radical precursors, tracers of urban and biomass combustion emissions, products
of oxidative processing, precursors to aerosol formation, and compounds
important for aerosol modification and transformation. Better understanding of
the processes in this region will improve process-oriented chemistry/climate
models and their validation by providing a unique suite of benchmark
measurements, especially in the characterization of active halogen chemistry.