* 1261948
* Understanding Long-term Variations in Stratospheric Water Vapor
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Andrew Dessler, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2017
* USD 259,112.00

This project seeks to understand changes in tropical stratospheric water vapor
seen in observations and in model simulations of future climate change.
Simulations of future climate consistently show an increasing trend in tropical
stratospheric water vapor due to greenhouse gas increases, but satellite data
since the 1980s show interannual and decadal variability but little trend. In
addition, comparison of monthly stratospheric water vapor and 100hPa heating
rate are negatively correlated in observational data, but positively correlated
in future climate simulations. Negative correlations are expected if changes in
water vapor and heating rates are linked to variations in the Brewer-Dobson
circulation, as a stronger BD circulation is associated with stronger tropical
heating (i.e. stronger diabatic upwelling) and colder tropical stratospheric
temperatures. But future climate simulations show increases in both water vapor
and the strength of the BD circulation. Moreover, increases in surface
temperature are expected to produce increases in stratospheric water vapor, but
surface temperatures rose over the observed record while tropical stratospheric
water vapor did not. This project uses a suite of models including a domain-
filling trajectory model, the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM),
and a one-dimensional radiative transfer model, to understand the underlying
processes responsible for the changes in observed and simulated water vapor
changes.

The work has broader impacts due to the climatic effects of stratospheric water
vapor, and the relationship between stratospheric ozone and water vapor. In
addition, the PI will conduct outreach to general audiences through new-media
outlets, thereby working to increase public understanding of the phenomena
addressed in this research. The project also supports and trains a graduate
student, thereby providing for the development of the scientific workforce in
this research area.