* 1261211
* IRES: Population Dynamics and Complex Systems: Challenges and Opportunities
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Erika Camacho, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 209,168.00

The project provides international research experiences for 11 young Americans
to carry out research at the interface of mathematics and the ecology of
infectious and vector borne diseases with a cadre of researchers conducting
interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary research at the premier private,
nonprofit, research university in Colombia, Universidad de los Andes (UNIANDES).
The students? projects will be driven by the study of Chagas in sylvatic
communities with focus on learning the complexity of the eco-epidemiological
cycle of T. cruzi while appreciating the challenges of eradicating the disease
directly from world experts and on the development of models for the study of
dengue epidemics in Latin America and how they differ from their counterpart in
Southeast Asia. The research will be carried out in collaborations with the
Center for the Study of Tropical Parasitology (CIMPAT) and the Vertebrate
Evolutionary Biology Lab (EVOLVERT) at The Universidad de los Andes. Professor
Juan M. Cordovez, the Director of the Research Group on Mathematical and
Computational Biology (Grupo de Investigación en Biología Matemática y
Computacional, BIOMAC), within the Departamento de Ingeniería Biomédica, would
provide the link between Arizona State University and
UNIANDES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;The training of Americans on the use of models in the study of the
ecology and transmission dynamics of diseases like Dengue or Chagas is important
to the US leadership role in a global economy. Our nation?s model of competitive
success counts on the direct personal participation of our citizens in
activities such as travel and trade that includes risks and economic
opportunities associated. The project provides international research
experiences for 11 young Americans to carry out research at the interface of
mathematics and the ecology of infectious and vector borne diseases at the
Universidad de los Andes (UNIANDES) in Colombia South America. The research will
be carried out in collaborations with the Center for the Study of Tropical
Parasitology (CIMPAT) and the Vertebrate Evolutionary Biology Lab (EVOLVERT) at
the Universidad de los Andes. &lt;br/&gt;