* 1261689
* Project Science Activities and Trace Gas Investigations from Whole Air Sampling on the NCAR GV Aircraft During the Convective Transport of Active Species in the Tropics Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This project involves the measurement of a wide range of organic trace gases
collected from the HAIS Advanced Whole Air Sampler (AWAS) on the NCAR GV
aircraft as part of the Convective Transport of Active Species in the Tropics
(CONTRAST) experiment proposed to take place during January and February 2014
from the island of Guam. CONTRAST is designed to measure the chemistry and
transport of reactive chemical species into the tropical Tropopause Transition
Layer (TTL) over the Western Pacific warm pool area. The trace gases to be
measured consist of a range of organic molecules, including a both short-lived
and long-lived halocarbon compounds, as well as non-methane hydrocarbons,
organic nitrates, and selected sulfur species. These gases will provide
information to diagnose halogen transformations and budget of the TTL, to
estimate relative age of air in the UT/LS, and to distinguish air mass sources
in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sources, chemistry, and transport of
trace gases and their degradation products into the lower stratosphere in the
tropical Pacific during the boreal winter season can substantially impact the
chemistry of the lower stratosphere. This project will improve process-oriented
chemistry/climate models and their validation by providing a unique suite of
benchmark measurements, especially in the characterization of active halogen
chemistry.