* 1261409
* Mentorship and Student-Author Travel Grant for Wireless Health 2012 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Roozbeh Jafari, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2014
* USD 18,250.00

The rapidly advancing field of wireless technologies and mobile health (mHealth)
is likely to play an important role in the future innovations that will help in
transforming healthcare to be more individual-centered with a focus on
prevention and wellbeing. Yet this nascent field requires advances and
innovations ranging from theoretical concepts to large scale implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will provide funds to
enable students to attend the conference. The participating students will
benefit from exposure to computational thinking and advances in in wireless
health technologies that utilize real-time data acquisition and inference to
support just-in-time interventions. At the same time, they will also learn of
the gaps in basic science as well as engineering that need to be addressed in
order to achieve the anticipated benefits of the wireless technologies and
mHealth. In addition, meeting the leaders in the fields will provide the
students with models for selecting and addressing the key difficult problems
that need to be solved. Finally, during the workshop, the participants will be
meeting their fellow students, giving them an opportunity for scientific
networking, so important in a rapidly advancing
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Wireless and mobile technologies are
likely to have significant societal impacts in a variety of domains. There are
indications that these fields will likely contribute significantly to
revolutionizing healthcare, from clinical trials to healthcare delivery. These
technologies are already changing the social interactions among individuals and
groups. Among the most important potential benefits of these technologies are
their impacts on bringing healthcare and education to underserved populations.
This is reflected in the data suggesting that mobile technology frequently
provides the only way for underserved populations to connect to the Internet and
interact with the healthcare system. Students working in the field will have the
opportunity to accelerate these trends. To achieve these goals the proposer is
planning to emphasize the recruitment of women and minority students to attend
the symposium.