* 1261970
* Synthesis and Nanomechanical Properties of Crystalline Boron-based Nanofilaments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/07/2012,08/31/2014
* Christopher Muhlstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2014
* USD 157,594.00

The objectives of this research award are to synthesize tiny, slender pieces of
boron-based materials (nanofilaments) and to measure their electrical, optical,
and mechanical properties. The nanofilaments will be created under controlled
conditions by depositing materials in special atmospheres using energy provided
by a laser. Subsequent experiments conducted on the nanofilaments will determine
a variety of properties including their size, shape, electrical resistance, and
mechanical strength. A unique feature of this program is that the changes in the
properties of the nanofilaments when they are deformed will be determined. The
deliverables for this program include the identification of the processing
conditions that create particular kinds of nanofilaments, and their mechanical,
electrical, and optical properties. Additionally, the researchers will document
their results, educate engineering students, and introduce high school students
to nanoscience through a summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
award will provide the basis for a new generation of nanoenabled devices and
composites. The resulting materials could have physical properties superior to
traditional boron filaments and will be easier to use in composites. Potential
applications include ultralight and conductive composites for cell phone
housings, electromagnetic shielding, and aerospace structures. The results of
the research will be disseminated to facilitate the introduction of these
materials into both existing and new commercial products. Undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral students involved with the program will benefit from
classroom instruction and the research process. Additionally, high school
students will participate in a summer program that will give them a hands-on
experience that will heighten their interest in the sciences and technical
careers.