* 1261229
* IRES: Patagonian Research Experiences in Sustainability Science (PRESS): Understanding Social-Ecological Drivers and Consequences of Global Change
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 249,990.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability science is shaped by two important
themes: 1) environmental change can only be understood at broad spatial and
temporal scales, requiring international and inter-institutional collaborations
and comparative research; and 2) sustainability is based on a combination of
theoretical and applied approaches that integrate both natural and social
sciences to create operative models, accurate predictions and viable management
plans. Thus, modern researchers must be able to work effectively in teams and
projects that span national, cultural and linguistic boundaries; and must be
well-trained in social-ecological approaches based on methods and value systems
that extend beyond traditional ecological science.&lt;br/&gt;The Patagonian
Research Experiences in Sustainability Science (PRESS) project aims to meet
these needs by providing an intensive, cross-cultural opportunity for 20
carefully prepared undergraduate and graduate student researchers over its three
year term. PRESS research will center on the study of socio-ecological drivers
and consequences of global change and sustainability in southern Patagonia, a
Global 200 biome that provides an unrivaled natural laboratory with stark
abiotic and biotic gradients. Participants will be paired with prominent
researchers at collaborating regional institutes and universities in Patagonia.
After developing a research proposal under the guidance of home faculty and
their Patagonian mentor, participants will travel to join their mentor?s lab for
four months, including focused training in relevant techniques, field work and
data collection, and data analysis. Supported projects will assess four main
social-ecological drivers of global change that affect southern Patagonia: a)
climate change in forests and grasslands, b) land use by forestry and ranching,
c) biotic interactions of invasive and native species, and d) economic
development from ecological tourism and protected area use. Scientific training
will be accompanied by cultural and linguistic capacity-building, as students
are immersed in a vibrant cross-cultural research environment. Participant
deliverables include presentation of findings to local scientists and land
managers, local and regional outreach, presentations at the annual UGRADS
student research colloquium held at Northern Arizona University, and the joint
publication of research findings in peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#8195;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the social and ecological drivers and consequences of
global ecological change has emerged as one of the most important and pressing
sustainability research topics of the modern age. ?Sustainability? in this
context means understanding how the natural world is changing and how human
populations are adapting to that change, and then developing strategies for
mitigating negative outcomes for both human and natural communities. Tackling
this grand research challenge is difficult because environmental change is a
global phenomenon, spanning continents and political borders; tomorrow?s
researchers will need to be able to collaborate effectively across national,
cultural and linguistic boundaries. The central aim of the Patagonian Research
Experience in Sustainability Science (PRESS) project is to help train this next
generation of internationally-competent researchers, while at the same time
producing significant advances in socio-ecological and sustainability research
in one of the southern hemisphere?s most sensitive and iconic biomes.
Specifically, over the three year grant period, 20 carefully prepared student
researchers will be matched with mentors at one of several collaborating
regional institutes and universities in Patagonia. Participants will work
remotely with Patagonian mentors and with Northern Arizona University faculty
advisors to prepare a project proposal. Participants will then travel to
Patagonia to join their host mentor?s lab for four months, during which time
they will receive basic research training, refine their research projects,
collect and analyze data, and write up results. Training in sustainability
science will be complemented with cultural and foreign language training, and
outcomes in both areas will be evaluated. PRESS provides high return on
investment through (a) preparing a next generation of researchers skilled at
multinational research; (b) producing publishable research in sustainability
science from mentored projects; and (c) developing a comprehensive pedagogical
model for international research training that will inform other U.S.
institutions as they evolve their undergraduate and graduate programs to adapt
to the rapidly globalizing modern research environment.