* 1261924
* I-Corps:  Isosorbide-based Renewabl Humectants to Replace Polyethylene Glycol
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Michael Jaffe, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project is focused on producing mesogenic polyesters containing isosorbide.
The work has taken two approaches: (1) Introducing isosorbide into known LCP
backbone as a "disruptor" for brick dust LCPs such as poly (p-hydroxybenzoic
acid); and (2) As part of a hydroxyacid mesogen formed by reacting isosorbide
with a suitable mesogen. The mechanism of water uptake in isosorbide compounds
was investigated and control of water uptake in these compounds was
demonstrated. A result of these studies on how to design hydrophobic isosorbide
compounds is a similar understanding of the structure of isosorbide compounds
with high and controlled hydrophilicity. This has led to the identification,
synthesis and characterization of highly hydrophilic, glycerol linked isosorbide
oligomers and polymers as effective replacements for the commonly utilized poly
(ethylene glycol, PEG) as a humectant in many personal care, cosmetic and
biomedical products.

Currently, ethylene glycol and its polymeric forms is an industrial staple. A
dominant use is as a reactant, making hydrophobic chemicals hydrophilic. The
major forms are polyethylene glycols (PEG) as solvents, emulsifiers, and to
enable greater water miscibility(surfactants). Principal markets of use are
pharmacy, personal care, paints and inks, oil extraction and grain products (de-
dusting). In recent years the trend toward PEG-free products has grown rapidly.
Currently a PEG-free solubilization alternative, composed of pentylene glycol
with surfactants, is available to help to dissolve lipophilic substances such as
perfume, essential oils, active ingredients and vitamins in pure aqueous and
aqueous/alcoholic formulations. The isosorbide derivative this project focuses
on is a renewable corn-derived material that will perform similarly, but will
open a new field of hydrophilicity chemistry because of the unique stereo
chemical make-up of this new oligomer.