* 1261560
* Uneven Growth, Economic Inequality and Social Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 170,468.00

Abstract Proposal Title: Uneven Growth, Economic Inequality and Social Conflict
Proposal Number: SES - 1261560 Principal Investigator: Ray, Debraj

In many developing countries, economic growth has been fundamentally uneven. The
effect of uneven growth and economic inequality on the potential for violent
social conflict is the subject of this project. It continues and extends a
research program on economic development, distribution and conflict. That
program rests on two core assertions. First, social conflict has strong economic
correlates: variables such as per-capita income and natural resource revenues
shape the incidence and extent of such conflict. Yet, classical expressions of
conflict between economic haves and have-nots are relatively rare; often,
warring groups are demarcated by noneconomic markers such as ethnicity or
religion. Previous research has shown that ethnic polarization and
fractionalization strongly influences conflict.

The current project takes the research a step further by considering the
economic characteristics of ethnic groups and how these enter into the
determination of social conflict over and above the demographic characteristics.
The analysis begins with a significant extension of the theoretical framework
introduced by Esteban and Ray (American Economic Review vol. 101, 1345-1374,
2011) to include joint economic and demographic determinants of ethnic conflict.
It is shown that the two sets of variables interact in specific ways, that
discipline the functional relationships to be tested and (in some cases)
estimated. The emphasis in is on within-group and cross-group economic
inequality and its effects on conflict. The empirical exercise based on the
theory is applied to a cross-section of countries.

The project then uses the same framework to inform an empirical study of Hindu-
Muslim violence in India. The emphasis in this section is on changes in group
per-capita incomes (rather than within-group distribution). It is argued that
Muslim group incomes in India have been positively associated with subsequent
religious conflict, while the opposite is true of Hindu incomes. The theory
permits an interpretation of this striking empirical finding.

The last part of the project theoretically examines a number of complementary
arguments that point towards the salience of ethnic violence in the face of
economic disparity and uneven change. This part of the project takes a very
different route from traditional hypotheses, which would associate such economic
characteristics with a greater probability of class, not ethnic, conflict.

Broader Impacts: the study of violent conflict, especially within developing
countries, is of immense importance. Uneven growth often involves significant
reallocation of resources, human and physical. Even if such growth is warranted
from a long-term perspective, it can bring immense hardship in the short to
medium run, and it can do so to individuals and groups who will never be
adequately compensated in their lifetime. Does economic growth stifle conflict,
or might it exacerbate it? What is the relationship between inequality and
conflict? Why might class conflict give way to ethnic conflict? The objective is
to show how the economic theory of conflict gives rise to a new set of testable
predictions which integrates economics, politics and demography. It is hoped
that political scientists, sociologists and ethnographers will find such an
attempt useful and complementary to their own work.

To this end, the current project continues to push towards a book on the
economics of ethnic violence. The intention is to put together, in a cohesive
way, a large literature from economics, political science and sociology on the
topic of conflict in developing countries. The principal investigator plans to
develop and teach a course on "Uneven Growth and Conflict," to develop a
detailed outline for the writing of such a book.