* 1261828
* CAREER: Control of Mobile Robot Networks: Integrating the Communication and Physical Domains
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Michael Zavlanos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 05/31/2017
* USD 356,184.00

Mobile robot networks are recently emerging as the most efficient way to address
a large variety of tasks ranging from surveillance and search-and-rescue
missions to cooperative manipulation and robotic surgery. These networks consist
of large and highly interconnected groups of cheap, small and agile agents that
collectively result in more modular, robust and scalable systems that can
efficiently handle uncertainties, faulty components and design complexity. At
the same time, the limited computation, power and communication capabilities of
the agents require new communication, cooperation and specialization techniques,
that raise fundamental problems on the interface of modern control theory and
robotics with the discrete science of communications and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop formal
methods and algorithms to address the control issues related to integration of
the physical (robots) and communication domains, that define mobile robot
networks. In particular, the PI is developing distributed techniques to
integrate robot mobility, dynamics and constraints with rich models of
communication, including power control, fading, priority flows etc. Ensuring
task completion, ?loop closure? with graph theoretic approaches in the
literature and experimentation are major parts of this research, which offers a
number of advantages over other approaches including more realistic models of
robot networks that can be implemented with fewer assumptions, lower
computational complexity and easiness of distributed
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in robotic and
communications can not be efficiently integrated on real platforms without the
necessary theoretical and experimental support. This research provides these
necessary components in facilitating the design of mobile autonomous systems and
fostering their adoption. An integral part of the research program is also an
educational agenda that involves K-12, undergraduate, and graduate level
education. The broader impact of the educational program is to introduce new
engineers and researchers to the potentials of multidisciplinary research as
well as to promote research and engineering careers among pre-college students.