* 1261682
* The medieval Black Death:  analysis of the demographic, health, and social consequences of a historic emerging disease
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 112,711.00

Dr. Sharon DeWitte (University of South Carolina) will investigate the Black
Death (c. 1347-1351), a devastating disease that was caused by the pathogen
responsible for modern bubonic plague. The Black Death was one of the most
important emerging infectious diseases in history, and such diseases are still
major threats to public health today. This three-year study will be done using
the skeletal remains of people who died just before, during, and after the Black
Death in London. It will address the questions of why the Black Death emerged
when it did, how the selective mortality of the epidemic in combination with
post-epidemic rising standards of living shaped health and demographic patterns
within the surviving population, and how plague epidemiology changed over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use hazard analysis of 1920
skeletons. Mortality and health patterns in the pre-Black Death period will
reveal whether the population was becoming increasingly unhealthy before the
epidemic. The post-Black Death samples will be analyzed to determine whether the
surviving population faced lower risks of mortality, lived longer, and was
healthier. This project will also reveal short-term changes in plague
epidemiology that might have occurred because of changes in the human host or
the pathogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important because it will
improve understanding of medieval plague and, more generally, emerging disease
dynamics. Investigating these diseases is vital to understanding modern human
biology, demography, and culture given their power to shape populations and
drive human evolution. It is also important to understand the social, political,
and economic processes that affect the emergence, epidemiology, and human
experience of disease, and to expand the temporal scope of such inquiries.
Assessment of emerging diseases in the past can also benefit efforts to
prioritize funding for studying modern emerging diseases and for enacting
surveillance and preventative measures in living populations.