* 1261308
* REU Site: Differential/Difference Equation Models and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* John Graef, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 290,000.00

The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga REU Site has major areas of
concentration in differential and difference equations, mathematical modeling in
biology, number theory, and probability. The research focus is on six main
topics: (i) population models with Allee effects; (ii) mathematical models with
time delays; (iii) telegraph equations; (iv) discrete periodic boundary value
problems; (v) the Riemann zeta-function; and (vi) random harmonic polynomials.
This includes the study of such well-known models as Nicholson's blowflies
model, the Lasota-Wazewska model of survival of red blood cells in animals, and
the Mackey-Glass model of blood cell production. In addition, properties of
random harmonic polynomials and the Riemann zeta-function, such as partial sums
and distribution of zeros, will be explored. Each of these topics is accessible
to junior/senior level undergraduates; but each topic also leads naturally to
many substantial and interesting mathematical issues. The mentors will introduce
the topics and provide the necessary background but with the goal of shifting
the focus to the students who will pose and investigate questions according to
their own interests and abilities.

The projects described above will involve a total of 8 to 10 undergraduate
students in active research for eight weeks each for three consecutive summers
from 2013 to 2015 under the supervision of 4 applied and pure mathematicians who
are dedicated researchers and mentors. The primary focus of this REU Site is in
mathematical training, active participation in research, and mentoring. Its
objectives are to provide undergraduate students with meaningful research
experience in mathematics, to show them the joy of doing research, and to
encourage them to pursue advanced degrees and/or careers in the mathematical
sciences. Conference presentations and publication of research findings will be
strongly encouraged. This REU Site will greatly contribute to the excitement and
development of mathematical research among undergraduate students. Moreover, it
will supplement current efforts in sustaining and strengthening our nation's
leadership in scientific research in the mathematical sciences and their
applications. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences and the Office of the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).