* 1261619
* Collaborative Research: Development of Airborne Lidar and Temperature Mapper "Facility" Instruments for the NSF GV and Measurements during SAANGRIA
* GEO,AGS
* 05/09/2012,09/30/2014
* David Fritts, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2014
* USD 180,308.00

The investigators will build an atmospheric lidar instrument and an airglow
imager for deployment on the NSF/NCAR Gulfstream-V (NGV) aircraft. The
instruments are designed to make measurements important for studying the impacts
of internal gravity waves (GWs) in atmospheric dynamics, and in the chemical,
microphysical, and plasma processes they influence. In the stratosphere, GW
effects include severe turbulence at flight altitudes, creation of polar
stratospheric clouds that contribute to ozone destruction, and systematic
influences on the large-scale circulation. Large-scale GWs also have similar,
but largely unknown, effects extending well into the thermosphere and
ionosphere. The Southern Andes -- ANtarctic GRavity wave InitiAtive (SAANGRIA)
is a program that would employ the NGV research aircraft to measure gravity wave
effects over the southern Andes, the Drake Passage, and the Antarctic Peninsula,
which is believed to be the most dynamically active region on Earth in terms of
GW forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current NGV instruments are well suited to
lower atmosphere SAANGRIA observations, but do not address climate and
mesosphere-lower thermosphere science topics fully. The new stratospheric and
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) NGV instruments would include Rayleigh
and resonance lidars and a Mesospheric Temperature Mapper that would measure
temperatures and vertical winds spanning altitudes from immediately above the
NGV flight altitude (~13 km) to ~100 km. These instruments will remain as NGV
"facility" instruments thereafter, thus greatly enhancing the scientific
benefits of the NCAR facilities for flight programs by NSF investigators in the
future. The information obtained from these measurements will benefit the
research community and society by helping to improve numerical weather
prediction, general circulation modeling, and climate studies.