* 1261303
* REU Site: Program in Biorefining and Biofuels
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 413,070.00

The development of sustainable and renewable energy supplies represents one of
society's greatest challenges. Biofuels are widely regarded a key component of a
new energy economy. The future production of fuels, chemicals and products from
biomass will require a complex series of integrated chemical conversion steps
('biorefining'). This REU Site Program engages students in cutting-edge research
for the production and conversions compounds that are of importance in
biorefining.

An additional focus of this REU site program is integration, both across
academic disciplines and across four different institutions in close proximity.
Participant interaction with researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder
(CU) [central (host) institution], Colorado State University (CSU), Colorado
School of Mines (Mines), and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
provides unique exposure to science and engineering careers. These institutions
have partnered to form the Colorado Center for Biorefining and Biofuels (C2B2):
a cooperative research and educational collaboration devoted to the conversion
of biomass to fuels and other products. As a result of interacting in this
dynamic 'virtual center' environment, students exit the site program equipped
with an understanding of university, federal, and industry research
partnerships. Moreover, during the summer program participants from various
disciplines must collaborate to find science- and engineering-based solutions to
challenges faced by renewable energy technologies. Students gain first-hand
experience in interdisciplinary research and development problem-solving
techniques and work together to create meaningful progress.

A principal objective of this site program is to encourage promising diverse
students, particularly women, underrepresented minorities, and students from
primarily undergraduate institutions, to pursue careers in engineering and
science research. Today's undergraduate students are fueled by the motivation to
make a difference in the world. This program is specifically designed to attract
participants from populations traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering and simultaneously reflect the cross-disciplinary and cross-
institutional nature of modern research, especially in renewable and sustainable
energy. This program introduces participants to the professions of scientific
investigation and engineering. It furthermore encourages participants to
complete bachelor?s degrees in pursuit of more advanced science, math, and
engineering graduate education. Participants gain scientific and engineering
maturity and are better prepared to enter a scientific career as a knowledgeable
team contributor. It is expected that many participants will utilize this
training to become the academic and commercial leaders of the next decade.

"The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program."