* 1261005
* CAREER:  Mass Transport in Groundwater:  an Integration of Research and Experiential Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 255,193.00

&lt;br/&gt;Soluble contaminants or tracers migrate through natural systems
defining concentration versus time curves that vary between sample locations.
Often, these curves show long tails that are not described by the processes of
advection and dispersion. Whether we need to predict evolution of natural
systems or the quality of our water supply, we must be able to quantitatively
predict such tailing behavior. The reliability of contaminant transport
predictions depends on a good understanding of in-situ flow and transport
processes; however, large contrasts, complex connectivity, and extreme spatial
localization of hydraulic properties combine with sparse data to limit our
understanding of fundamental processes and properties controlling field-scale
hydrologic behavior. This research looks to help answer the following question:
Under what scenarios can&lt;br/&gt;long tailing of concentration histories be
described by commonly used advective-dispersive models given hydraulic
conductivity heterogeneity, versus the need for bicontinuum models with local
diffusion between mobile and less mobile porosity
domains?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bicontinuum mass transfer has been used to explain
complex transport behavior in some environments, but experimental verification
of this process is problematic because geochemical samples only represent the
mobile component of the pore space, making determination of processes in the
immobile domain impossible. Recently, the PI and colleagues have demonstrated
that electrical geophysical techniques provide a&lt;br/&gt;means of verifying
the occurrence of bicontinuum transport and estimating the parameters which
control these processes by sampling the total pore space, rather than just the
mobile domain. While these results show promise for using remotely sensed data
for directly estimating hydrologic parameters controlling mass
transfer?immobile&lt;br/&gt;porosity and mass-transfer rate?in situ, determining
when dual-domain systems control transport is unclear. In particular, it is not
clear what scales of mass transfer rates (or diffusion lengths) and immobile
porosity fractions can be practically investigated with this approach, or
heterogeneity controls on transport. The objectives of this research are to
determine 1) whether solutes locally diffuse between mobile and less mobile
zones at three field sites of differing geology, and 2) how mass transfer
processes within and between heterogeneous zones affect our macroscopic view of
solute transport in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tied to this research is the
development of an integrated hydrogeophysics summer course, where undergraduate
researchers will combine field experimentation, in-class instruction, and
numerical modeling to develop and test hypotheses regarding the processes
controlling transport under different regimes. This field camp will be run in
collaboration with three HBCUs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities)
partnered with Penn State and the Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP), a
summer-long internship that engages students from minority groups and
institutions in cutting-edge&lt;br/&gt;research at majority institutions of the
Committee on Institutional Cooperation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;