* 1261910
* Synthesis and Characterization of Functional Boron Nitride Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Yoke Khin Yap, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;New carbon materials such as fullerenes,
carbon nanotubes, and graphene have attracted tremendous research interests and
led to two Nobel Prizes. The structures of boron nitride (BN) materials are
similar to those of carbon solids but have intriguing and different properties.
However, the synthesis of BN nanostructures is very challenging. This project
supports the efforts to synthesize, characterize, and functionalize single wall
boron nitride nanotubes (SW-BNNTs) and boron nitride nanoribbons (BNNRs) by
catalytic chemical vapor deposition, which will enable the creation of new
electronic and optical materials with tunable properties. This project offers
integrated education and outreach activities to future STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) workforces, includes high school
students and teachers, undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, scientists, engineers, and underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
efforts to synthesize, characterize, and functionalize single wall boron nitride
nanotubes (SW-BNNTs) and boron nitride nanoribbons (BNNRs) by catalytic chemical
vapor deposition. These research themes are challenging, unexplored, and will
lead to cutting edge discoveries on new functional BN nanostructures with
tunable electronic and optical properties. This project contributes to a series
of education and outreach activities, including, i) minor, enterprise, and
certificate programs in nanoscale science and technology; ii) research training
to postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students; iii)
nanotech workshops for high school students (girls, minorities, persons with
disabilities) and their teachers; iv) development of a new book and encyclopedia
chapters; v) organization of an international conference series; and vi)
collaboration with researchers at national laboratories.