* 1261968
* CCCC Increasing Capacity &amp; Enhancing Tribal Innovation
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2020
* Karen Saari, Cankdeska Cikana Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2020
* USD 2,495,760.00

Cankdeska Cikana Community College is dedicated to community capacity building
via educational opportunities. Through strategic planning efforts, CCCC has
carefully crafted a plan that will strengthen and sustain STEM courses and
programs by:&lt;br/&gt;1. actively recruiting new talent (students and faculty)
and raising the STEM bar by providing support to existing STEM curriculum
through hiring highly qualified STEM faculty, research and development, and PEER
tutoring;&lt;br/&gt;2. implementing an innovative mathematics curriculum
paradigm that will approach mathematics from three alternative (Accelerated,
Slice, and Extended) directions aside from the traditional 15 week model;
and&lt;br/&gt;3. leveraging existing partnerships to provide a 4-year degree
program through face-to-face, hybrid, and interactive video networking (IVN)
course delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: CCCC will achieve
higher enrollment goals and retain students to matriculation into four-year
institutions through recruitment and retention strategies that implement
innovative tactics of math course advancement from 4 directions. Students will
increase their ability to complete remedial and advanced mathematics through: 1)
Accelerated Mathematics Academy (AMA); 2) use of mastery learning paradigm in
extended math courses; 3) utilization of a Slice model for course engagement;
and/or 4) continuation of the traditional 15 week semester approach. The college
will increase STEM instructional capacity and improve research capabilities
through the role modeling of a research environment that recognizes the
importance of culture in relation to STEM. Additional STEM faculty with STEM
credentials will enhance existing services and free up time for all faculty to
focus on the development of intellectual and innovative models for learning.
Evaluative processes will allow CCCC to build on existing pedagogical practices
as well as cultivating new cutting edge practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This project encompasses a comprehensive strategy to scaffold on
existing education models that will implement a strategy for success through
recruitment, support, and retention. A current student population averaging 245
students that are predominantly Native American of high poverty levels will be
served. Opportunities for incoming freshman will increase college readiness with
the AMA while attracting existing students that may have had disparities in the
past. Successful implementation of this goal will help provide the paradigm
necessary to promote a sustainable program and the backing to keep students on a
path to successful matriculation into mainstream institutions. Additional STEM
faculty expands the college's ability to explore proven models while increasing
capacity to conduct research that will lead to dissemination through peer
reviewed publications and conferences. The successful outcome of this project
will increase STEM enrollment in mainstream universities. Broader outcomes focus
on increasing STEM graduates that will serve as engineers, scientists, and
mathematicians both inside and outside of Native American communities.