* 1261433
* Neural investigation of the dual role of saccadic eye movements in visual perception
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Michael Paradiso, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 549,786.00

Humans are highly visual animals and our daily experiences, memories, and dreams
are dominated by our visual sense. To create the continuous and seamless visual
experience, humans explore their environment by making three to four eye
fixations every second, each followed by a rapid saccadic eye movement to the
next object of interest. However, most experiments on vision are conducted with
research participants trained to keep their eyes still to remove these saccadic
eye movements. Such an approach may not tell us in full how vision works in its
naturalistic context where eyes are freely moving. In this project, Dr. Michael
Paradiso of Brown University will use single unit recording from monkeys when
they make visual decisions about objects appearing during or just after saccadic
eye movements. The data are expected to reveal how eye movements alter visual
processing and how the brain is able to parse the neural continuum into discrete
perceptual block using signals associated with saccades. These experiments are
innovative in their integration of behavioral testing in naturalistic paradigms
with brain recordings using leading edge multi-electrode technology. The
researcher aims to bridge the gap between basic research and our understanding
of human visual experience in the real world.

Numerous disorders ranging from autism, to dyslexia and schizophrenia exhibit
abnormal eye movements. At the present it is unclear how the abnormal eye
movements are involved in the disorder, but the proposed project will provide
critical data that can serve as a foundation for further studies targeted at
specific disorders. Through the project, the researcher will continue to give
lectures to K-12 students, collaborate with K-12 teachers on science
instruction, and host a discussion group in Brown's Catalyst Program for
incoming minority students at Brown University. Finally, Dr. Paradiso will
participate in the big data effort by making the data available to support other
coordinated NSF efforts that aim to make use of real data in the teaching of
STEM related courses and to enable participation in discovery science by those
who would otherwise have no access to such data.