* 1261833
* 2013-2018 UNAVCO Community Proposal Geodesy Advancing Geosciences and EarthScope:  The GAGE Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Margaret Benoit
* 12/31/2018
* USD 71,460,873.00

Miller&lt;br/&gt;1261833&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GAGE Facility: Geodesy
Advancing Geosciences and EarthScope Cooperative Agreement (CA) supports
advancement of cutting-edge community geodetic research around the world. Over
the last two decades, space-based geodetic observations have enabled measurement
of the motions of the Earth?s surface and crust at many different scales, with
unprecedented spatial and temporal detail and increased precision, leading to
fundamental discoveries in continental deformation, plate boundary processes,
the earthquake cycle, the geometry and dynamics of magmatic systems, continental
groundwater storage and hydrologic loading. Space geodesy furthers research on
earthquake and tsunami hazards, volcanic eruptions, coastal subsidence, wetlands
health, soil moisture and groundwater distribution. Of particular importance are
contributions to understanding of processes related to climate dynamics,
including hurricane tracking and intensity, sea level rise, and changes in
mountain glaciers and large polar ice sheets. As global population
disproportionately increases in hazards-prone coastal and tectonically active
regions of the US and across the globe, the societal relevance of quantifying,
understanding, and potentially mitigating natural hazards grows. Geoscientists
using global geodetic infrastructure coupled with leading edge techniques are
well poised to advance basic research that is in the U.S. and global public
interest as the challenges of living on a dynamic planet
escalate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-funded geodesy investigators are active on
every continent, across a broad spectrum of the geosciences, and facilitated by
data and engineering services that are now merged under the GAGE Facility. GAGE
continues operations of: 1) the EarthScope Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO), an
integrated set of geodetic networks that includes 1100 continuous GPS sites
(with ~350 high-rate, low-latency data streams and ~125 surface meteorological
sensors), 78 borehole strainmeters and seismometers, and 6 long-baseline laser
strainmeters, and tiltmeters on several volcanoes; 2) global engineering and
data services primarily to NSF-funded investigators who use terrestrial and
satellite geodetic technologies in their research and provision of network
operations support to community GPS networks and NASA?s Global GNSS Network
(GGN); and 3) Education and community outreach actvities. NSF?s Division of
Polar Programs (PLR) contributes to the GAGE Facility support of PI research and
GPS networks in Greenland and Antarctica. NASA contributes to the GAGE Facility
to support the GGN and the activities of the IGS Central Bureau, which underlie
the internationally coordinated reference frame products that make high-
precision geodesy possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***