* 1261582
* CIF21 DIBBs: Brown Dog
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Praveen Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 10,519,716.00

The information age has made it trivial for anyone to create and then share vast
amounts of digital data. This includes unstructured collections made of data
such as images, video, and audio to collections of born digital content made up
of data such as documents and spreadsheets. While the creation and sharing of
content has been made easy, its inverse, the ability to search and use the
contents of digital data, has been made exponentially more difficult. In the
physical analogue librarians have used the process of curation to standardize
the format by which information is stored and diligently index holdings with
metadata to allow both current and future generations to find information.
Digitally this does not happen as that curation overhead is an unwelcomed
bottleneck to the creation of more data. Though popular services such as modern
search engines give the illusion that this is being done, this is largely over
the portion of digital data that is text based and/or containing text metadata.
Unstructured collections and contents trapped behind difficult to read file
formats, however, make up a significant part of our collective digital data
assets and are largely not accessible. &lt;br/&gt;Science today not only uses
but relies on software and digital content. It is well known that science is not
only responsible for a significant amount of our digital data holdings but that
also much of this is un-curated data, what the scientific community currently
refer to as "long-tail" data. As such contemporary science, which relies on
digital data and software, software which evolves and disappears quickly as
underlying technology changes, is entering a realm where scientific results are
no-longer easily reproducible and as such in essence no longer a science as
science hinges on the fact that a documented procedure will result in the same
result each time.