* 1261587
* MEETING:   Inside the Vertebrate Nose, Barcelona, Spain, July 8-12,2013
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Funds will be used to support the travel and participation of American graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars in a symposium entitled "Inside the
Vertebrate Nose: Evolution, Structure and Function" that will be held within the
larger 10th International Congress of Vertebrate Morphologists (ICVM) in
Barcelona, Spain in July of 2013. This symposium will bring together anatomists,
paleontologists, anthropologists, and engineers to focus on improving
understanding of the nose, a structure of vital importance to olfaction and
respiration. Relative to other regions of the vertebrate head (e.g. the eyes,
ears, and mouth), the nose has received little scientific attention. Because the
major functions of the nose are dependent on airflow and the internal anatomy of
the nose affects airflow, a complete picture of nasal function requires
scientists that study both anatomy (i.e. biologists) and flow dynamics (i.e.
engineers) to collaborate within an evolutionary and comparative anatomy
context. Over the past decade, advances in imaging and computation have
generated new data on both nasal anatomy and airflow dynamics that need to be
integrated. For example, high resolution computed tomography (CT) scans and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have allowed unprecedented views of the complex
internal anatomy of the skull in a wide array of vertebrates. Similarly,
advances in computational fluid dynamics have been used to simulate airflow
within the nose and to study how the nose actually works to transport odorants
(smells) to different regions of the nasal cavity. This meeting will be the
first to bring together physical and life scientists who study the nose in a
broad array of vertebrates, both extant and extinct. Novel ideas and new
approaches are likely to emerge and young scientists (graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows) will benefit from participating. The ICVM is an ideal
venue as it is held only once every four years and is very well attended by a
diverse group of vertebrate biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students
and postdoctoral scholars who participate in the meeting will enhance their
professional skills and broaden their professional contacts. Women and students
from underrepresented minorities in science will be actively recruited as
participants by advertising through professional society meetings and websites,
as well as via listservs. By bringing together researchers from disparate
fields, the symposium is likely to lead to productive discussions and
collaborations that are excellent examples of integrative, cross-disciplinary
science. Furthermore, this symposium and the publications that result from it
can contribute to the current state of knowledge in the areas of inhalation
toxicology, intranasal drug delivery, and artificial olfaction. For example,
advanced computer models of respiration could be used for predicting drug
delivery pathways in the human nose, while an improved understanding of
olfaction in other mammal species may reveal numerous bio-inspired design
principles for building synthetic smell detectors.