* 1261066
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Promoting Information Dispersion in Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Rong Rong, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 7,227.00

Information is critical to economic decision making. One important way people
obtain information is through social networks. Economists have studied the
shapes (or topologies) of social networks, in an effort to understand the
conditions under which one obtains efficient dissemination of information. These
studies have led people to draw attention to 'star' shaped networks, which occur
when small numbers of 'hub' agents gather information and distribute it to a
large number of people along 'spokes'. This type of network structure is thought
to be important in facilitating efficiency in a wide number of contexts,
including marketing, political leadership, as well as the dissemination of new
ideas and innovations. Despite the importance of 'star' networks, there remains
uncertainty about the features of social and economic environments that
facilitate their emergence. This is unfortunate, as many economically developing
areas continue to be impeded by poorly designed information networks.
Information is critical to economic decision making. In such cases, if possible,
taking simple steps (by implementing the right sort of institutions) to
facilitate the emergence of stars may offer substantial benefits for an area's
economic growth and development. This study is an effort to discover these
simple steps.

The coPI studies the impact of three institutional characteristics that often
coexist with star networks in natural settings. In particular, he hypothesizes
that star networks may be more likely to emerge when(1)information acquisition
is costly and budgets are limited; (2) network decisions can be made in real
time; and (3)there exist a certain form of property right protection, in
particular the right of the first refusal, where early investors have the right
(but not the obligation) to continue to play this role. All three institutions
have the characteristic of stabilizing the decision environment. He hypothesizes
that it is this stabilizing force that underlies the formation of reliable,
resilient, stable and efficient star network formation.

Results from this project could have broader impact because it may have
important implications for agricultural development, as the institutions studied
could in principle easily be implemented in appropriate natural environments in
order to bring improved agricultural knowledge and productivity. The results of
the study may also foster broad-based spread of knowledge and innovation, which
ultimately promotes the economic development process. Finally, the novel
perspectives offered by this study hold value to critical cross-disciplinary
research that lies at the nexus of marketing, public policy study, sociology,
anthropology and behavioral and institutional economics.