* 1261748
* The interplay between methanotrophy, methanogenesis, and soil geochemistry and its impact on net methane flux to the atmosphere from Arctic soils
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Jennifer Roberts, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 05/31/2014
* USD 51,521.00

Abstract

(1) Technical description

Microbial communities recycle carbon and nitrogen in the terrestrial environment
and are central to the flux of soil gases, including methane (CH4), a potent
greenhouse gas. Unfortunately, patterns of CH4 release from soils, especially in
the Arctic are changing, and there is an urgent need to better understand the
basis of in situ CH4 production by methanogens and oxidation rates and patterns
by methanotrophs; the main biological mechanism for CH4 consumption. Laboratory
work by the PI has established that mineral-bound nutrients are accessible to
methanotrophs and enhance their activity. Preliminary fieldwork in soil
environments near Ny Ålesund, Svalbard suggests that soil macronutrients, such
as P, and perhaps trace metals like Cu and Ni may limit methanotroph activity
and therefore methane oxidation rates. There is little known, however, how these
geochemical and nutrient conditions vary through the biological active zone
(BAZ) and impact methanogenesis. In collaboration with two researchers from
Newcastle University in the UK, who will perform all microbiological,
metagenomic and gas flux analyses, the PI proposes to perform geochemical,
mineralogical, and isotopic analyses on soils collected through the BAZ from
more than 13 sites in the vicinity of Ny Ålesund, Svalbard. EAGER funds are
requested to:

1. Field-test these laboratory relationships in a complex natural Arctic
permafrost soil environment, in which success is not guaranteed.

2. Test the innovative hypothesis that soil geochemistry is a fundamental
control on methane flux, a hypothesis that has not been field-tested previously,
nor with the rigor of our proposed sampling plan that includes variation in
altitude, hydrology, geomorphology, and bedrock lithology.

3. Develop a geochemical tool for predicting methane flux in Arctic
environments, which utilizes existing geochemical data or new data, acquired at
relatively low cost.

(2) Broader significance and importance

Methane fluxes from Arctic soils are an important input into the global climate
system; this project, if successful, can strengthen our ability to predict and
model global climate change. Understanding the link between soil geochemistry
and methanotroph/methanogen activity has broad applicability for many natural
systems outside of the Arctic. This project strengthens international
collaboration (with UK researchers). One B.S. student will be trained through
this grant. The PI has also partnered with a biology high school teacher to
provide research opportunities for high school students.