* 1261189
* Collaborative Research:  GSE/RES:  Diverse Young Women Traveling Pathways to STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/06/2012,09/30/2013
* Monica Bruning, Des Moines Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2013
* USD 121,262.00

Intellectual Merit: The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship
between (1) access to and use of STEM-related social, cultural, and economic
"capital" (or resources) and (2) specific educational pathways in college for a
group of academically talented, mostly minority young women who participated for
3 years in a high school program intended to spark and sustain their interest in
engineering. The high school program, Female Recruits Explore Engineering
(FREE), was implemented in 10 public schools in 3 states (CO, IA, and OH), from
2006-2009. FREE began with 131 mostly urban, Latina, Black, Native American and
Asian American girls who were strong students in math and science. The proposed
study will follow all the young women who stayed in FREE during high school and
their first post-high school year (n=81). In this group, 22% are pursuing
engineering majors, 35% are in other STEM majors, 33% are pursuing non-STEM
majors, and 10% are undecided. Pierre Bourdieu's "social capital" framework will
be employed to analyze the capital the participants brought with them and will
have used in college, including that gained in FREE, to pursue their college
goals. The concept of "educational pathways" will be used to examine the dynamic
interplay between institutional structures for pursuing college degrees, sources
of support in college, and individual decisions and choices made in college.
Data will include information about the young women's high school backgrounds,
experiences and lives (observation; interviews; demographic, self-efficacy and
social network surveys; Blackberry PIN, Messenger and email messages; website
and Facebook postings) from the FREE project. Comparable new data will be
collected about the women's college experiences through Facebook postings,
interviews and surveys. The qualitative data will be analyzed by creating a
coding scheme of a priori categories (based on the research questions) and in
situ (emerging from the data) categories and managed with the ATLAS.ti software
program. Survey data will be analyzed with descriptive statistics, and where
survey questions have been drawn from national surveys, those data will be used
to make national comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research seeks to impact the broader education community and society as a whole
by: illuminating the connections between forms of capital and choice for or
against careers in engineering and other STEM fields; contributing to policies
and programs for increasing diversity in STEM fields; involving non-privileged
students in research related to their STEM circumstances and options; preparing
graduate students in Education, Women's Studies, and STEM fields for research on
education-related issues, particularly those involving under-represented
populations; and widely disseminating results through diverse sources, such as
peer-reviewed journals, STEM-oriented associations, the FREE website, college-
oriented websites and magazines, local and national press, and speaking
engagements.