* 1261805
* Collaborative Research:   Building Knowledge Capital in Specialized Financial Centers
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jessie Poon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2016
* USD 93,926.00

This project examines the nature of religious knowledge capital in Islamic
finance and how this capital strengthens and legitimizes financial centers'
locational reputation. Religious knowledge capital combines the resources,
skills and authority associated with a community of experts endowed with
specialized religious knowledge. From a theoretical perspective this research
will advance the concept of religious knowledge capital as it can be
distinguished from human capital by highlighting the nature of epistemic
authority among religious scholars and financial gatekeepers in Islamic
economies. Such authority is rooted in knowledge of the Islamic (specifically
Shari'a) legal methodology and epistemology. Direct grounding of sacred texts
bestows knowledge communities with legal authority that renders financial
products, services and contracts permissible in Islamic markets. The
investigators will address important theoretical and empirical questions of
variegated capitalism associated with religious principles of market governance.
As such, the research seeks to achieve two outcomes. First it will
quantitatively test the hypothesis that religious knowledge capital positively
influences locational reputation using spatial models. Second, it will
qualitatively clarify the factors that shape religious knowledge capital level.
Data collection involves surveys, interviews and web analysis at Kuala Lumpur
(Malaysia) and Manama (Bahrain). Both cities are building considerable human and
knowledge capital in Islamic finance but in different ways. In comparing
knowledge communities in the two cities, the project contributes to economic
geography by unpacking the nature of local governance structures and how these
structures facilitate Islamic financial flows across global spaces.

The project will train students from underrepresented groups at their respective
universities, and disseminate findings through publications, workshops,
conferences, and lectures in the US, Malaysia and Bahrain, and relevant Gulf
States, and via the APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) study centers.
Government agencies in Malaysia and Bahrain have also expressed an interest in
the research and the investigators will foster international collaborations with
researchers in those countries and their policy-makers. This research stands to
benefit the United States in two ways. First, American cities such as New York
City have acquired a reputation for their command of global financial flows, and
Citigroup along with other American banks have begun to offer Islamic financial
products. But NYC trails behind London as a center of Islamic finance. Second,
the potential for American banks to access the Islamic market is enormous as
demand for Islamic financial services rises in the US. This research will help
shed light on how American banks, and the cities that host them, can become
significant players in the global Islamic financial market.