* 1261814
* Education and Rapid Socio-Cultural Change: A Longitudinal Mixed-Methods Assessment of Secondary Education in a Developing World Context
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Eileen Anderson-Fye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 70,004.00

The goals of this project are first, to examine the role of secondary education
as a mediator of globalizing cultural change in subjective and objective
outcomes for the demographic shift cohort in a rapidly changing socio-cultural
and economic context; and second, to inform theory, policy, and practice
regarding the mushrooming global health concern of adolescent well-being. To
accomplish these goals this research will extend a longitudinal study of a key
cohort of young women's experiences of cultural and economic change to examine
and explain important outcomes in their lives. In doing so, this research will
provide experience-near data on processes of globalization as mediated by
education. It will also assess and report on outcomes in relation to both local
and global indicators of adolescent well-being including identification of
points for policy and practice interventions. Through a mixed-methods
ethnographic approach using interviews, surveys, and archival research, this
study utilizes a unique opportunity to track iterative processes of individuals
within their changing cultural context over time in order to explain (i.e. not
simply describe) significant outcomes in their lives.

This project aims to advance theory on subjective processes involved in
globalization for young people with a focus on intracultural variation,
education, and subjective experience. Specifically, this study applies a human
development perspective to youth-related globalization theories to articulate
the iterative processes of personal meaning making and rapid cultural and
institutional change. It will explain how individuals in a critical historical
moment of cultural change have made sense of socio-cultural, institutional, and
economic change and employed educational experience to selectively craft new
pathways in their own lives.

The project has broad impacts on policy and practice regarding growing global
concerns related to adolescent well-being, and it impacts methodological
expansion of ethnographic techniques in longitudinal cultural anthropology
studies. Results will point to key arenas and sensitive periods for evaluating
institutional interventions to promote general well-being for youth undergoing
rapid cultural change and contribute a rare person-centered ethnographic model
of a panel study in cultural anthropology while training graduate and
undergraduate students.