* 1261824
* Workshop on Micro and Nano Structures for Phase Change Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Yoav Peles, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,600.00

CBET-1261824&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peles &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boiling, evaporation, and
condensation on micro and nano engineered structures have received significant
interest over the last decade. It is now evident that such structures on
surfaces hold great promise to advance liquid-vapor phase change systems and are
key to enable thermal management of ultra-high heat flux systems, such as
computer processing units (CPUs), laser diodes, and power amplifiers.
Accordingly, there has been a significant increase in research efforts in these
areas with a significant emergence in recent conferences. However, comprehensive
understanding of complex phase-change processes is still needed, which is
currently lacking, to harness these processes for various devices and important
applications. Furthermore, a roadmap that defines the needs for the future
generation of phase-change technologies needs to be developed. This workshop
address these shortcomings and provide a roadmap to industry, government
agencies, and the academic communities to accelerate and optimize the
development of superior heat transfer methods offered by micro and nano
technologies. To achieve these goals, the workshop focuses on: 1) State-of-the-
art knowledge of phase change processes, 2) Advancements in modeling, metrology,
manipulation capability, 3) Transformative opportunities and future directions
for phase-change research, and 4) Development of phase-change devices and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant supports this workshop by helping
create a forum that brings together experts from various disciplines that will
solve significant current and future thermal management challenges. The NSF
support also allows extending the invitation to young participants as well as
true pioneers to this workshop. The workshop brings together experts from
various disciplines including mechanical engineering, chemical engineering and
material science, with an emphasis on the heat transfer community to identify
critical challenges, advancements, and new directions in phase-change research.
The two-day extensive workshop identifies key research, development, and design
needs, and provides a guideline for such future endeavors. The outcome of this
workshop is focused on developing a roadmap that defines the needs for the
future generation of phase-change technologies, as well as documented in
archival review articles.