* 1261776
* The Severe Hail Analysis, Representation, and Prediction (SHARP) Project
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ming Xue, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 819,070.00

Severe hail, particularly in urban areas, can cause significant injury and
millions of dollars in property damage. These impacts, however, could be
significantly mitigated with more accurate and precise hail predictions based on
0-2 hour numerical weather prediction (NWP) forecasts. To provide such NWP
forecasts requires advances in data assimilation (DA), the development of
innovative ensemble forecast methods, and the application of novel data mining
techniques to represent and predict hail within state-of-the-art NWP models. The
Severe Hail Analysis, Representation, and Prediction project (SHARP) will focus
on answering two scientific hypotheses: (1) assimilation of data from new and
multiple data sources (including single- and dual-polarization Doppler radars,
wind profilers, soundings, and surface observations) will improve hail
representation within a NWP model, and (2) application of advanced data-mining
techniques to NWP ensemble output will improve predictions of hail size and
coverage. The specific goals of SHARP will be to: (1) produce and verify 0-2
hour ensemble forecasts of severe hail for a variety of events; (2) assess the
ability of these forecasts to correctly represent hail as observed by dual-
polarization Doppler radars and other instruments; and (3) accurately predict
the geographic extent and size of hail reaching the surface, verifying the
forecasts against high-quality observational data sets such as those produced by
the NOAA Severe Hazards Analysis and Verification Experiment (SHAVE). Forecast
ensemble output will be compared against radar-based extrapolation methods. The
intellectual merit of this effort lies in progress toward application of
advanced data assimilation (using multiple-moment microphysics and dual-
polarization radar data) and data mining for short-term hail prediction. Though
data mining has been applied to precipitation forecasts at the continental
scale, far more novel is its use alongside advanced Ensemble Kalman Filter
(EnKF) DA for convective-scale NWP. This effort builds upon previous work by the
PIs in the fields of DA, storm-scale ensemble prediction, and data mining. This
project is expected to advance the science of severe weather prediction,
defining a paradigm linking data assimilation and data mining that could be
applied to predict other convective-scale hazards such as downbursts and
tornadoes. With sufficient computing resources, the techniques and algorithms
developed in this project could be applied to support real-time severe weather
warning operations, as envisioned in the NWS "Warn-on-Forecast" paradigm.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of will include enhanced cross-
disciplinary connections disciplinary and potential economic benefits to sectors
including aviation that are especially vulnerable to hail. Results will aid in
improving lead-time and user confidence in hail warnings, giving vulnerable
industries increased opportunity to mitigate damage and individuals additional
time to seek shelter. Collaboration with the National Severe Storms Laboratory
will enable comparison and testing of results against operational, radar-based
extrapolation methods and enable transfer of knowledge and tools to NWS
forecasters responsible for severe weather warnings. The PIs will provide
interdisciplinary training to graduate students, as well as undergraduate
students through the OU/CAPS Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program, with which the PIs have a strong history of involvement.