* 1261322
* REU Site:   Using the Social Sciences, Natural Sciences, and Mathematics to Study Crime
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Kent Kerley, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2016
* USD 341,312.00

"Using the Social Sciences, Natural Sciences, and Mathematics to Study Crime" is
an interdisciplinary REU program that brings together faculty from three
programs (Criminal Justice, Forensic Science, and Computer Forensics) at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). This eight-week summer program
combines the strengths of these distinctive, yet interrelated, programs into a
synergistic relationship. Students work with faculty in one of three research
tracks: 1) Criminal Justice, 2) Forensic Science, or 3) Digital Forensics. This
collaborative venture benefits REU student participants, faculty mentors, two
academic departments, the College of Arts and Sciences, the Center for
Information Assurance and Joint Forensics Research, the university research
infrastructure, and the scientific community via intellectual merit and broader
impacts.

Intellectual Merit This REU program addresses emerging issues of crime and
criminal investigation by uniting a traditional Social Science discipline
(Criminal Justice) with two STEM disciplines (Forensic Science and Computer and
Information Science). Our program provides a much-needed opportunity for
undergraduate students to conduct interdisciplinary research on a pressing
social problem. The overall objective of this program is to involve a diverse
group of undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research that prepare them
for a wide range of post-graduate programs in Criminal Justice/Criminology,
Sociology, Biology, Chemistry, Forensic Science, Computer Science, and Computer
Forensics. This REU program broadens the research participation of
underrepresented groups and students from colleges and universities where
research opportunities in STEM are limited through targeted recruitment and
mentoring. UAB is one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the
Southeastern region of the United States and is surrounded by a large number of
universities with similar levels of diversity, as well as many Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The research infrastructure and
personnel are in place at UAB to deliver a strong interdisciplinary research
program targeted to a diverse group of undergraduate students from across the
nation. In addition to learning scientific content and participating in real
research projects, students also learn about the interdisciplinary nature of
scientific inquiry, research ethics, post-graduate options, and professional and
career development.

Broader Impacts Numerous broad impacts are realized for students involved in
this interdisciplinary REU Site. REU participants and faculty mentors gain a
greater awareness of, and appreciation for, the contributions of many
disciplines to research challenges. The cohort-based nature of the program allow
students to develop long-term collaborative relationships with faculty and
students from multiple disciplines. The outcomes of this interdisciplinary
program include: 1) State-of-the-art research experiences that motivate students
to pursue graduate degrees in Social Science and STEM disciplines, 2) Broadened
participation of underrepresented groups and students from colleges and
universities where research opportunities in STEM are limited in research on
crime, 3) Increased understanding of how Social Science and STEM disciplines
converge to address pressing social problems, 4) A sense of community among REU
students and faculty, 5) An understanding of ethical issues faced by researchers
in Social Science and STEM disciplines, and 6) Enhanced collaboration between
the Department of Justice Sciences (including Criminal Justice, Forensic
Science, and Legal Studies programs) and the Department of Computer and
Information Sciences at UAB (including Computer Forensics and Digital Security
programs).