* 1261443
* Collaborative research:   Sources and circulation of intermediate and deep waters and their role in Campanian-Maastrichtian global cooling
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Christopher Poulsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2018
* USD 193,620.00

The late Cretaceous period (83-66 Ma) saw an important climatic transition from
the extreme warmth of the early Late Cretaceous to the cooler conditions of the
Early Paleocene. Evidence from multiple ocean basins indicates that this
transition was accompanied by major changes in ocean circulation. However, the
nature of these oceanographic changes and their role in global cooling are the
subject of debate. Some interpretations call for expansion of southern component
water (SCW) through the global ocean, possibly causing widespread cooling
through low-latitude upwelling of cold deep waters. Others suggest shifts in the
dominance of regional sources of deep-water formation, including initiation of
North Atlantic sources, leading to changes in intra-basinal heat transport and
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research, involving scientists
from the University of Missouri-Columbia, the University of Florida, and the
University of Michigan, seeks to resolve these controversies. Building on their
earlier findings, the researchers will generate new geochemical proxy data from
locations that will, in combination with existing data, constrain possible
intermediate- and deep ocean sources and circulation modes. They will also
evaluate the plausibility of paleoceanographic interpretations through climate
model simulations, testing hypotheses regarding the effect of gateways and
greenhouse gas concentrations on circulation patterns and deep convection and
their links with global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work will add to our knowledge about the relationship between ocean
circulation and global climate change and, in this way, contribute to efforts to
predict future climate change. In addition, the researchers will conduct
specific activities that contribute to general education and the dissemination
of scientific understanding, and the training and mentoring of young scientists
including the following: (i) developing short videos to communicate the
excitement and novelty of paleoceanographic research to the public, to be
featured in displays at natural history museums at the researchers? home
institutions, and posted on popular websites, (ii) training graduate students at
each of the participating institutions, and (iii) disseminating results through
publications, presentations at professional meetings, and by integrating
research into lecture material, discussions, and classroom exercises for
graduate and undergraduate students.