* 1261026
* U.S.-Chile IRES: Intraspecific Variation and Genetic Mechanisms of Animal Sociality
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Cecelia Wigal, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 249,801.00

Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed program, twelve U.S. students (6
undergrad, 6 graduate) will collaborate with faculty and students at two Chilean
institutions (Universidad de Chile, P. Universidad Católica de Chile) to
determine geographical and social conditions underlying direct fitness variation
in the degu (Octodon degus), a social rodent found within a wide geographical
range in Chile. Previous work in one degu population showed that direct fitness
(per capita number of offspring per mother) decreases with increasing group
size, suggesting that group living is costly to females. Contrary to theory,
degus in this population do not live in kin groups, suggesting that direct
fitness costs are not offset by enhanced indirect fitness. To what extent these
trends occur in other degu populations is not known. IRES students will study
how group size, kinship and local environmental conditions influence the direct
fitness of females ? including an examination of the extent to which direct
reproduction is equitable among females belonging to the same social groups ? in
two degu populations. Students working in the field will determine social group
composition and collect tissue for genetic analyses. Student-led genetic
analyses will determine if females living with kin have higher inclusive fitness
than females living with non-kin. Depending on the outcomes of these studies,
the students may conduct research on social foraging strategies, costs of
dispersal and personality assessment in different
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will develop the professional
skills and cultural understanding of students, increasing the likelihood for
successful future projects and their capacity to compete and collaborate in the
international research arena. To this end, students will be engaged in research,
educational, and cultural activities for up to two years. Prior to IRES,
students will participate in animal and research training, grant proposal
development, and Spanish language courses. During IRES, students will develop
behavioral and genetic research skills, giving them a broad research ?toolkit.?
Collaborations with Chilean counterparts will enhance their international
network of peers and potential collaborators. After IRES, students will prepare
manuscripts for publication in peer-reviewed journals and present their results
at regional and national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;An important aim of the program is
to broaden the impacts of the project by promoting international research and
STEM education in the greater Chattanooga, Tennessee area. To this end, IRES
students will consult with University of Tennessee at Chattanooga engineering
students regarding the design of a new prairie dog exhibit at the Chattanooga
Zoo, an organization located in inner-city Chattanooga and serving a diverse
constituency. In collaboration with students from the Chattanooga Girls
Leadership Academy (a STEM-focused middle &amp; high school serving mostly
minority &amp; economically disadvantaged girls), the IRES students will study
the behavior of the prairie dogs and other social animals at the zoo.
Undergraduate students in the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga?s STEM
teacher preparation program ? a pathway into secondary STEM classrooms for
talented STEM majors ? will incorporate some of the projects into STEM
educational activities for science classes at the high school. Activities will
be highlighted in a documentary segment to be aired on a local Public
Broadcasting Station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, this award will provide 6
undergraduate and 6 graduate students from the University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga and other institutions with the opportunity to gain international
research experience in Chile. In collaboration with researchers at the
Universidad de Chile and Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, students will
study the composition of social groups and reproductive consequences of group-
living among the degu (Octodon degus), a rodent found only in Chile. The aim of
the work is to determine if the reproductive consequences of group-living are
habitat-dependent or depend on the extent to which degus live with close
relatives. To this end, the students will study degu social groups in two
populations. They will also conduct genetic analyses to determine if females
live with close relatives and if the number of young that females produce is
dependent on the size and composition of the groups in which they live. This
research will make important contributions to the discipline of behavioral
ecology. &lt;br/&gt;The program will develop the professional skills and
cultural understanding of students, increasing the likelihood for success of
projects and the international competitiveness of students. To this end,
students will be engaged in research, educational, and cultural activities for
up to two years. Prior to IRES, students will receive animal and research
training, write grant proposals, and take Spanish courses. During IRES, students
will develop research skills that will make them competitive for graduate
programs and research careers. Collaborations with Chilean counterparts will
enhance their international networking. After IRES, students will prepare
manuscripts for publication in scientific journals and present their results at
regional and national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;An important aim of the program is to
broaden the impacts of the project by promoting international research and STEM
education in the greater Chattanooga, Tennessee area. To this end, IRES students
will consult with University of Tennessee at Chattanooga engineering students
regarding the design of a new prairie dog exhibit at the Chattanooga Zoo, an
organization located in inner-city Chattanooga and serving a diverse
constituency. In collaboration with students from the Chattanooga Girls
Leadership Academy (a STEM-focused middle &amp; high school serving mostly
minority &amp; economically disadvantaged girls), the IRES students will study
the behavior of the prairie dogs and other social animals at the zoo.
Undergraduate students in the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga?s STEM
teacher preparation program ? a pathway into secondary STEM classrooms for
talented STEM majors ? will incorporate some of the projects into STEM
educational activities for science classes at the high school. Activities will
be highlighted in a documentary segment to be aired on a local Public
Broadcasting Station.