* 1261525
* IRES:  US-Australia Collaboration on a Fundamental Approach to Generating New Classes of Lightweight, High Performance,High Entropy Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Lori Bassman, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 223,438.00

Through this International Research Experiences for Students award, Harvey Mudd
College (HMC) undergraduate students will participate in an ongoing
collaboration with researchers in the School of Materials Science and
Engineering and the Electron Microscope Unit at the University of New South
Wales (UNSW) in Sydney, Australia. Principal investigator Lori Bassman and lead
UNSW collaborators Dr. Kevin Laws and Professor Michael Ferry will develop
project directions for year-round research by participating students (four per
year), with 10 week visits by the students and PI to UNSW each year. At UNSW the
students will have extensive access to physical metallurgy laboratories,
microscope facilities, training, and discipline-specific expertise unavailable
at HMC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the collaboration, HMC students will
develop novel metallic high entropy alloys (HEAs) with mechanical properties
greatly exceeding those of conventional engineering metals. Unlike traditional
alloys that have one primary constituent element, HEAs have five or more
elements in roughly equiatomic proportions. HEAs have excellent potential in a
vast range of applications, from making lighter-weight, high-strength structures
to usage in high temperature applications to forming coatings for high wear or
corrosive environments. Given their complexity, the range of possible alloys to
be developed is as extensive as the periodic table itself, with tremendous
promise for tailoring material properties for a great many different
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms by which these complex alloys
are formed and improved properties are achieved are not well understood. The
central goal of this project is to develop a fundamental approach for predicting
compositions that form stable metallic solid solutions. This approach will be
used to generate new classes of alloys with application-specific properties. The
specific projects to be performed by HMC undergraduates will focus on alloy
development, fabrication, mechanical characterization and microstructural
characterization, as well as computational modeling of alloy structures. An
experimentally validated, systematic model based on first-principles
calculations will enable efficient development of further HEA
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the maturation of
undergraduate students into confident, enthusiastic researchers who are prepared
for science and engineering careers in international research environments.