* 1261363
* Cultural Dynamics and Overlapping Interaction Spheres in the Marmara Lake Basin, Western Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Christina Luke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 245,924.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Christopher H. Roosevelt and Dr.
Christina Luke will lead a three-year interdisciplinary research project
exploring the cultural dynamics of social and political groups active in western
Turkey during the Middle and Late Bronze Ages of the second millennium BCE. The
project focuses on the Marmara Lake Basin of the middle Gediz River valley, a
strategic gateway linking Aegean and central Anatolian spheres of interaction,
to understand the local development and nature of centralized political
authority in the context of dynamic and wider interaction spheres to east and
west. Through integration of non-invasive surface survey, excavation, and sample
and object analyses at a network of recently discovered citadels and other sites
in the study area, the project investigates political alliances and economic
relationships during a time in which Minoan and Mycenaean polities thrived in
the Aegean and the Hittites of central Anatolia grew from a local kingdom to a
vast territorial empire. The largest and most complex site of the local network
was Kaymakçý, and it was likely both the local capital as well as that of an
independent kingdom and later Hittite vassal known as the Seha River Land. The
8.6 ha citadel dates to the second millennium BCE, during which time parts of it
were burned at least once, and after which time it appears to have been
abandoned forever, leaving well-preserved Bronze Age remains on the surface.

These fundamental political and social processes are still at work in the Near
East today and this archaeological project provides an excellent example to
examine how they interact over an extended time period.

The proposed work will integrate geophysical and soil-chemistry surveys,
excavation, ceramic and stone material studies, and botanical, faunal, and other
subsistence and environmental sample analyses to address spatial organization,
subsistence practices, and modes of material production for understanding the
dynamics of social complexity in areas of overlapping interaction spheres.
Furthermore, this research in the middle Gediz River valley will complement
ongoing work elsewhere in Bronze Age Anatolia. While the valley has always been
acknowledged as an important, connective corridor between the Aegean and central
Anatolia, it has remained a major gap in archaeological and geo-political
understandings of Minoan, Mycenaean, local Anatolian, and Hittite interactions
in western Anatolia. The project plans to fill this gap with the first new
excavation project in the region since the 1950s.

The broader impacts of the project include contributions to archaeological
understandings of relationships between local communities, interregional
interaction spheres, the spatial development of emergent political authorities,
and the organizational characteristics of their subsistence management and
material production activities. Additionally, the project will provide fieldwork
opportunities and research topics for both American and foreign (especially
Turkish) students. The educational impact of the project is of particular
importance for contributing to archaeological heritage management in Turkey.
With an American-Turkish team at both senior-researcher and student levels, and
in cooperation with local representatives of the Turkish Ministry of Culture and
Tourism, the project will foment international collaboration in promoting
global, interdisciplinary, scientific, and "best practice" anthropological
approaches to the rich field that is the archaeology of Anatolia.