* 1261550
* REU Site:  Ecosystem Informatics Summer Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Julia Jones, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 06/30/2016
* USD 307,606.00

The objectives of this REU Site are: (1) to train students from ecosystem,
earth, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences in collaborative
interdisciplinary research and professional development; (2) to forestall the
flight of US citizens from STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) disciplines by recruiting qualified, diverse students to engage in
ecological problems requiring computer, mathematical sciences and engineering
input; and (3) to conduct research to develop and apply novel techniques in
computer science, engineering, and mathematics to solve natural resource
management problems, allowing informatics to enable the science and the science
to enable tool development. We will achieve these objectives through structured
research experiences, thematic and professional development seminars, exchanges
with other REU sites, immersive field experiences, and mentoring and development
of collegial relationships. Students will be recruited from ecology,
geosciences, engineering, mathematics, and computer science. We will actively
recruit Native American, African American, and Hispanic students and will
provide all students with high quality mentoring, graduate school fellowship
opportunities, and career counseling, so they will enter the workforce equipped
to make key contributions to natural resources management and policy. We intend
to provide students with skills for today's science environment, where
information technology and models are essential parts of ecosystem management.

Mentored by teams of interdisciplinary scientists, participants will work on
research projects addressing five key themes: (1) agricultural sustainability
("pollinator networks"); (2) climate change effects on organisms ("bioacoustics
of birds"); (3) river restoration ("fish and engineered log jams"); (4)
sustainable aquatic habitats ("aquatic insects") and (5) coastal hazards and
sustainability ("waves and vegetation"). Each of these research themes
integrates ecological principles, field experiences, novel engineering
techniques, new developments in computer science, and mathematical modeling and
problem solving. The activities will advance discovery while promoting training
and learning in key policy issues including climate change, ecological change,
and ecosystem restoration. The REU Site will recruit and train underrepresented
minorities, enhance infrastructure and programs at the Andrews Forest LTER and
OSU Wave Lab, and disseminate management and policy implications to USFS
partners. The Site will also serve as a national model for transforming the
education of undergraduates to embrace Ecosystem Informatics (EI) as both a set
of tools and a mindset for approaching and solving natural resources problems in
an interdisciplinary context.