* 1261263
* EAGER: Corrosion Protection of Metals Using Nanoporous Oxide Thin-Films: An Environmentally Friendly Game-Changing Technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Marc Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2013
* USD 69,320.00

This EAGER project will establish basic knowledge to demonstrate the counter-
intuitive notion that certain porous coatings are capable of deterring
corrosion. This study will be based on electrochemistry and surface
characterization of coated and uncoated metals subject to corrosive
environments. The Environmental Chemistry & Technology (EC&T) program team at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison will work to establish the links between the
type of oxide used in making the coatings, the physical properties of the
resulting porous film, and the required corrosion deterring properties. The
traditional approach to anti-corrosion focuses on fully covering the surface
with a thick layer to avoid the penetration of an electrolyte. This project has
the potential to elucidate the role of nanopores on diffusion and reaction and
thus to develop understanding of the role of nano-porosity in preventing
corrosion.

The broader impacts of the project are that it may open up opportunities for new
research in the field. Corrosion is a worldwide drain on resources, costing
about 3-4% of the economic output of industrialized countries. The nature of
this project conveys broad impacts from technological and environmental points
of view. These coatings are made from sol-gel chemistries, which are water-based
and do not require organic solvents. Since the final products are metal oxides,
the coatings are practically inert from a food safety point of view, in addition
to having lower VOC emissions than those derived from the application of organic
anti-corrosion coatings in a variety of other contexts. Therefore, these
coatings may become an environmentally friendly alternative for coating cans and
other food-related products and also may have the potential to provide solutions
to corrosion problems in a multiplicity of other settings.