* 1261325
* Flow, Geometric Motion, Deformation and Mass Transport in Materials Science and Physiological Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 13,996.00

Calderer&lt;br/&gt;1261325&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and her
collaborators organize a Summer Graduate Program, Flow, Geometric Motion,
Deformation, and Mass Transport in Materials Sciences and Physiological
Processes, at the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications in July 2013.
Through a series of lectures, tutorials, and hands-on lab demonstrations the
summer school introduces students and junior researchers to the mathematical and
scientific connections between topics of condensed matter physics and materials
sciences on the one hand and physiology problems on the other, and it gives them
a better grasp of the fundamentals of mathematical and computational studies in
mechanisms that underlie physiological and materials processes, particularly
soft materials. Speakers includes experts in applied and numerical analysis,
partial differential equations and geometry, mathematical modeling in material
sciences and physiology, computational mathematics, and experimental sciences.
The project helps support students, junior researchers, and researchers from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; How a system behaves over time,
and the drivers of its dynamics, are central questions in every area of science
and engineering. They are especially challenging when they involve phenomena
that span large ranges of length or time scales. Such questions in the areas of
materials, particularly soft materials, and of physiology share common features
of multiscale phenomena, transport and diffusion, and energy-driven dynamics.
The science and engineering communities that deal with physiological systems and
those that deal with materials sciences would benefit from greater interactions
and from better understanding of the mathematical methods appropriate for these
problems. The purpose of this summer school is to give students and junior
researchers a better grasp of the fundamentals of mathematical and computational
studies in mechanisms that underlie physiological and materials processes.
Improved understanding of how to model, analyze, and computationally simulate
basic physiological and materials processes can lead to improved materials,
advances in fundamental understanding of physiological processes with
consequences for health care, and advances in bioengineering.