* 1261460
* Examining Neural Markers of Implicit Speech Rhythm during Silent Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Cyrille Magne, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 05/31/2016
* USD 121,338.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speech rhythm, the patterns of varying pitch, loudness and
tempo in spoken language, plays a major role in language acquisition and
comprehension. For example, sensitivity to speech rhythm during early childhood
has been found to be a predictor of acquisition of good reading skills and
introducing rhythmic regularity can help when speech comprehension or production
is disrupted. Yet it remains unclear whether and how rhythmic regularity affects
reading. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Cyrille Magne,
Ph.D., of Middle Tennessee State University, will investigate how linguistic
rhythm affects the processing of both structure and meaning of written sentences
in English. Dr. Magne will use electrophysiological methods to measure how
linguistic rhythm influences brain activity during reading. Dr. Magne expects to
answer the question whether rhythmic information is actively used to constrain
reading and whether a regular rhythm may be used as a mean to facilitate reading
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge obtained from this research
has the potential to have far-reaching impacts on both educational and clinical
applications. Specifically, the findings may be of crucial importance for
researchers attempting to use neural markers to support the development of new
methods for reading assessment, progress monitoring, and intervention. The
experimental findings may lead to discovery of biological markers useful in the
study of reading disorders such as dyslexia. Furthermore, this project also
offers a unique opportunity for school practitioners, currently enrolled in the
Ph.D. program in Literacy Studies at Middle Tennessee State University, to
conduct research using cognitive neuroscience tools. Finally, Dr. Magne will
participate in the big data sharing effort by making the data available to
support other coordinated NSF efforts that aim to make use of real data in the
teaching of STEM-related courses and to enable participation in discovery
science by those who would otherwise have no access to such
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by the Office of
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).