* 1261160
* IRES: Informal Science Learning in Ecological Contexts: Science Learning and Native Language Use in Contrasting North American and Mongolian Mountain Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Michael Brody, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/2018
* USD 247,356.00

Technical part.&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative research project between
Montana State University (MSU), Bozeman, USA and Gorno-Altaisk State University
(GASU), Altai Republic, Russian Federation. In this NSF International Research
Experiences for Students project MSU students will travel to the Altai Republic
and work with faculty and students at Gorno-Altaisk University to conduct
research related to native language use in learning ecological sciences in
informal settings. Student researchers will conduct individual studies related
to the project theme of science learning in ecological contexts. This project
will help students learn how to conduct educational research related to the
ecological learning experiences of indigenous youth (ages12-16) and the use and
influence of native language in learning about environment. This research
directly addresses the results of our prior NSF supported work that identified
shared issues of indigenous people, natural resources and the decline of native
language use among underserved populations in the Altai and Yellowstone systems.
This project contributes significantly to our emerging understanding of science
learning in informal settings. It addresses a unique conception of ecological
learning in three dimensions; personal, community and cultural perspectives.
Research and education objectives align with modern conceptualizations of
informal science learning as proposed by the National Academies of Science
(2009). The MSU-GASU collaboration provides a holistic view of science learning
and will unite diverse intellectual resources and research efforts in unique
ecological and social systems. Both the Yellowstone and Altai mountain systems
are of global concern as part of worldwide natural and cultural resources
impacted by pervasive development, recreation and tourism activities and climate
change. The underlying theoretical foundation for learning proposed in this
research project is the basis for effective approaches to enable isolated rural
populations to contribute traditional knowledge and wisdom to contemporary
issues related to world-wide ecological and cultural issues including global
climate change. Aspects of sustainability practices that are embedded in the
knowledge and social processes of both marginalized and dominant societies will
be better understood and taken into consideration for future research and
education activities. Research outcomes will contribute to more effective
informal, place-based and experiential science learning to help empower
communities and decision makers in meeting challenges of sustainability.
Inevitably, we expect this work to extend our understanding of science learning
related to critical natural and cultural resources and their management. An
understanding of how, why and where learning takes place will help extend the US
and international research and education agendas related to informal science
learning, natural and cultural resource management and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical part.&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative research project between Montana State University (MSU), Bozeman,
USA and Gorno-Altaisk State University (GASU), Altai Republic, Russian
Federation. In this NSF International Research Experiences for Students project
MSU students will travel to the Altai Republic and work with faculty and
students at Gorno-Altaisk University to conduct research related to native
language use in learning ecological sciences in informal settings. Student
researchers will conduct individual studies related to the project theme of
science learning in ecological contexts. This project we will help students
learn how to conduct educational research related to the ecological learning
experiences of indigenous youth (ages12-16) and the use and influence of native
language in learning about environment. Three cohorts of five MSU students will
travel to the Altai Republic for eight weeks in the summers of 2013, 2014 &amp;
2015. MSU students will comprise a research team with GASU science, education
and language faculty to conduct research in the city of Gorno-Altaisk, two
medium size villages such as Onguday and two small villages such as Karakol. We
expect to work with youth in each setting and interview a representative sample
at each site. As a research team we expect to gain a better understanding of how
indigenous youth use native Altai language in informal settings to learn about
environment. We expect to compare sights within the study. As part of our larger
research interests in ecological learning and native people, we will conduct a
similar comparative study in the Yellowstone Ecosystem with Native American
youth. The studies associated with this project will add to our understanding
about the extent and nature of native language use to learn science in
underserved populations in very sensitive and unique ecological and cultural
settings.