* 1261033
* IRES: Development of Enantioselective Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Paul Helquist, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 12/31/2018
* USD 249,858.00

This NSF International Research Experiences for Students program will provide
support for a total of 12 Ph.D. students pursuing dissertation research in
several subdisciplines of chemistry at the University of Notre Dame to do
research in any of three closely aligned laboratories in Sweden. Four students
will be selected each year during this three-year program to spend four summer
months pursuing research on a unified theme of development of new
enantioselective catalysts. Initial emphasis will be placed on catalysts for the
synthesis of chiral amines, which represent a broad class of compounds of
importance as pharmaceutical products, agricultural compounds, and small
molecule probes in molecular biology and biochemistry. The mentors, who have
collaborations amongst themselves and with Notre Dame faculty members, are
Professor Per-Ola Norrby at Gothenburg University, Professor Pher Andersson at
Stockholm University, and Professor Jan-Erling BÃ¤ckvall at Stockholm University.
They are world leaders in the development of computational methods for
prediction of enantioselectivities of chiral transition metal catalysts, the
development and characterization of new metal catalysts, the evaluation of
catalyst performance, and the use of molecular biology methods to develop new
peptide-based catalysts. They will direct IRES student projects in these areas
of specialization, blending computational studies with experimental chemistry
and the tools of molecular biology to develop new transition metal- and peptide-
based enantioselective catalysts. Quantum mechanics calculations will be used to
define structures of transition states for selected reactions employing chiral
metal catalysts. The calculated transition states will be used to generate force
fields that will be applied to the in silico screening of chiral catalyst
libraries to predict enantioselectivity of new or previously known catalysts in
advance of their preparation and experimental validation. Molecular biology in
the form of directed evolution will be employed for developing complementary
peptide-based catalysts. The combination of these capabilities in the three
program laboratories is unique and brings powerful new tools to bear on catalyst
development. The specific IRES student projects interface well with research
programs at Notre Dame and will be of interest to Ph.D. students having
dissertation projects in synthetic organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry,
organometallic chemistry, analytical chemistry, materials science, biochemistry,
and molecular biology. The participating students will gain experience with
advanced computational and experimental methods for small-molecule and
polypeptide-based catalyst development. The students will present their research
in an international setting, and write reports and manuscripts for publication
in scientific journals. Upon returning to the Notre Dame, the participating
students will be encouraged to apply their newly gained knowledge towards their
dissertation research projects and, with their dissertation directors, to
maintain collaborations with their Swedish mentors to pursue further aspects of
their IRES projects. The collective IRES experience will prepare the
participants for careers in an increasingly competitive technological world in
which scientists are expected to have multiple skills and to succeed in an
international setting. Moreover, students will be personally enriched from
immersion in a different scientific and societal culture. In the national
interest, the research outcomes of this IRES project, namely development of new
enantioselective catalysts, can be translated into improved production of
pharmaceuticals, agricultural agents, and chemical tools for use in biochemistry
and molecular biology. These areas are long-standing strengths of the U.S.,
applicable to large-scale manufacturing of products for both domestic use and
export. Retention of these strengths requires training of students who can
contribute their expertise in an increasingly competitive, technologically
based, global economy.