* 1261040
* The Effects of Education on Behavioral Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Leandro Carvalho, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 223,002.00

This award funds research that will help us understand how education affects the
financial decisions people make. The focus here is not on targeted education
about retirement and investing, but general higher education. The research team
will accomplish this by comparing a group of college students to comparable
students with the same academic background and accomplishments who had to delay
college enrollment. The research team will examine whether the college-educated
participants make more consistent decisions over time, whether they are more or
less likely to gamble on small risks, and whether they are less likely to use
inaccuarate rules-of-thumb in financial decision making. results of the project
will yield broader impact by giving new evidence on how education may help
encourage retirement saving and long-run investments in health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research has established that individuals often
behave in ways that inconsistent with some of the key assumptions used in
economic models. In particular, they may be time-inconsistent, have attitudes
toward rsik that depend on reference points or question framing, and have
systematically incorrect beliefs. Such behaviors may explain why some households
have inadequate savings for retirement, the sensitivity of demand for annuities
to framing, individuals over-insuring against small risks, and investment
behavior depending strongly on the past performance of stocks. Previous research
has suggested that these kinds of behavior are more common among people with
less education. However, the correlation may simply be the result of individual
differences that lead people to choose less education. For example, people who
value long run benefits in the way predicted by economic models may not just
invest more in their retirement savings, but also invest more time and effort in
their own education. The research team proposes to use an unusual natural
experiment to resolve this puzzle. An overenrolled public college has had to
conduct a lottery for enrollment places. Winners enroll at once, others must
wait a year before enrolling. The team will use lab experiments and survey data
from both groups to study whether the winners (who have more education because
of early enrollment) are less likely to exhibit (i) time inconsistency, (ii)
small stakes risk aversion, (iii) use of biased heuristics, or (iii)
susceptibility to framing effects.