* 1261359
* Growth Rates of Bacterial Taxa in Coastal Marine Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Barbara Campbell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2017
* USD 773,996.00

Prokaryotic organisms in marine systems are highly diverse and carry out many
types of metabolic processes important in biogeochemical cycles. However, the
contribution of individual bacterial taxa to biochemical processes is not well
understood. Similarly, previous studies have had limited success in
understanding the regulation of bacterial communities by looking at correlations
between abundance of individual taxa and environmental factors. Estimates of
growth rates will help understand both problems. The contribution of specific
bacterial taxa to biogeochemical cycles is likely to scale with growth rate as
well as abundance, and these rates are also likely to be more sensitive to
environment fluctuations than abundance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
will examine the following questions and hypotheses about a fundamental property
of organisms, growth rates: 1) what is the relationship between growth rate and
abundance of specific bacterial taxa in controlled experiments? Do 16S rRNA:rDNA
ratios or other growth-regulated transcript:gene ratios reflect real differences
in growth rates? The PIs hypothesize that growth responsive transcript:gene
ratios will correlate with growth rates independent of metabolic strategy and
phylogeny, even though ratios and absolute rates will vary among bacterial
species or within a taxa growing under different conditions. This hypothesis
will be explored in environmentally relevant isolated bacteria whose genomes
have been sequenced as well as in individual taxa in natural communities, whose
genomes will be sequenced via a single cell approach. 2) What is the
relationship between growth rate and abundance in situ? How are variations in
the environment reflected in bacterial growth rates? The PIs hypothesize that
growth rates, estimated by either 16S rRNA:rDNA ratios or by other growth
responsive transcript:gene ratios, will be better correlated to environmental
factors than abundance alone. Variation in growth rates within and between taxa
will correlate with changes in the environment, especially with light and
nutrients. The project will test this hypothesis by analyzing three
well-­studied diverse marine ecosystems: a coastal Microbial Observatory site
which has been sampled since 2006, and the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To investigate the questions and hypotheses outlined
above, the PIs will use a combination of single cell genomics, high throughput
sequencing, and QPCR approaches to examine levels of 16S rRNA and other growth-
regulated transcripts as well as their corresponding genes under various
nutrient conditions and different in situ temporal and spatial scales. High
throughput sequencing avoids amplification and cloning artifacts and is cost
effective. Growth-­responsive transcript:gene ratios, microbial abundance, and
biogeochemical properties will be examined over hourly, daily, weekly and
monthly time scales to investigate the influence of environmental factors on
growth rates of individual bacterial taxa and to explore bottom-­up control of
microbial communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
results from this project will do much to alter our perception of microbial
processes in the oceans and estuaries by providing answers to long-­standing
&lt;br/&gt;questions about relationships between activity and standing stocks of
bacterial populations. It will begin to link quantitative rate measurements of
specific bacterial taxa to the extensive genomic data now becoming available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts The project will support a graduate
student and involve underrepresented undergraduates in summer research projects,
including at sea fieldwork. The results from this project will be incorporated
into an environmental genomics web site and used in courses taught by Kirchman.
The Kirchman and Campbell labs are featured in lab tours open to the public (~
1000 visitors per year) and the PIs are also involved in Coast Day, an annual
open house that attracts about 10,000 visitors. Finally, the PIs will be
involved in K-­12 teacher training workshops and other Delaware Environmental
Institute outreach activities.