* 1261653
* Acquisition of Next Generation Terrestrial Laser Scanning Systems for Community Earth and Polar Science Research
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 399,836.00

1261653 &lt;br/&gt;Mattioli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAR/Instrumentation and
Facilities Program grant supports acquisition of two terrestrial laser scanners
(TLS) and associated digital photography equipment to be incorporated into a
current pool of five UNAVCO facility TLS system available for loan to the
broader geoscience community. The TLS system will support research and research
training that requires the capability to rapidly map the surface topography of
landforms, structure and vegetation with high spatial resolution (mm) in a well
constrained positional reference frame. The TLS systems will be available to
support a wide range of geoscience and broader applications including studies of
transient surface features (e.g, landslides), barrier beach processes, studies
of earthquake rupture geometry and processes; volcanic deformation, bridge
deformation in response to dynamic earth processes, tsunami generated landforms
and related features, glacier topography, geological outcrop mapping,
archaeological mapping and plant ecology. The instruments will: 1) replace an
aged and recently retired TLS system originally purchased with support from by
OPP for polar project deployments; and 2) augment the current TLS pool with new
technologies and a variety of new capabilities including longer range, full
waveform digitization and more rapid scanning rates. The systems will support
geoscience education through incorporation into field camp exercises using TLS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***