* 1261214
* Geotraces Pacific Section: Gallium, vanadium, and associated elements indicative of dust input and redox cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2016
* USD 199,565.00

During the 2013 GEOTRACES Eastern Pacific Zonal Section cruise, a scientist from
the University of Southern Mississippi will determine the distributions of
gallium (Ga) and vanadium (V), as well as V redox speciation. The planned cruise
track is ideal for this effort because it will traverse various oceanic
environments that influence the biogeochemistry of these elements namely, the
Peru margin/upwelling zone and the associated oxygen minimum zone, gradients in
atmospheric inputs and biological productivity from the Peru margin to Tahiti,
and hydrothermal vents along the East Pacific Rise. Specific goals of the
project include: (1) examine the discrepancy between surface water Ga and
aluminum (Al) distributions and estimate dust inputs; (2) confirm the
relationship observed in the North Pacific between the surface ocean Ga/Al ratio
and the chlorophyll distribution; (3) compare the surface ocean manganese
distribution with that of Ga, Al, and lead to differentiate between shelf and
aerosol inputs; (4) determine if there is evidence of shelf V removal which
contributes to the surface ocean V depletion; (5) test for hydrothermal
influences on the V distribution downstream from the East Pacific Rise; and (6)
compare V redox speciation with that of other elements including selenium,
arsenic, and iodine as a means of examining the importance of water column
reduction versus advective interactions with reducing coastal sediments. As
such, the elements selected as the focus of this study, will provide information
on dust input and redox cycling, especially when compared with other elements
being determined by other cruise participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Results from the study would be included into course materials for
Oceanography and Marine Chemistry classes. One graduate student would be
supported and trained as part of this project. Mentoring of high school student
is also noted.