* 1261956
* EAGER: Unraveling the mechanism and the role of anti- inflammatory nanoparticles in multiple sclerosis model
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 190,134.00

PI: Seal, Sudipta&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1261956&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a disabling
neurological disorder affecting 2.5 million patients worldwide including 400,000
Americans. MS often results in severe disability including the inability to
walk, impaired vision or in some cases blindness and cognitive dysfunction.
Although immunomodulatory therapies became available but are partially
effective, therefore, there is a continuing need to develop more effective
treatment strategies to combat this disabling disease. Experimental autoimmune
encephalitis (EAE) is a well accepted an animal model for MS which can be
induced in mice using myelin protein like MOG (Myelin Oligodendrocyte
Glycoprotein) or PLP (proteolipid protein). Recently nanotechnology based
apporacheshave shown a lot of promise in various therapies. Among various
nanoparticles, cerium oxide nanoparticles (nanoceria; NCe) are very unique,
possess excellent antioxidant properties and act as potent, regenerative free
radical scavengers. Since inflammation play key role in axonal loss and
demyelinating events underlying MS pathology and contribute to disability in MS
patients, we examined the effect of NCe on ROS and inflammation in macrophage
and T cells and found that NCe treatment quenches ROS generation, inhibits iNOS
and COX2 (inflammatory mediators) This study will be first study to show the
therapeutic potential of nanoparticles to revert the disability in EAE, a model
of MS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesis/Objectives: Engineered mixed valence
cerium oxide nanoparticles with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties
will suppress disease in animal models of MS by modulating adaptive immune
responses and may provide neuroprotection (inhibiting axonal loss and
demyelination) in the CNS, thereby reverting disability/paralysis. We propose
the following aims: 1) Engineering of NCe and its full scale characterization
for biocompatibility, 2) Examine the potential of NCe on adaptive immune
response and reverting disability in mouse models mimicking chronic and
relapsing remitting form of MS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
study, if successful, would provide the groundwork and rationale for introducing
this therapy to the MS clinical arena. The main advantages of using this
nanotechnology based therapy are: 1): NCe exhibits regenerative free radical
scavenging and excellent antioxidant properties. 2): NCe acts as anti-
inflammatory molecule in in-vitro as well as in-vivo mice model. 3): NCe
treatment protects neurons against oxidative stress and prolongs their life span
in culture. 4): Administration of NCe in mouse model is safe and shows no
toxicity even with significantly higher doses. 5): More importantly, due to the
regenerative property of NCe, it will limit the repeated doses during
therapeutic studies in vivo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance/Transformative
Concept This EAGER proposal focuses on the science behind developing nano rare
earth particles and its mechanism in reverting disability in animal models of MS
by neutralizing oxidative stress induced generated by inflammation in CNS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed study has potential to take
nanotechnology mediated pharmacological treatment to a new level, if successful;
it can provide effective therapies for MS. The finding will not be just confined
to these diseases but has broad implications to other neurodegenerative
diseases, which involve oxidative stress and inflammation. In this concept
project we proposed to explore possible protection of NCe in reverting paralysis
in animal models of MS which can have a big societal impact on the millions of
people worldwide on MS treatment.