* 1261670
* Collaborative Research: Planning for Renewables: Regional Transmission Organizations Managing Tension and Networking Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Elizabeth Wilson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 158,301.00

This project addresses the process of organizational adaptation among "Regional
Transmission Organizations" (RTOs), which coordinate the movement of electricity
to more than two-thirds of households in the United States. RTOs are highly
complex socio-technical organizations that are challenged to facilitate
fundamental transformations in how electricity is produced and delivered, driven
by individual state mandates requiring increased use of renewable fuel sources
(primarily from variable sources such as wind and solar energy). RTOs must adapt
to these mandates through policy innovation, a difficult organizational problem
since decision-making by RTOs happens within a complex negotiation framework
involving a large number of voluntary external stakeholders (e.g., electricity
generating companies, regulators, consumer and environmental advocates). The
focus of this comparative analysis among three RTOs (serving the Mid-Atlantic,
Midwest and California) is to understand how, why, and when these networks of
conflicting stakeholders can lead to innovation. The approach blends direct
observation of policy-formation processes with semi-structured interviews in an
empirical investigation of the configuration of stakeholder networks within RTOs
and the communication strategies employed by RTO stakeholders within the policy
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RTOs play a critical role in the transition to
more sustainable energy systems, making decisions that are pivotal to
environmental quality, economic growth and security, and social well-being. The
focus of this research, which is designed to understand processes of
communication in complex dynamic organizations, will provide direct insights
that can contribute to the sustainable transformation of similar organizations
and infrastructures critical to social well-being. Our program of engaged
scholarship includes the gathering of primary data on stakeholder perceptions of
policy-formation processes within RTOs, as well as meetings and workshops held
jointly with university researchers, industry practitioners, and regulators.