* 1261519
* Trace Metal Proxies in Non-spinose Planktic Foraminifera: Environmental Calibrations and Incorporation Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Tessa Hill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2018
* USD 618,699.00

This research, led by a team of researchers at the University of California -
Davis, seeks to provide fundamental understanding of the environmental and
biological processes that control common geochemical proxies in planktonic
foraminifera. Specifically, the work will focus on improving and developing new
calibrations for and understanding proxy behavior in two paleoceanographically
important planktonic foraminifer species (the non-spinose N. dutertrei and N.
pachyderma). These species inhabit subsurface waters and polar and subpolar
latitudes, and are important in reconstructing past variations in
stratification, thermocline depth, upwelling intensity, productivity, monsoon
variability, ENSO dynamics, and high latitude processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high-resolution microanalytical techniques (laser-
ICP-MS, electron microprobe, and NanoSIMS) together with stable isotope tracers
and controlled foraminiferal culture experiments, the researchers will isolate
the impacts of key processes that can affect the shell composition of planktonic
foraminifera. The goal of these experiments is to use the mechanistic
understanding gained to improve interpretations of paleoceanographic
reconstructions of environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include improved calibrations of geochemical proxies
widely used by the paleoceanography and paleoclimate communities. The
researchers are actively involved in teaching and mentoring both graduate
students and young scientists, and several are supported through this project.