* 1261681
* Seismological Facilities for the Advancement of Geoscience and EarthScope
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2022
* David Simpson, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2022
* USD 154,880,277.00

The IRIS Consortium (Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology)
provides, via the "Seismological Facilities for the Advancement of Geoscience
and EarthScope" (SAGE), a suite of community-governed, multi-user facilities for
instrumentation and data management that support research and education in
seismology and the Earth sciences. The facilities include a high-performance
network of more than 150 permanent stations providing data for global studies of
earthquakes and deep Earth structure; a mobile array of more than 400
seismometers and atmospheric sensors completing a traverse of the conterminous
United States and deploying to Alaska; and more than 4000 portable instruments
(including magnetotelluric systems) are available for short-and long-term loan
to university-based researchers for detailed studies as part of NSF-funded field
programs. Future observing needs are being addressed via systematic engineering
efforts. Data from all of these observational systems, along with extensive
collections of seismic data contributed by other organizations, are freely and
openly available through the IRIS Data Management
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected and distributed through IRIS
facilities form the observational basis for most of the fundamental studies in
seismology carried out by researchers at US universities and in many
organizations worldwide. The stability and high quality of the permanent
observatories capture both the short-term details of faulting during the seconds
to minutes of rupture in major earthquakes as well as decadal-scale changes in
global earthquake activity. Data from permanent, mobile, and portable arrays are
used to resolve features in Earth structure over scales that range from the
whole Earth, to lithosphere, to regional basins, to fault zones. These data
provide fundamental information on Earth structure and processes that, in
combination with other geoscience disciplines, contribute to enhanced
understanding of how the active Earth evolves and deforms. As a part of
EarthScope, these observations contribute to multidisciplinary studies that
focus on the structure and dynamics of North America and contribute to
unraveling the history of deformation of the continent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRIS program in Education and Public Outreach directly
links the public and schools with the activities of an academic research
community by demonstrating how basic seismological observations are made and
used in Earth science investigations. Through a variety of activities that
extend from the provision of classroom and web resources, to museum displays,
public lectures, and internships, IRIS encourages students to engage in
scientific inquiry and appreciate the importance of the Earth sciences in their
lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to supporting fundamental research, the
seismological resources provided by IRIS serve dual use by contributing directly
to societal needs through reporting of global earthquake activity and
applications in monitoring nuclear test ban treaties. Scientific and technical
outreach by IRIS and its members as part of their international activities also
provides assistance and guidance in the development and implementation of
earthquake monitoring networks and hazard assessment, especially in developing
countries.