* 1261812
* The Political Economy of Branding a New Site for a Specialty Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Kevin Yelvington, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 368,602.00

Kevin Yelvington of the University of South Florida proposes to explore how
different producers and other stakeholders in otherwise competitive emerging
markets cooperate in "branding" their products. The research is set in the
Temecula Valley of Southern California, which is an ideal area to explore these
issues as it is being challenged with plans for land use that have potentially
large impacts in terms of the economy, ecology, and social development of
region. The project seeks to understand landscape transformation and the uses of
natural resources, especially water, in this process, as well as the multiple
labor processes upon which niche agricultural markets are built. This project
employs a number of qualitative methods including participant observation
fieldwork, key informant interviews, focus groups, the collection of oral
histories, surveys, and archival data research. The research for this 3-year
project will be conducted by the Principal Investigator and a team of advanced
graduate students in applied anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
economic anthropological explorations into the conditions under which
cooperation occurs among market competitors, this project's research design
explores how many different stakeholders combine into a single system using the
concept of terroir, a term that is used to explain how the land imparts a
particular quality to a product. The researcher extends this concept to include
other aspects of the land, including the effects on the environment, the
interests of the residents and government, and the primary consumers of the
products from this region. The methods have the potential to fundamentally
transform anthropological and other social scientific approaches to the study of
work, by creating a model that could be applied to other landscapes with complex
social systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a student training
component that will also contribute development of competitive science and
technological education. The broader impacts of the proposed research also
include providing information on environmental sustainability, tourism,
conditions of agricultural employment, and the impacts of food chain processes.
These contributions will be achieved by an extensive publication program in
academic and popular venues, as well as presentations aimed at professional and
popular audiences.