* 1261340
* Mobile Devices for Survey Data Collection
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Roger Tourangeau, Westat Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 601,922.00

This project will examine mobile devices, specifically smartphones and tablet
computers, as vehicles for survey data collection. The appeal of these devices
for survey researchers is clear. Because they are lightweight and relatively
inexpensive, they make it easier to collect data using such existing survey
modes as computer-assisted personal interviewing. The research will examine
three issues raised by use of such devices. First, the input methods that these
devices permit (such as touchscreen interfaces) are relatively unfamiliar to
many users and may create response problems. Although these interfaces are
sometimes used on laptops, tablets and smartphones require them, making
usability concerns more central. Second, the screens on tablets and smartphones
are considerably smaller than those on laptop or desktop computers. Experiments
on web surveys demonstrate the importance of "visual prominence." Any
information that respondents need to use should be immediately visible to them
without their having to perform any action (such as a mouse click) to make the
information visible. Even the need for an eye movement may effectively render
information invisible. Because of the small screens on mobile devices, it may be
much harder to make all of the potentially useful information visible to
respondents than it is with a laptop or desktop computer. The final issue is the
perceived privacy of data collected on these devices. Respondents are willing to
reveal sensitive information about themselves when a computer administers the
questions, and web surveys seem to retain the advantages of earlier methods of
computerized self-administration. But it is unclear whether respondents will
display the same level of candor when the survey is administered over the
Internet on a tablet computer or a smartphone. Two realistic field experiments
and a usability study will examine these issues. Both experiments will be
conducted in a single, face-to-face survey. The first experiment will compare
laptop computers with tablets and smartphones and will examine the effects of
both screen size and input method on breakoffs, missing data, completion times,
and indicators of the quality of the responses. The second experiment will
compare the same three data collection platforms as vehicles for collecting
sensitive information. The experiment will ask respondents to assess the
sensitivity of the questions, because item sensitivity may vary as a function of
the device used to collect the data.

Surveys are a central tool for social scientists and policymakers in the United
States, and survey research is a multi-billion dollar industry in the United
States alone. Any set of technological advances, such as the widespread adoption
of smartphones and tablet computers, is likely to have a major impact on how
surveys are done. Although mobile devices will be widely used for surveys
regardless of whether this research is done, the work will produce practical
guidelines for using such devices to collect survey data and will alert survey
researchers to some of the potential pitfalls of these devices.