* 1261566
* February Fourier Talks, 2013
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Rama Chellappa, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2014
* USD 48,698.00

Title: February Fourier Talks 2013:&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for
the eighth meeting in the February Fourier Talks (FFT) series and a satellite
Workshop on "Phaseless Reconstruction." The 2013 FFT will be held February
21-22, 2013, at the University of Maryland, College Park, and will be followed
by the Workshop on Phaseless Reconstruction to be held February 23 - 25, 2013.
The FFT is a high-level forum for harmonic analysts to bring their work to
scientists from industry and government agencies. In addition, it allows experts
in applied and pure harmonic analysis to become familiar with the latest
problems in need of mathematical formulation and solution. Finally, it
introduces young mathematicians and scientists to applied and pure harmonic
analysis. More information, including a list of speakers and abstracts,
registration information, and an archive of past conferences, can be found at
the conference webpage: www.fft2013.org. The Workshop on Phaseless
Reconstruction will bring together researchers from harmonic analysis, quantum
information theory, and electrical engineering communities to discuss new
development on efficient signal reconstruction from phaseless measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The February Fourier Talks directly encourage dialogue and
collaboration between mathematicians and scientists working in industry and
government. The structure of the conference consists of three main lectures and
sixteen 30 minute invited talks. The conference encourages and financially
supports participation by students, recent Ph.D. recipients, and members of
groups underrepresented in mathematics. The workshop on Phaseless Reconstruction
is structured in a similar manner to the FFT, and allows ample discussion time
among the participants. More information, including a list of speakers and
abstracts and registration information is available at the workshop webpage:
http://www.norbertwiener.umd.edu/FFT/2013/phaseless.html.