* 1261399
* CAREER:  Practical Leakage Resilience: Provable Side-Channel Resistance for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/13/2012,04/30/2017
* Thomas Eisenbarth, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 04/30/2017
* USD 399,046.00

The security of pervasive computing devices relies on cryptographic engines
which are usually considered the most trusted part of the system. An immanent
threat to embedded cryptographic engines are physical attacks. Practical
countermeasures against physical attacks are not completely fail-safe and overly
expensive for most applications. Theoretical approaches, however, still tend to
have imperfect leakage models and wrong or impractical assumptions about the
abilities of cryptographic sub-primitives. Yet, the theoretical concepts of
leakage resilience, which have been mostly disregarded by practitioners, carry a
great potential to construct cryptographic primitives that resist physical
attacks and allow for more resource-efficient
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates solutions for
basic cryptographic services that are (i) secure in the presence of physical
attacks and (ii) are comparable in performance and costs to state-of-the-art
implementations of cryptography. This is achieved by enhancing the concepts of
leakage resilience to make them applicable in the constrained regimes of
embedded pervasive systems. Theoretical concepts are advanced and brought into
practice by actual implementation. Practical evaluation uncovers remaining
weaknesses in the currently used leakage models. By combining the advantages of
both approaches ? a thorough practical evaluation of the applied methods and the
well-defined leakage-resilience of the theoretical approaches ? stronger, more
reliable, and practical solutions are derived. Besides an increased security for
the wide range of embedded products, the findings give valuable feedback to both
theoretic cryptographers and practical security architects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only security solutions that are leakage resilient,
withstand practical evaluation and match economic expectations guarantee a
widespread use and hence more secure pervasive systems.