* 1261058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Modeling the Dynamics of Agency-agency Partnerships before and following Extreme Events
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Jun Zhuang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 12,500.00

The objective of this research is to model and analyze partnership creation,
length, and conclusion in networks of agencies responding to extreme events. The
researchers develop models to explore how characteristics of partnerships could
be used to predict dynamics in agency investment, commitment length, partnership
selection, and exit timing. The research collects and validates data by
interviewing agencies active in responding to extreme events. This project
compares agency behavior in two separate disaster response scenarios,
mathematically models the life-cycle of agency partnerships during disaster
operations, and conducts controlled experiments to analyze agency decision
making.

Extreme events have had a significant impact on the world over the last several
years, including earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, and tropical storms. The
scale and scope of events like Hurricane Sandy, the earthquake and tsunami in
Japan, and the tornados around the United States make it imperative to increase
our understanding of how government, non-governmental, and business agencies
interact with one another in the aftermath of such extreme events. This study
builds on previous work in emergency management to provide an analysis of the
partnership selection and resource sharing processes that occur following an
extreme event. By documenting the dynamical change in roles and flow of
resources following extreme events, this work tests hypotheses regarding
agencies and how they are impacted by partnerships, goals, roles, and prior
involvement. With the support of a host of agencies that are actively involved
in relief operations in the U.S. and around the world, the model results are
checked for relevance, accuracy, and correct representation of the agencies and
individuals responding to extreme events.