* 1261800
* SCHOLARS AWARDS:   Climate, Population Density, and Remote Sensing: Identifying Social-Ecological Hotspots
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Colin West, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 54,999.00

University of North Carolina (UNC) ecological anthropologist Colin Thor West
will conduct research on land use and land cover change (LULCC) on ecological
hotspots. The research will be focused on the northern Central Plateau of
Burkina Faso, a place long recorded by experts as a textbook example of
anthropogenic desertification. This region is part of the larger Sahel where
population pressure and droughts are causing widespread environmental harm. More
recent analyses, however, have documented a reversal in this process. Satellite
imagery has detected a process of "greening" in the Sahel and it is particularly
pronounced on the northern Central Plateau. Thus, there are conflicting
interpretations of human-environment dynamics that generally describe either a
widespread and uniform trajectory of environmental degradation (desertification)
or a similarly homogeneous trajectory of environmental rehabilitation
(greening). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous ethnographic fieldwork by the PI
suggests that both processes are occurring simultaneously but in different
places at different points in time. Using remote sensing techniques, this
proposed research will identify social-ecological hotspots where negative
(degrading) and positive (rehabilitating) human-environment interactions are
occurring. Thus, it will show that land degradation/rehabilitation are
ultimately patchy and discontinuous processes that co-occur within the same
landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. West will develop basic skills in remote
sensing analysis through training at UNC?s Landscape Ecology and Biogeography
Lab. Dr. Aaron Moody, an associate professor in UNC's Department of Geography,
will mentor him in data acquisition, processing and analysis. The research will
produce a spatially and temporally explicit dataset of vegetation, rainfall, and
population that identifies social-ecological hotspots, which will enable
development organizations and government agencies to better target assistance.