* 1261495
* AEMB 2012 Broader Impacts Educational Sessions at BMES, October 24-27, 2012, Atlanta, GA
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 19,000.00

1261495&lt;br/&gt;Murray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of bioengineering
degree programs in the United States has skyrocketed over the past decade. There
are more than 70 ABET accredited undergraduate Biomedical
Engineering/Bioengineering programs, and this is expected to exceed 100 within
the next few years. Likewise, the range of new devices and technologies in the
healthcare field has increased dramatically. While the products and services
that Biomedical Engineers design and implement are intended to improve health
and well-being, they can also create a range of social and ethical dilemmas,
especially for leading-edge technologies. As an example, potential difficulties
stem from implantable or wearable sensors that can store and transmit personal
health information which emergency care providers could electronically access.
Yet, this same information might also be accessed by insurance companies or
identity thieves. A device that could save people's lives could also be the
gateway to harm them. Additionally, public policy has an effect on the funding
for innovation and on the laws that regulate it. Thus, students would benefit
from exposure to the process of the public policy
debate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical Engineering (BME) students today are
only a few years away from becoming a part of the process driving the
development of new biomedical technologies. It is imperative that this
generation of engineers be well-equipped to identify potential social and
ethical issues that may arise from their inventions. It is equally important
that they learn how public policy impacts their work and how to effectively
engage with policy makers and the general public to ensure that conditions for
innovation are optimized for the benefit of all. Most BME academic programs
include ethics and social impact of medical devices only as integrated
components in a selected course or courses, and few programs cover public
policy. In 2005, AEMB determined to fill in the gaps by hosting an intensive
educational ethics session for students during the Biomedical Engineering
Society (BMES) Annual Meeting, a leading national conference. Today, AEMB
sponsors three sessions at the BMES Annual Meeting, including ethics, public
policy and societal impacts. Funding from this grant will be used to (1) provide
matching travel grants to students to attend the conference and these three
sessions, and (2) to produce professional video recordings of each session for
free use by schools and student groups. Students receiving these grants will
participate in all three sessions. After they return home, they will facilitate
training sessions at their schools using videos and other materials from these
sessions. Other student leaders and faculty that attend these sessions will be
asked to host sessions at their campuses, as well. Furthermore, AEMB will
contact each US BME program chair to request that they use the session
materials. This should promote wide use of the
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This set of sessions
is a new model for broadening the knowledge and skills of these important topics
and for improving student involvement in their profession. Other societies will
hopefully recognize the merits of this approach and use it as a template for
exposing undergraduate and graduate students in other disciplines to these same
problems. Furthermore, this method of educating students via a combination of
presentations and discussions is known to be an effective educational approach.
The students and faculty participants will be encouraged to use this approach
when they run their own sessions and thus promote the increased use of active
learning methods in BME education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that student participants will routinely
consider ethics, public policy, and societal impact issues during the process of
device and technology design and implementation; this will further improve
technologies available to society. As they bring this knowledge to their
communities they will also increase awareness in the wider society of the
important consequences of both good and poor engineering design and practice.
AEMB leadership is encouraging all faculty advisors to bring students from
underrepresented groups to the conference and our session by applying for FASEB
MARC Mentor/Student travel grants. Also, because many local AEMB student leaders
are women, this travel grant program will ensure that women are well-
represented. Additionally, the professionally recorded videos of each session
and other materials will be available free of charge so that any school or
student organization can present their content to students. Potentially, this
can reach students in every BME program in the country.