* 1261014
* Ambiguity, Business Cycle Dynamics and Optimal Policy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Cosmin Ilut, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 11/30/2015
* USD 174,978.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Ambiguity, Business Cycle Dynamics and
Optimal Policy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES ? 1261014&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: llut, Cosmin&lt;br/&gt; This proposal starts from two
observations. On the one hand, a large body of evidence suggests that humans
perceive ambiguous situations (that is, uncertain situations where probabilities
are not known) differently from risky situations (where probabilities are
known). Arguably the majority of decisions made on a daily basis by investors
and businesses are made under ambiguity. On the other hand, there is a large
literature in economics that attempts to understand the quantitative
implications of decision makers' attitudes towards uncertainty for asset prices
and the business cycle. This literature has almost exclusively assumed that
decision makers behave as if probabilities are known. It has so far met with
limited success: a number of "puzzles" show that standard models cannot
reconcile the volatility of business cycle quantities with the level and
volatility of asset prices and investors' asset positions. This casts doubt on
how useful these models are for evaluating policy in uncertain
situations.&lt;br/&gt; This proposal describes a new approach to building
macroeconomic models with ambiguity-averse decision makers. In terms of
methodology, the proposal provides a simple way to build, solve and estimate
such models. In particular, the approach accommodates time variation in the
ambiguity perceived by agents about different sources of uncertainty, such as
productivity or policy parameters. The approach also suggests how to connect
uncertainty measured by an econometrician to the uncertainty perceived by
economic agents in a model. The proposed research analyzes how to use the new
tools to show that ambiguity is a promising model ingredient for understanding
business cycle dynamics, asset price volatility and optimal policy.&lt;br/&gt;To
model agents? attitude towards ambiguity, the proposed approach builds on
developed decision-theoretical foundations. In particular the approach uses the
multiple priors utility model, according to which agents act as if they evaluate
plans using a worst case probability drawn from a set of multiple beliefs. If
agents have less confidence in probability assessments on the uncertain events
then the set of beliefs is larger. In a dynamic model, one reason for a change
in the size of the belief set is the arrival of information. For example, a loss
of confidence could be triggered by worrisome information about the future.
Conversely, an increase in confidence -- captured by shrinkage of the set of
beliefs -- could occur as agents might learn reassuring information that moves
them closer toward thinking in terms of probabilities. In either case, agents
respond to a change in confidence if the worst case probability used to evaluate
actions also changes.&lt;br/&gt; In a macroeconomic model, uncertainty comes
from a variety of sources, summarized by a number of exogenous shocks. Examples
include contemporaneous changes to technology or the policy regime, but also
news about those issues in the future. The proposed approach to constructing
belief sets for agents with multiple priors utility is the following. At every
date, the set of beliefs about a shock next period is parameterized by an
interval of means centered around zero. A loss of confidence is then captured by
an increase in the width of the interval; in particular, the "worst case" mean
becomes worse. Conversely, an increase in confidence is captured by a narrowing
of the interval and thereby a better worst case mean. Since agents take actions
based on the worst case mean, a change in confidence works like news shock: an
agent who gains (losses) confidence responds as if he had received good (bad)
news about the future.&lt;br/&gt; The analysis of confidence shocks is
particularly tractable in economies that are essentially linear, that is, the
worst case means supporting agents' equilibrium choices can be written as a
linear function of the state variables. This property implies that equilibria
can be accurately characterized using first order approximations. In particular,
the proposed research can study agents' responses to changes in uncertainty, as
well as time variation in uncertainty premia on assets, without resorting to
higher order approximations. This is in sharp contrast to the case of changes in
risk, where higher order solutions are critical.&lt;br/&gt;An important goal of
the proposed research is to quantify the effects of confidence shocks in driving
the US business cycle and asset prices. In particular, one application is to
incorporate agents? ambiguity about productivity into a standard quantitative
DSGE model and allow their confidence to vary over time, a type of "uncertainty
shock". Even though uncertainty shocks are present, standard linearization
methods can be used to solve and estimate the model. Preliminary results suggest
that such time-varying ambiguity can emerge as a major source of business cycle
fluctuations. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research also aims to make progress in
understanding movements in asset prices. Here the important insight is that time
variation in ambiguity leads econometricians to measure time varying premia in
asset markets. Indeed, when investors evaluate an asset as if the mean payoff is
low, then they are willing to pay only a low price for it. To an econometrician,
the return on the asset -- actual payoff minus price -- will then look unusually
high. The more ambiguity investors perceive, the lower is the price and the
higher is the subsequent return. The proposal aims to address issues such as the
magnitude of average asset premia, which are puzzlingly low in rational
expectations models, and time-variation in excess returns in a quantitative
model that can be fit to the data. &lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broad
impact, in part, because it brings diverse areas of economic research into
greater contact with one another. Specifically, the proposal links advances in
decision theory to areas in macroeconomics and finance such as business cycles,
asset pricing, and optimal policy. So the project should enhance synergies
across sub-disciplines. The proposal should also lead to progress in
understanding environments in which agents? confidence matters for the economy,
which is important for positive and normative analysis. The project has the
potential of having a significant impact on how policy makers analyze such
complex environments, including stabilization policies, the functioning of
financial markets, booms and crashes in asset prices and real activity.