* 1261740
* DOAS (Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy) Measurements during CONTRAST (CONvective Transport of Active Species in the Tropics)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 02/29/2016
* USD 381,563.00

As part of the larger CONTRAST (Convective Transport of Active Species in the
Tropics) measurement campaign, which has the main objective of measuring the
transport of reactive chemical species into the topical Tropopause Transition
Layer (TTL) over the western Pacific warm pool, University of Colorado-Boulder
researchers seek to measure the column abundances of a number of trace halogen
compounds e.g., bromine oxide (BrO), iodine oxide (IO), chlorine dioxide (OClO)
along with other trace gas species.

During northern winter, surface tropospheric air masses containing these
reactive gases may be preferentially transported by intense tropical convection
high into the TTL lower stratosphere over the region of the Pacific warm pool.
Here they may impact the chemistry of the lower stratosphere, including its
ozone chemistry. The unique low-ozone environments in the upper troposphere are
expected to result in very small levels of OH radicals, which can be expected to
increase the lifetime of reactive gases whose main loss is through hydroxyl (OH)
radical oxidation. The simultaneous occurrence of deep convection and prolonged
lifetime of organic compounds in the TTL can have significant impact on the
stratospheric halogen budget.

The timing of the CONTRAST experiment has been designed to take advantage of
collaborations with two international airborne studies planned for the same time
and geographic location. These are the NASA EV1 project ATTREX (Airborne
Tropical Tropopause Experiment) and the European CAST (Coordinated Airborne
Studies in the Tropics). With complementary instrument payloads, coordinated
flights of the NSF GV, the NASA Global Hawk and the UK BAE146 will provide an
unprecedented examination of the full atmospheric column, from surface to >19
km, in the Tropical Western Pacific.