* 1261025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:   Bandits or states? Evidence on the origins of states from armed groups in eastern Congo
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/28/2014
* USD 30,001.00

Some states protect their populations, use restraint in taxation and provide
public goods, while others engage in arbitrary expropriation and impede economic
growth. Why?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This question has recently received
substantial attention in economics, but the existing theory remains exploratory
and untested with causal inference methods. Since states are supposed to have
the monopoly of the use of violence, social sciences have often described strong
states forming out of criminal organizations centralizing violence. It is this
first step into the formation of strong states that this study will test using
armed groups in eastern Democratic of Congo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
explanations emphasize that high expected value of future potential taxation can
induce criminal organizations to abandon arbitrary expropriation. Larger levels
of expected taxable income from the population indeed can generate incentives to
"bandits" to settle and promote growth for the purpose of taxing it, especially
when the environment in which they operate is characterized by a weak state. The
opposite can in turn reduce the returns of territorial control, and lead bandits
to engage in arbitrary violent expropriations that discourage investment or hurt
the tax base potential for output generation. &lt;br/&gt;In order to provide for
the first time empirical evidence on this question with causal inference
methods, this project implements the collection of original historical data
(1990-2013) on dozens of armed groups in 120 villages in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where armed groups operate and have
operated. There is anecdotal and preliminary evidence that these groups engage
in violent expropriations, but they often prefer to settle, build local
institutions, provide public goods, and tax output on a repeated basis. The
wealth of information accessible about the past of this region if often
disregarded, but this study demonstrates that it is possible to collect it and
produce high quality disaggregated data in DRC of an area and a period that has
none.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through that period, unusually large changes in world
prices for minerals located in DRC have been well documented. This study
exploits these changes, as well as village level dates of surprise mineral
discovery and exhaustion, in order to provide a causal explanation of how local
conditions - the value and type of the taxable output in the village, often
minerals - drive economic institutions, which are believed to be essential for
private sector growth. In this context, the objective is understanding how local
conditions and changes in world market forces cause armed groups to set up local
state-like institutions, and to refrain from violence against civilians in the
affected villages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has been designed to
generate data that will be the basis of a long term research agenda, and allow
for the analysis of the following questions: the mechanisms of formation of
community defense groups; the extent and social effects of sexual violence; as
well as an embedded real context experiment assessing inter-ethnic trust among
conflicted groups and the role of trust-inducing institutions.&lt;br/&gt;The
resulting dataset has been demonstrated to be of very high quality. It includes
local prices; taxation types and levels by armed groups and local authorities;
violent expropriations; provision of public goods; degree of participation of
armed groups in village administration; local recruitment strategies; and
household economic and social histories.