* 1261499
* Endogenous Opioid Mediation of the Social Regulation of Threat
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* James Coan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2016
* USD 392,578.00

Social isolation has been found to be as detrimental to health as smoking and
obesity, but the neural mechanisms linking social relationships to health and
well-being are poorly understood. Evidence suggests that social support may
increase endogenous opioid activity throughout the brain, and opioids limit the
brain's reaction to stress. The proposed research will utilize a pharmacological
intervention--naltrexone--to block endogenous opioid activity during a procedure
that combines social support and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Using a randomized, double-blind placebo control design, participants will first
receive either an opioid antagonist (which blocks the effects of opioids) or an
inert sugar pill. Participants will then be subjected to a stressor during brain
imaging under each of three conditions: while alone, while receiving social
support from a stranger, and while receiving support from a spouse. Dr. James
Coan (University of Virgina) and colleagues' past research has demonstrated that
threat-related brain activity is attenuated by social support using this
experimental design, particularly when the support provider is a spouse. If
opioid antagonists block this effect from occurring, that will constitute
compelling evidence that at least one key mechanism linking social contact to
better health is the activation of opioid activity that buffers us against the
effects of stress. This study is unique in providing 1) a critical test of the
opioid hypothesis of social support in humans; and 2) a novel approach to the
methods used in this area of research by mixing a pharmaceutical intervention, a
social support manipulation, and fMRI, all in a broadly representative community
sample.

Historically, the greatest strides in understanding important phenomena follow a
detailed account of underlying mechanisms. If naltrexone blocks the impact of
social support on the brain's threat response, then vital steps will have been
taken toward understanding the nature of well documented links between social
relationships and health. Understanding these mechanisms could have a broad and
meaningful influence on a numerous and diverse array of scientific and medical
questions, paying substantial dividends to society as a whole. Knowledge of the
basic mechanisms supporting relationship-health associations will help us to
realize full potential of interventions that emphasize social relationships
across a variety of disciplines and contexts.