* 1261782
* Scalable Manufacturing of Novel Hydrogen Storage Materials with Control at Nanometer Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 329,278.00

This grant provides funding for the development of numerical tools and
nanomanufacturing processes for characterizing the structure-process-performance
relationships of nanosphere coatings on silicon thin films. These coatings have
the potential to not only enhance solar efficiencies without introducing
additional surface recombination, but also reduce manufacturing processes and
costs. The developed numerical tools will determine optimal structures for
enhanced efficiencies while considering both ordered and disordered structures.
Detailed simulations will be performed on optimal structures to determine the
role of scattering and whispering gallery modes as well as to determine the
angular performance of coated solar cells and evaluate transport
characteristics. Scalable, inexpensive spin coating methods will be used to
understand how nanosphere coatings may be assembled onto silicon thin film
photovoltaics. Manufactured samples will be characterized structurally,
optically, and electronically to validate simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will lead to improvements in the design of next-
generation solar cells. This could also have a profound impact on other
nanophotonic applications that make use of whispering gallery modes such as
optical filters and biosensors. A broad impact is envisioned in the areas of
solar cells, topology optimization, and nanomanufacturing. This project will
also educate and outreach to next-generation engineers through open source
software development, the introduction of various education modules, and
involvement with the Pitt Office of Diversity's INVESTING NOW summer program.