* 1261772
* Acquisition of high-temperature rock-magnetic instruments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Peter Solheid, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 334,080.00

The project will expand experimental capabilities at the Institute for Rock
Magnetism (IRM) through the acquisition of two new
instruments:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first is a Asylum Research MFP-3D Magnetic
Force Microscope. This instrument maps the spatial distribution of magnetic
field gradients at a controlled height above the surface of a magnetic material
sample, with a resolution of a few tens of nanometers, over areas up to ~100
micrometers, thereby allowing observation of the micromagnetic structure of the
material (domains and domain walls). In addition to room-temperature imaging,
the MFP-3D also allows high-temperature imaging up to 400째C. This is
accomplished with a separate high temperature environmental stage (PolyHeater)
that sits on the MFP-3D XY scanning stage. Heating and cooling can be done in
air or controlled atmospheres (e.g., He, Ar, CO, etc). Sample temperature can be
maintained to better than 0.2째C precision with accuracy to 0.5째C and temperature
overshoots less than 0.2째C. All control and measurement functions are fully
programmable for custom heating-cooling imaging experiments. The second is an
AGICO MFK1-FA Kappabridge and CS4 Furnace. This instrument measures both ?real?
(in-phase) and ?imaginary? (quadrature) components of complex susceptibility,
with three AC operating frequencies (976, 3904 and 15616 Hz) and a range of
applied AC field intensities from 2 A/m up to a maximum of 700 A/m (depending on
frequency). High spatial uniformity of both applied fields and the instrument
response function allow accurate measurement of the magnetic anisotropy of
geological samples having various sizes and shapes, and an integrated specimen
rotator in the MFK1-FA enables rapid automated acquisition of orientation-
dependent data. The CS4 furnace, integrated with the MFK1-FA, will enable
measurements of frequency- and amplitude-dependent susceptibility at elevated
temperature, which will be important new capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The new high-temperature capabilities of these two instruments will allow
resident and visiting researchers at the Institute for Rock Magnetism to probe
the fundamental physical origins of magnetic ?memory? in geologically
significant magnetic materials such as magnetite, titanomagnetite, hematite,
hemoilmenite, and pyrrhotite. The nonuniform magnetizations in micrometer-to-
millimeter sized particles of these minerals provide us with the paleomagnetic
?recordings? of past geomagnetic field strength and orientation that allow us to
study the evolution of the earth?s deep interior, the motion of tectonic plates,
and other significant problems in the geosciences, biosciences, planetary
geology, and meteoritic studies. Observation of the micromagnetic configurations
within mineral grains, and their changes with experimentally applied fields and
controlled temperatures, allows us to study the mechanisms of natural magnetic
recording, to understand their sensitivity to thermal or chemical overprinting
over geologic time, and to devise optimized laboratory methods for the recovery
of paleomagnetic field data from natural recording media.