* 1261660
* Geometric methods in local and global representation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Zhiwei Yun, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 43,453.00

The proposal aims to apply methods from algebraic geometry to study
representations of algebraic groups. The PI and his collaborators will further
develop his theory of global Springer representations, which involves the
geometry of Hitchin integrable systems, and apply it to representations of
p-adic groups. The proposal also proposes to use geometric methods of Laumon,
Ngo, etc. to prove orbital integral identities (Fundamental Lemmas) in relative
trace formulae and to construct explicit automorphic forms (sheaves) for
function fields and their Hecke eigenvalues (local systems), especially those
with wild ramifications. e.g., Kloosterman sheaves for general reductive groups.
Finally the proposed project also plans to study Koszul duality patterns for
sheaves on generalized flag varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
naturally sits at the intersection of algebraic geometry, representation theory,
number theory, and mathematical physics. In these subjects as well as in
understanding our physical world, symmetry is a central theme. Group theory is a
uniform way to study such symmetries, and representation theory is trying to
classify the actions of groups on vector spaces. As often happens, the most
interesting representations come from geometric objects with symmetries, which
in turn appear in physics. This is why geometric methods are so powerful in
solving representation-theoretic problems.&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the
PI hopes to shed light on hard problems in representation theory and number
theory, and to discover more symmetries that appear in geometry.