* 1261162
* U.S. - U.K. IRES:  Future Electric Transportation Systems (FETS)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2017
* John Lesko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,994.00

This IRES award entitled U.S.-U.K. IRES: Future Electric Transportation Systems
(FETS) at the University of Nottingham, England, U.K.supports international
research experiences for U.S. engineering students from Virginia Tech. For each
of three years, five students (2 graduate and 3 undergraduate students) will
participate in an intensive ten week research experience with two of the
University of Nottingham?s internationally recognized research groups: the Power
Electronics, Machines and Control Research Group (PEMC) and the Human Factors
Research Group (HFRG). Participants will investigate next generation electrical
power systems for environmentally-friendly transport systems and the human
factors issues that accompany their use and adoption. &lt;br/&gt;This ten week
program will consist of two phases. The first phase will consist of three pre-
departure workshops plus three weeks of mentorship and research preparation at
Virginia Tech to orient students to the experience and the mentors and faculty
they will work with. The second phase will consist of seven weeks at the
University of Nottingham engaged in concentrated research with the PEMC or HGRG.
Students will focus on three main research areas: power electronic systems in
transportation, human factors and the acceptance of electronic drive systems,
and the interface of power electronics and human factors. Students will work
collaboratively as part of a large team including faculty, Ph.D. students, and
postdoctoral research fellows who will act as mentors. &lt;br/&gt;Among the
broader impacts of this IRES program are the promotion of international,
interdisciplinary research collaborations that foster innovative technical
leaders capable of creating and effectively integrating electric transportation
systems into our society. As an international research experience for students,
the IRES-FETS program promotes and grows international research collaborations
between the U.S. and the U.K.; creates natural mentorships in engineering for
undergraduate and graduate students; and involves undergraduates in an active
research environment with graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and
faculty in areas of research with national and international implications for
energy and environment. These extensive field research experiences for
undergraduates will also help to increase the success of these students in
graduate programs in engineering fields.