* 1261860
* Integrated Policy and Engineering Design for Complex Systems with Applications to Distribution Systems within Smart Electric Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Jitesh Panchal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 04/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

The research objective of this award is to create a framework for integrated
policy and engineering design considering multiple goals of policy makers,
stakeholders, and dynamic stability. The research objective will be achieved by
establishing domain-independent multilevel design techniques through the
integration of mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints, constructs
from multi-objective optimization, games with vector payoffs, and stability
theories. The framework will be validated through the design of market-oriented
feed-in-tariff policies for smart electric grids, accounting for economic,
environmental, technical, and energy-security objectives. Domain-specific models
will be developed using techniques such as continuation power flow analysis and
volatility analysis. The research will result in a general framework that can be
applied to other complex systems that require the integrated consideration of
technical design and policy decisions. Deliverables include a computational
framework for integrated policy and engineering design, extension of existing
mathematical constructs to multi-objective problems, and specific insights into
the design of feed-in-tariff policies.

If successful, the results of this research will enable computational policy
design using multilevel design techniques. The applications include large-scale
complex systems such as energy, transportation and telecommunication
infrastructure. The results will be disseminated through industrial partners,
university's extension energy program, journal publications and conference
presentations. The outreach efforts are designed to increase public awareness
through local science centers, to support local communities through design-
oriented service-learning projects, and to increase the participation of women
and minorities through undergraduate research. Project outcomes will be
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses. High school students will be
engaged through existing design competitions to educate them about engineering,
energy, and policy-related issues.