* 1261284
* CAREER: Mechanics of Bio-inspired Multilayered Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/13/2012,08/31/2018
* Nima Rahbar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,454.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to study the size-
scale dependence of toughness in multilayered structures. The superior
mechanical properties of layered biological materials relates to its
hierarchical structure and nature?s ability to design these materials with
nanoscale structural components. This project establishes a link between
toughening mechanisms in biological materials and the design of robust
structural composites. To achieve this goal, toughening mechanisms in biological
and bio-inspired multilayers will be studied using a novel experimental
technique that allows measurement of crack growth in real time at nanometer
scale. Using the knowledge of the origin of toughness, a freeze-casting
technique will be used to make nature-inspired layered hybrid composites.
Mechanics models will be developed to understand the toughening mechanisms such
as viscoelastic crack bridging, crack deflections and twisting in biological and
bioinspired multilayered materials. The models will be used to optimize the
toughness of nature-inspired composites as well as to design tailored composite
materials for a wide range of structural applications. The educational plan
contributes to and draws upon the research plan. The outreach program
collaborates with a university in Africa and locally with a community college.
The curriculum development includes inductive team-teaching of multidisciplinary
engineering courses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Strength and toughness are both
vital properties for most structural materials. Although there has been success
in the development of stronger and harder materials, these materials have little
to no use as bulk structural materials without appropriate fracture resistance.
Understating the mechanical behavior of biological materials is a crucial step
in the design of robust structural materials. The objective of this project is
to study toughness in biological multilayer materials. The experimental
techniques and theoretical findings from this fundamental research will have a
direct impact on the improvement of much needed sustainable infrastructure in
the United States. The resulting models can be used to optimize the properties
of bio-based composite materials. The educational initiatives will involve
participation of underrepresented groups through collaborations with local a
community college and Citizen schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;