* 1261383
* RAPID: FULL ACCOUNTING OF PYROGENIC-C DYNAMICS AT THE WATERSHED SCALE:  A UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY OFFERED BY THE HIGH PARK FIRE
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Keith Paustian, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 197,363.00

Carbon is the main building block of all vegetation, as well as the organic
component of soils. In order to predict the effects of wildfires on forest
carbon storage in a future where more fires are expected to occur, a better
understanding of the cycling of carbon is therefore critical. This project
focuses on pyrogenic, or black carbon and its related fluxes, a component that
has been largely ignored in earlier studies. During fire a fraction of the
burned carbon, perhaps up to ten percent of the total, is converted to black
carbon and deposited in the soil, where it may runoff in water or remain stored.
In many fire-prone ecosystems, black carbon comprises more than 20 percent of
soil organic matter. The High Park Fire burned more than 35,000 hectares in June
2012 along the Cache la Poudre River in Northern Colorado and, in the process,
created a unique opportunity to conduct a full initial accounting of black
carbon dynamics, from production to deposition, storage, and runoff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the rate of production of
black carbon from the High Park Fire, its rate of loss in erosion compared to
its accumulation deeper in soil, its export by water runoff through an intensive
water monitoring effort, and deposition along river banks and in stream bed
sediments. Stored samples of sediments and water from before and after the fire
will be used along with new samples taken over the following year. State of the
art methods will be used to accurately quantify black carbon in all soil,
sediment and water samples. This will provide valuable measurements in support
of a more mechanistic understanding and modeling of black carbon dynamics in
mountain ecosystems increasingly prone to fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the
many fires of 2012, the general public is more than ever interested in their
causes and consequences. An open panel on fires, pyrogenic carbon, and their
impacts on water resources and climate change will be organized locally.
Additionally, the project will develop an inquiry project aimed at engaging
secondary school students in Colorado Front Range communities and rural eastern
Colorado, which includes a large Hispanic population. A lesson on black carbon
will be framed as a forensic detective mystery to determine where and when a
fire occurred. Students will analyze samples to solve the mystery and lead into
discussions on the causes and consequences of wildfires. Effectiveness of
outreach will be assessed using pre- and post-tests administered by experts at
Colorado State University.