* 1261806
* University Innovation Programs Summit
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 199,997.00

Interest in entrepreneurship and technology commercialization within U.S.
colleges and universities has grown in recent years, especially as related to
scientific and technological discoveries. Higher education institutions have
developed numerous programs and infrastructure to help faculty explore and
realize the potential commercialization of their research. The National Science
Foundation (NSF) and other federal programs along with private foundations and
nonprofit organizations have supported efforts that strengthen the higher
education entrepreneurial ecosystem and increasing commercialization of
research. The US government invests $148 billion annually in basic research,
more than any other country. While significant successes have resulted from this
investment, a much greater opportunity exists to fully capitalize on this
investment for the benefit of society. For university research to achieve
greater impact, academic researchers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics need opportunities to learn how to evaluate whether their research
discoveries have potential for commercialization. For this reason, many
organizations and universities have developed programs designed to accelerate
the commercialization of university research. The proposed summit will bring
together university leaders and researchers who seek to strengthen
entrepreneurial ecosystems on their respective campuses and in the broader
community. The meeting will provide opportunities for these faculty and
institutional leaders to learn more about emerging programs and new resources
that can help advance their institutional goals.

The summit participants will have the opportunity to learn about relevant
services, resources and programs such as I-Corps, SBIR and PFI through
discussion of successful program models that have emerged from these programs.
NCIIA and the conference presenters will share the results of research on
university technology entrepreneurship, and engage participants in discussion
about how to develop new programming that supports the commercialization of
funded research. Participants will be provided information about funding,
training and networking opportunities and have the opportunity to discuss
emerging needs and approaches to addressing them. Both the emerging needs and
the solutions that emerge from these discussions will be captured and summarized
in a white paper and video for dissemination. The summit is designed to increase
participation in programs and networks supporting entrepreneurship education and
commercialization. This will, in turn, increase the likelihood that
commercializable research will emerge from U.S. colleges and universities,
ideally leading to commercialization through translation and the creation of new
ventures that evolve into viable businesses.