* 1261385
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Application of Reflectance Spectroscopy to Chert Provenance of Mississippian Symbolic Weaponry
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2014
* David Dye, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 17,167.00

Under the guidance of Dr. David Dye, Ryan Parish will examine the source of
prehistoric stone resources used in the manufacture of Mississippian symbolic
weaponry "swords" through non-destructive reflectance spectroscopic analysis.
Mr. Parish will test the single source hypothesis which postulates that the
sword artifacts are manufactured from chert prehistorically quarried from
deposits located near Dover, Tennessee. Source data for the Mississippian chert
swords will allow Mr. Parish to examine whether preferential selection of Dover
chert existed despite the presence of local visually similar Ft Payne deposits.
Through the application of reflectance spectroscopy, Mr. Parish will investigate
whether the source of the material used in the manufacture of the Mississippian
sword artifacts was culturally significant as implied by current source
assignments.

The sourcing of Mississippian chert swords will allow archaeologists to study
resource selection, inter-regional exchange, socio-political organization, and
craft specialization in ranked chiefdoms during the Middle Mississippian Stage
(1200-1400 AD). Source data also provices the ability to construct hypotheses
regarding the use of exotic resources by elites. Currently a large number of
Mississippian swords are visually identified as being manufactured from Dover
chert. Dover chert is a material type represented in archaeological assemblages
from Oklahoma to Georgia and as far north as New York spanning a large portion
of what is broadly recognized as Mississippian societies. The distribution of
Dover chert signifies an extensive long distance trade network in place during
the Mississippian Period. However, the presence of macroscopically similar
variants of Ft Payne and Lower St. Louis (Dover) chert outcropping across the
Southeast makes the source of the "Dover" chert swords uncertain.

The project involves the non-destructive analysis of Mississippian chert swords
from curated collections that have received no previous analytical study. The
nature of variation within chert necessitates the creation of a large database
of representative samples. The creation of a regional database representing two
of the major chert types in the Southeast will contribute to future studies
relating to the prehistoric record of the region. The potentially fast,
inexpensive, accurate, and non-destructive characteristics of reflectance
spectroscopy promote the creation of a dynamic database that will be useful for
future research relating to prehistoric chert utilization, selection,
distribution, and acquisition. The project takes a multidisciplinary approach
drawing from the fields of Anthropology, Archaeology, Chemistry, Geography,
Geology and Statistics. Development of reflectance spectroscopy techniques
addresses current limitations to chert sourcing including accuracy, large
numbers of samples, non-destructive analysis of curated artifacts and speed. The
project will bring together archaeologists, flintknappers and geologists. The
study will signify a long term chert provenance research focus at the University
of Memphis and at Murray State University, thus encouraging multi-institutional
collaboration that will benefit future students. Specifically, the project will
provide training to undergraduate students at all stages of the project. The
prehistoric acquisition and consumption of chert resources for symbolically
charged items provides an anthropologic case study aiding our understanding of
resource selection, use and reuse.