* 1261104
* IRES: Building Networks for U.S. Chemistry Undergraduates in Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Bradley Miller, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2017
* USD 249,326.00

TECHNICAL Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award from the National Science Foundation
Office of International Science and Engineering (NSF OISE) supports a new
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) program organized and
managed by the American Chemical Society (ACS) for the summers of 2014-2016.
This IRES takes a non-traditional approach by connecting U.S. students with
undergraduate research experiences throughout Germany while reciprocally, at no
cost to the U.S. funding agencies, German students will be placed into summer
U.S. Chemistry and Materials Science sites. For 2014-2016, through a partnership
with the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) students will conduct summer
research on important topics at leading German universities and institutes, all
offering substantial research projects with a high potential for resulting
publications. Eight U.S. students?from diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds
and from institutions with limited access to research?are recruited nationally
to participate in this ten-week IRES program. Conversely, approximately eight
international students from across Germany are placed throughout existing NSF
sponsored Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs in the U.S.,
nurturing the global networks of these domestic programs. Participants in both
directions are matched with research mentors and projects that meet their
individual interests. All IRES participants present their research at the Spring
ACS National Meeting; prepare an official abstract; create and present a
research poster; consider ethical issues of research; gain respect for
scientific professionalism, other cultures, and collaboration; and communicate
scientific findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Strict curricular requirements prevent many U.S. students
majoring in the sciences from studying abroad. While sharpening their laboratory
research skills, this intensive, summer International Research Experiences for
Students (IRES) program provides U.S. undergraduates with the opportunity to
develop talents that will allow them to work effectively across cultures, boost
their careers, and establish relationships that may lead to future scientific
collaborations. In particular, summer research allows students to gain
international experience without disrupting their studies; increases national
competiveness, innovation, and knowledge base; and assists in solving challenges
of a global scope (e.g., energy, health, food/water). This American Chemical
Society (ACS) IRES program funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) yearly connects eight
U.S. chemistry and materials science students?recruited national from diverse
backgrounds and institutions?with research experiences at recognized producers
of scientific knowledge throughout Germany by means of a partnership with the
German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). While fostering intellectual growth and
maturity, the IRES experience is intended to catalyze students? desire to enroll
in advanced degree programs; deliver a substantial research experience; produce
excellent scientific publications; instill a respect for other cultures and
science professionalism; and provide an appreciation for the global scientific
enterprise. Reciprocally, as part of this program and at no cost to U.S.
institutions or funders, approximately eight German students are matched to and
placed at domestic NSF sponsored summer institutes to nurture international
dimensions and establish additional networks at these host universities. This
unique many-to-many model where students from all U.S. institutions can go to
all German institutions, and students from across Germany can go to dozens of
U.S. partner institutions, significantly disperses the beneficial impact of
these international exchanges beyond what is achievable with a traditional study
abroad program.