* 1261230
* Travel Support for the "50 Years of the Seismology of the Sun and Stars" Workshop; Sunspot, New Mexico; May 6-10, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Sushanta Tripathy, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 11/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the Scientific Organizing Committee convening a workshop at
the National Solar Observatory (NSO) in Sunspot, NM, from May 6 to May 10, 2013.
The workshop is entitled, "50 Years of the Seismology of the Sun and Stars," and
it is important to note that the year 2013 is an important milestone in
helioseismology, being the 50th anniversary year of the discovery of the
5-minute solar oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSO workshop will bring
together solar and stellar seismologists, theorists, and observers on the
occasion of completing 50 years of helioseismic investigations, in order to
discuss recent scientific advances and plan for future research. The workshop
will be structured to include invited talks on various key topics, to be
followed by contributed talks, discussions, and posters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organizers plan to publish proceedings of the workshop
within a time frame of six months. These proceedings will represent an
historical overview of the scientific results in helioseismology over the last
50 years. This document's purpose is to help young new researchers understand
the historical development of the field, as well as to aid in planning future
instrumentation and the theoretical interpretation of future observations. Based
on NSO's past experience with this kind of workshop, the Organizers expect the
participation of a large number of graduate students, women, and
underrepresented minorities, all of whom will be recruited to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The committee members are planning for this event
to be limited to about 60 to 70 attendees and they intend use this NSF award to
provide partial travel support for 10-14 participants representing the
categories of invited speakers, young researchers, and under-represented
researchers.