* 1261384
* NSF Workshop on Research Data Management Implementations
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Hakizumwami B. Runesha, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2014
* USD 67,513.00

The objective of this workshop is to bring together researchers to discuss
actual data management implementation architectures and their application to
discipline-specific workflows. This workshop thus builds on the results of the
NSF funded data lifecycle management workshop held at Princeton University in
2011, shifting focus to implementations solutions. We will invite submission of
position and experience papers that describe implementations of discipline-based
data management infrastructure and services, and the ways in which those
solutions leverage resources within and outside their institutions. The workshop
will also engage participants in a discussion of how a coordinated effort among
research computing centers may accelerate the implementation of effective
research data management workflows, and contribute to national efforts and
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Collecting, moving,
analyzing, sharing and preserving the appropriate data&lt;br/&gt;are fundamental
to research. While many meetings and workshops have discussed
best&lt;br/&gt;practices, too few meetings have focused on how data management
plans are implemented for&lt;br/&gt;different disciplines. The resulting lack of
broadly applicable research data management&lt;br/&gt;methods and
implementations has led to a culture of one-off, institution-specific, and
potentially&lt;br/&gt;unsustainable solutions; as well as the use of data
structures and formats, organizational&lt;br/&gt;structures, and/or metadata
tagging approaches that are not maintainable or
transferrable.&lt;br/&gt;Recommendations developed at this workshop will enable
more effective coordination of data&lt;br/&gt;within and among institutions.
This workshop will have a direct impact on the research&lt;br/&gt;capabilities
by sharing implementations and interoperable plans for research data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Collecting, moving,
analyzing, sharing and preserving the appropriate data&lt;br/&gt;are fundamental
to research. While many meetings and workshops have discussed
best&lt;br/&gt;practices, too few meetings have focused on how data management
plans are implemented for&lt;br/&gt;different disciplines. The resulting lack of
broadly applicable research data management&lt;br/&gt;methods and
implementations has led to a culture of one-off, institution-specific, and
potentially&lt;br/&gt;unsustainable solutions; as well as the use of data
structures and formats, organizational&lt;br/&gt;structures, and/or metadata
tagging approaches that are not maintainable or
transferrable.&lt;br/&gt;Recommendations developed at this workshop will enable
more effective coordination of data&lt;br/&gt;within and among institutions.
This workshop will have a direct impact on the research&lt;br/&gt;capabilities
by sharing implementations and interoperable plans for research data management.