* 1261118
* Erbil Plain Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Jason Ur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 197,075.00

With NSF support, the Erbil Plain Archaeological Survey (EPAS) will investigate
the landscape of the core of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (ca. 900-600 BC) in the
Kurdistan Region of Iraq. Evidence suggests that Assyrian kings deliberately
transformed the landscape through forced migration of conquered peoples, the
agricultural colonization of arable lands, and the modification of natural
hydrology through dams and canals. EPAS will evaluate this hypothesis in the
heart of the Assyrian empire by means of a 3-year archaeological survey of 3,200
km2. Despite its archaeological importance, the Assyrian heartland has never
been surveyed systematically. The initial phase will employ satellite imagery to
identify archaeological sites and landscape features (e.g., canals, subterranean
karez water systems, trackways). Subsequently, these places will be visited,
mapped, and surface artifacts collected. At the same time, the project will
visit canals, trackways, and carved reliefs to confirm their identifications and
map them. The project will describe the Neo-Assyrian landscape as well as
earlier and subsequent patterns. This project will investigate the geographical
consequences of forced migration and the power of early empires to redesign
their environments, and will produce a model of an early imperial landscape. It
will test a new satellite remote sensing methodology that has yet to receive
rigorous ground truthing. Because of the fortuitous juxtaposition of new digital
survey techniques, the history of research, and new political stability and
desire for collaboration by Iraqis, this project has the potential to
reconstruct ancient settlement and land use on a scale comparable to the great
surveys of Sumer, Oaxaca, and the Valley of Mexico, but undertaken with spatial
technologies unavailable to this earlier generation of projects. EPAS will train
American and other Western graduate students in field survey, remote sensing,
and spatial analysis. It will introduce these concepts to Iraqi archaeology
students, who have been particularly disadvantaged in technical and
methodological training. Field data from EPAS be a part of thesis research,
conference presentation, and publication for all of these students. EPAS will
form collaborations with Iraqi museums, universities, and antiquities
directorates; these institutions and their personnel are now emerging from
decades of international isolation, and in some cases persecution by the former
Baathist government. The resulting inventory of sites and landscape features
will be provided to Antiquities organizations at the local and national level,
for incorporation into the national cultural heritage database. Iraq, and
especially the Erbil region, is developing rapidly, and such a database is
critical if the nation's cultural heritage will be taken into consideration in
planning decisions. Finally, the trauma of forced migration at the hands of the
state is an experience in the living memory of nearly every adult Kurd in Iraq.
By documenting the spatial impact of forced migration, ancient and modern, this
project will promote the awareness of its geographic and social consequences.