* 1261563
* Development of Algorithms for the Quantification and Simulation of Three-Dimensional Microstructure in Granular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2012,08/31/2015
* T. Matthew Evans, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 79,011.00

The research supported by this award is directed toward the development of a
suite of stereological algorithms to allow for the robust quantification of the
three-dimensional structure of granular soils from the results of computed
tomography (CT) scans of specimens tested in the laboratory. These algorithms
will allow for the unambiguous description of the solids and void space at
multiple scales within the specimen. Such an approach is potentially
transformative with respect to the manner in which the structure of granular
materials are measured, described, quantified, and modeled. These algorithms,
when coupled with existing approaches to the quantification and simulation of
particle shapes, will allow for unprecedented amounts of information to be
extracted from laboratory measurements and, if desired, used for discrete
numerical simulations. There is currently a significant disconnect between the
experimental and numerical approaches that are exploited for the study of
granular material microstructure. An experimental approach relies upon
observation of the response of real materials in the laboratory while a
numerical approach is typically applied to an idealized assembly of particles
but is capable of rapid replicate tests and continuous monitoring of
microstructure as a function of boundary deformation. However, there is not
currently a robust and consistent procedure for linking the two research
strategies across multiple scales. The same algorithms used to quantify
microstructure in real specimens can be used to guide the generation of granular
assemblies for DEM simulations such that they are structurally and statistically
similar to those measured in the laboratory.

This suite of algorithms will be valuable to researchers in geotechnical
engineering and other fields where characterization of microstructure at similar
resolutions is necessary: e.g., petroleum engineering, materials processing,
composite materials, ceramics, and some consumer goods. While some individual
algorithms currently exist in the literature, these have often been developed on
proprietary (and varying) platforms and are generally not widely distributed.
Significantly, these disparate approaches have not been synthesized across a
single coherent data set to allow for comparison of results, inference of
higher-order behavior, or realization of any computational efficiencies that may
arise when performing multiple characterizations of a single microstructure.
Thus, development and dissemination of the proposed algorithms may have
significant broader impacts. In addition, the proposed work will provide
valuable training to the students working on the project team and equip them
with a set of skills that is portable to a variety of problems.