* 1261744
* ATE Central 2.0: Amplifying the Impact of ATE
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 4,030,874.00

Internet Scout, a research center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, worked
with the ATE community to create ATE Central (atecentral.net). The resulting web
portal and set of tools, services, and publications are designed to support the
community and showcase the depth and breadth of the ATE program. ATE Central
includes a large searchable collection of ATE-created curricula, learning
objects, web sites, and media, a comprehensive database of project and center
information, and services and tools that leverage this data to serve and promote
the ATE community. To further the overall goals and objectives of ATE Central,
this proposal aims to develop additional innovative tools, services, and
solutions in response to needs articulated by the community.

Innovative mobile apps and widgets are helping organize and disseminate
information about valuable ATE deliverables and the projects and centers. The
Community College Listing Service is helping build a comprehensive list of
community college programs in ATE programmatic areas allowing projects and
centers more complete data for their web sites and ATE users an easy path to
finding programs and collaborators. Sustainability support is helping projects
and centers define, plan, and manage which deliverables and components should be
carried forward after NSF funding. The Audience Technology Survey is creating a
unique service, aggregating mailing lists from projects and centers to survey
end users from across the community to build a deeper understanding of their use
of technology and social media. ATE Central's portal, services, and tools form
an integrated, creative approach to supporting the ATE community and amplifying
the impacts of the ATE program.

ATE Central 2.0 is continuing to use digital library standards and procedures to
compile, normalize, and disseminate metadata about the ATE projects and centers
and the resources they collect and develop, broadening the impact of their work
and disseminating metadata to organizations like the STEM Exchange, OAIster, the
DPLA, and others in the digital library and education communities. The
collective work of the ATE program, and ATE Central 2.0, is impacting a diverse
set of users - from students and faculty to industry partners. Utilizing a
variety of pathways (from conferences to social media to webinars) for outreach
combined with a commitment to Universal Design, ATE 2.0 is broadening access to
valuable ATE data and deliverables for all users, including those with
disabilities.