* 1261514
* Long Term Social Stability in the Tres-Zapotes Region
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Christopher Pool, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 240,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Christopher A. Pool and Dr.
Michael L. Loughlin will direct a regional archeological survey to investigate
causes for the remarkable resilience of the polity headed by Tres Zapotes in
southern Veracruz, Mexico. From the Arab Spring, to the Haitian earthquake, to
global climate change, contemporary events underscore the need for polities to
adjust to social and natural disturbances in their environments. Archaeology has
a unique ability to provide a comparative perspective on the resilience of human
societies in the long term. While much scholarly and popular attention has been
focused on the phenomenon of collapse, understanding why some polities and
institutions are more resilient than others is as important as as understanding
what collapses and why.

Tres Zapotes was the capital of regional polity of the Olmec and epi-Olmec
cultures between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 300. While other Olmec centers were
collapsing around 400 B.C., Tres Zapotes grew and flourished for another 700
years before it suffered a protracted decline. During that time, the evolving
Tres Zapotes polity experienced challenges from periodic volcanic eruptions,
changing environmental conditions, and an increasingly competitive political
landscape. Previous NSF-funded investigations by Dr. Pool suggest that a key
factor in the resilience of the Tres Zapotes polity was its shift from
monarchical rule to a system in which governance was shared among multiple
competing factions in the capital. The current project focuses on how Tres
Zapotes implemented governance within its territory and how that territory was
created and maintained. Such understanding requires regional-scale data on the
distribution of population, the plans of civic-ceremonial architecture, the
organization of craft production, and the exploitation of the environment.

The current project combines traditional archaeological survey and surface
collection methods with the advanced remote sensing technologies of LiDAR and
multispectral satellite imagery to investigate the relationship between Tres
Zapotes and hinterland populations over time. In addition the project seeks
evidence of earlier occupations stretching back into the Archaic period
(8000-2000 B.C.) to better understand how humans adapted to the humid tropical
environment that eventually gave rise to the Tres Zapotes polity. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in its melding of political-economic and
landscape perspectives to evaluate models of political resilience - a matter of
considerable anthropological and practical importance.

The broader impacts of the study include the training of Mexican and U.S.
students in field and analytical techniques, interpretation of remote sensing
data, and enhancement of the local research infrastructure through needed
expansion to the project laboratory on the grounds of the Tres Zapotes Museum.
The project will contribute to public education by (1) providing materials for
museum displays (2) allowing museum visitors to observe laboratory activities,
and (3) giving public talks to schools and civic organizations in the region.
Information from the project will be widely disseminated through professional
publications, graduate dissertations and theses, and a project web page.