* 1261172
* IRES: Culture and Heritage in European Societies and Spaces (CHESS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Krista Harper, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,861.00

This US-Spain IRES project further develops and expands research and training
opportunities related to the anthropology of culture and heritage in Europe
successfully launched in the 2010-2013 NSF-funded CHESS program (OISE-0968575).
This project will provide an early-career international research experience for
fifteen (15) undergraduate and graduate students from the University of
Massachusetts Amherst and the Five Colleges consortium. The PI and co-PI will
recruit three cohorts of students to conduct systematic, comparative research
around the theme of "Cultural Heritage in European Societies and Spaces (CHESS)"
as part of a three-year research project and training program in collaboration
with the Department of Anthropological Sciences at the University of Barcelona
in Spain. For each of the three years, research projects will be organized
around a central research stream: highlighting specific strengths of the US and
Spanish faculty: 1) "Crisis, culture, and heritage" (2013-2014); 2) "Sustainable
heritage, communities, and economies" (2014-2015); and 3) "Social Justice,
heritage, and changing forms of value" (2015-2016). Students will be trained
through a course series in research design and methods, field research in
Europe, and data analysis and writing for publication. International research
and training workshops at the two universities will provide US students with
intensive mentoring from renowned European scholars, as well as networking and
collaboration with their international peers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Anthropologists have critically engaged the concepts of culture and
heritage for decades, but the rise of the field of heritage studies offers new
opportunities for ethnographic investigation of how these central disciplinary
concepts are being used by policymakers, citizens, and other social actors. By
developing their projects in relation to a central set of research questions,
students will contribute to three key areas of inquiry for the larger
comparative investigation of culture and heritage as sites of contestation,
conflict, and cohesion in Europe. The proposed CHESS program provides an
integrative framework for an ethnographic field school that will draw the
participation of students across the four subfields of anthropology (cultural,
linguistic, archaeological, and biological) and serve as a model for
interdisciplinary research teambuilding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
Government institutions face new demands to develop public programming that
reflects our nation's diverse, multicultural heritage, and there is a growing
need for social scientists trained in the anthropology of heritage and related
fields. Broader impacts of the project include 1) training a diverse group of
fifteen (15) US students for international, comparative anthropological research
on cultural heritage policies and debates, 2) developing scientific research
networks between anthropologists in the US and Spain that will form the basis
for further international research projects and ongoing relationships, including
synergistic initiatives between the UMass Department of Anthropology, and new
certificate programs in Heritage and Society Studies and Modern European
Studies, the Five Colleges consortium, and European partner institutions; 3)
collaborating with faculty and students from Spain to produce a body of
systematic, comparative research on debates surrounding heritage management in
Europe, including research reports, peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations, project-related theses, and multimedia case studies for use by
community organizations, policymakers, and classroom instructors. These
publications are available to the general public through a CHESS project website
professionally archived by the UMass Amherst library. Holding an international
CHESS workshop at UMass Amherst each year of the program further extends the
broader impacts enabling at least 30 U.S. students to develop international
professional networks, mentoring relationships, and collaborators.