* 1261775
* PECASE:  Revolutionizing Surface Wave Methods for Engineering Analyses - from Deterministic and Incoherent to Probabilistic and Standardized (DIPS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Brady Cox, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2017
* USD 407,983.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is jointly funded
by the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division and the Office of
International Science and Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface wave methods
(SWMs) have become fully entrenched as powerful tools in geotechnical site
investigation over the past decade, and their end result - a subsurface profile
of small-strain shear modulus/shear wave velocity (Vs) - is used as a key input
parameter in many engineering analyses. The expanding use of SWMs is driven by
the desire to "reach" within the earth and retrieve accurate and meaningful
engineering parameters without the need for borings. Traditionally, SWMs have
been used to provide a single, deterministic Vs profile for each site tested,
without consideration given to measurement/dispersion uncertainty and how it
propagates forward through the inversion process used to estimate Vs. However,
as the profession moves toward probabilistic design and performance-based
engineering, the inability to quantify uncertainty in Vs from SWMs has been
exposed as a major impediment to future progress. An ever increasing number of
researchers and practitioners are using SWMs without understanding how
acquisition parameters such as spatial sampling interval, array aperture, source
proximity, and signal-to-noise ratio influence the uncertainty of their results.
Furthermore, only anecdotal recommendations exist (often conflicting) to guide
the selection of these parameters relative to a desired depth of exploration. It
is likely that no other non-standardized test is used in geotechnical
engineering more widely than SWMs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will address
these issues in his career by revolutionizing SWMs from Deterministic and
Incoherent to Probabilistic and Standardized (DIPS). The DIPS plan (aimed at
"smoothing-out the dips" in SWMs) involves: (1) quantifying
measurement/dispersion uncertainty in SWMs so that Monte Carlo-based inversions
can be used to propagate this uncertainty forward into a suite of acceptable Vs
profiles with confidence intervals on layer thickness and velocity (i.e.,
advancing from deterministic to probabilistic), and (2) developing standards for
SWMs applied to solving engineering problems (i.e., advancing from incoherent
recommendations to coherent standards). The DIPS plan is guided by the vision to
collect and analyze a unique, large and freely-shared set of experimental data
at key benchmark sites across the country using the four main types of SWMs with
systematically varied acquisition parameters. Meaningful dispersion uncertainty
will be evaluated for each set of acquisition parameters using newly-proposed
methods. Intra-method variability in dispersion estimates will then be examined
and the set of parameters with the lowest uncertainty selected to anchor the
development of standards. With meaningful estimates of dispersion uncertainty,
Monte Carlo inversions will be used to establish confidence intervals for Vs
layer thickness and velocity, resulting in fully probabilistic results that can
be incorporated into subsequent performance-based analyses. Following this step,
inter-method variability will be examined in order to evaluate bias between
various SWMs and borehole Vs measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Arkansas (UA) has placed the PI in a unique position to carry out the DIPS
plan and integrate it with existing educational programs aimed at increasing
undergraduate research experiences, diversifying the student body, and
developing international collaborations. The PI is committed to integrating
research and education in SWMs, having been involved in this field since his own
undergraduate research project. The DIPS plan will not only allow for students
to become involved in undergraduate research, but will also provide an
opportunity to spend a semester abroad through a preexisting foreign exchange
agreement between UA and the Politecnico di Torino (PDT) in Italy. The PI's
colleagues at PDT are experts in surface wave testing, and this project opens up
a unique chance for our institutions, professors and students to participate in
international exchange of education, ideas and culture through undergraduate
researchers. Recruitment of students to participate in the PDT exchange will
occur through the Engineering Career Awareness Program (ECAP), a UA College of
Engineering program that combines several piloted and proven strategies to
recruit, retain and graduate minority undergraduate students. UA tracks the
progress of ECAP students to assess the impact of the program, providing a pre-
existing mechanism to track the retention and success of ECAP students with
international PDT research experiences. The PI believes that this experience
will lead to 100 percent retention and a high likelihood that these
underrepresented students will continue their education via graduate studies.