* 1261715
* CIF21 DIBBs: Long Term Access to Large Scientific Data Sets: The SkyServer and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Amy Walton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,449,659.00

The Project aims to create a sustainable collaborative ecosystem built around
several large scientific data sets for the broader science community. Based upon
the expertise developed for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) SkyServer and
the associated projects the Project will formalize the main system components
and reengineer them to be much more reusable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project
will take full ownership of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey archive and will
provide a robust environment for its continued operations, using an economy of
scale enabled by common, shared building blocks derived from the existing SDSS
SkyServer framework, based upon a large, scalable database
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using these building blocks, the team will build
and operate open data archives from large observations and numerical
simulations, including computational fluid dynamics, ocean circulation and
astrophysics, reaching PB scales. The Project will further extend the tools to
life sciences, like large-scale, next-generation genome sequencing experiments,
as well as high-throughput neuroscience imaging data. The resulting distributed,
parallel database framework will be linked to small, user-created data sets that
can be used also collaboratively, in conjunction with each other and the large
data collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project will work with selected
communities to help deploying and serving data using our building blocks,
demonstrating portability, generality and economies of scale; will help and
encourage other institutions and communities to use the tools, while seeking
collaborations that result in disruptive changes, and will build tools that
accelerate the timescale to deploy new services and applications and rapidly
test new ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project will enable individual users to
bring their "small data" and analyze it collaboratively in the context of the
large data. &lt;br/&gt;Our particular goals are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (i) Take
full ownership of the SDSS Archive (database and flat files) and ensure a
scalable and robust environment for its continued
operation;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (ii) Build upon our decade-long effort on SDSS
and its ad-hoc spinoffs, through reengineering its components into portable and
general building blocks;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (iii) Systematically address
curation issues arising from using a service-oriented architecture (SOA), and
the resulting service life-cycle;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (iv) Work with projects
from additional scientific domains to help deploying and serving data using our
building blocks, demonstrating portability, generality and economies of
scale;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; (v) Develop scalable extensions to our database
cluster in order to deal with large numerical simulations scaling up to
petabytes, and turn them into open numerical laboratories;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
(vi) Use our CasJobs Collaborative Environment to address the problem of small
but complex data in the "Long Tail" of science.