* 1261431
* Tropical Climate Reconstruction with Tree-Ring Chronologies from the Central Amazon and Eastern Highlands of Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* David Stahle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 04/30/2015
* USD 64,980.00

This collaborative project will involve the University of Arkansas (David
Stahle), the Brazilian National Institute for Amazonian Research/Max Planck
Institute (Jochen Schongart), and the Federal University at Lavras, Brazil (Ana
Carolina Barbosa). Rigorous dendrochronological methods will be used to train
students and faculty at both institutions and to develop several exactly dated,
well replicated ring-width chronologies covering the last 300-years in the
seasonally flooded bottomland forests of the central Amazon basin and in
seasonally dry upland forests of eastern Brazil. Exactly dated tree-ring
chronologies provide a vital preindustrial perspective on global warming and
have produced the only spatially distributed estimates of past megadroughts and
pluvials needed for testing climate model simulations of the dynamics
responsible for decadal moisture regimes over North America. The vast majority
of tree-ring chronologies available worldwide have been developed from temperate
and boreal forests. However, the most biodiverse forest ecosystems in the world,
the forests of the Amazon Basin in Brazil, have not produced a single freely
available multi-century tree-ring chronology useful for exact dating or climate
reconstruction. &lt;br/&gt; In the absence of a cold winter dormant season, most
tropical tree species do not produce anatomically distinctive annual growth
rings and therefore cannot be used for routine dendrochronology. However, strong
environmental rhythms do exist in some tropical forests and can induce annual
ring formation in a few native species. This includes the profound precipitation
seasonality and the prolonged flood pulse of lowland forests in the central
Amazon. Preliminary research has proven that annual rings exist in Macrolobium
acacifolium in these inundation forests and their potential value for
hydroclimatic applications has been demonstrated. Annual rings have also been
proven in Cedrella fissilis and C. odorata from seasonally dry upland forests of
Brazil and eastern Bolivia, and ring width and oxygen isotope chronologies from
both are related to large-scale climate variability. A major impediment to the
development of long climate sensitive tree ring chronologies in Amazonia has
been the lack of expertise with the rigorous application of dendrochronology,
the most accurate and precise dating method in geochronology. &lt;br/&gt; The
300-year long master chronologies of tree growth and climate history that will
be developed through this project are expected to leverage a wide range of
interdisciplinary research, including climate dynamics, isotope
paleoclimatology, and forest ecology. Once this research concept is proven,
further collaborative investigations are envisioned that involve US and
Brazilian scientists, in order to model the climate and stream flow response of
the derived chronologies, develop calibrated reconstructions of annual
hydroclimatic conditions, and investigate the large scale ocean-atmospheric
forcing of moisture regimes over tropical South America.