* 1261811
* CAREER:   Multilayer Code Synthesis For Correctness and Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/13/2012,07/31/2017
* Qing Yi, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 219,571.00

Correctness and performance are two of the most fundamental concerns
in&lt;br/&gt;software development. In particular, the increasing complexity of
modern &lt;br/&gt;computing environment has made it extremely difficult for
software applications to be both correct and efficient. Software programs are
frequently found to be flawed, and existing technology has fallen behind in
providing the necessary programming language and tool support to ensure high
quality software development. This research develops programming language as
well as compiler analysis and optimization techniques to support the automated
translation of software from high-level design to low-level efficient
implementations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a multilayer code
synthesis framework that systematically produces high-quality software by
effectively combining software verification techniques with program analysis and
compiler optimization in a three-phase translation process. First, starting from
the software design phase, the framework automatically translates formal
software semantic specifications into object-oriented or procedural
implementations based on strategies selected by programmers. Then, based on
knowledge from the software-design phase, a sequence of domain-specific
optimizations is applied to the implementation to improve algorithm efficiency.
Finally, architecture-specific optimizations are applied to performance-critical
routines, and the optimized routines are empirically tuned as the application is
ported to different machines. Different design and programming languages may be
used in each translation phase, and software verification technology will be
used to ensure the correctness of each translation. The research focuses on
scientific computing and system software applications, where both correctness
and performance are of critical concern. The integrated research is expected to
significantly improve both the trustworthiness and performance of existing
software development.