* 1261327
* Syndication on public television stations via NETA of "Taking the Long View: The Life of Shiing-shen Chern"
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2014
* USD 48,210.00

Although programs such as PBS's NOVA and NPR's Science Friday and magazine
articles in Scientific American and Discovery make the sciences accessible to
the public, content about mathematics and mathematicians is scarce. "Taking the
Long View" presents a unique opportunity to learn about the extraordinary
mathematical contributions of Shiing-shen Chern. Going beyond an exposition of
his foundational contributions to differential geometry, the film interweaves
20th century Chinese history to ground Chern's intellectual and cultural
accomplishments. The result is a startling realization of Chern's far-reaching
impact on the development of pure mathematics, specifically, differential
geometry, and on cross-cultural mathematical collaboration. For its analysis of
how historical events shaped the life of an extraordinary man who greatly
advanced pure mathematics and mathematical exchange between China and the West,
"Taking the Long View" is unlike anything else currently available, especially
given its focus on Chinese and Western relations. This 54-minute film has been
released as a DVD with 35 minutes of extra features that explain, among other
things, the Gauss-Bonnet Theorem and Chern's insightful proof, Cartan's
technique of moving frames for treating geometric problems, vector bundles and
Chern's discovery of their topological classes, and other mathematical topics.
This project will make the film available for broadcast on more than 300 local
public television stations through syndication by the National Educational
Telecommunications Association (NETA). Following its broadcast, it will be made
available for online streaming from several web
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Taking the Long View" is a unique and valuable
contribution to the goal of bringing mathematics to nonmathematical audiences.
Syndication of "Taking the Long View" by NETA will expose an extremely large and
diverse audience (the general public) to accessible mathematical concepts,
Shiing-shen Chern's dedication to and impact on mathematics, and the importance
of Western and Chinese relations in the development of mathematics. Viewers will
learn about fundamental concepts in differential geometry, such as Chern
classes; Chern's critical role in disseminating Cartan's innovative techniques
(often described as "moving frames"); and Chern's great success in promoting
cross-cultural mathematical collaboration by encouraging Chinese and Western
mathematicians to study and teach abroad. The film's focus on the impact of
Chinese and Western relations on the development of mathematics distinguishes
the film from other programs and articles about mathematics. Furthermore,
Shiing-shen Chern remains an original and highly respected thinker within the
field whose contributions cannot be overestimated.