* 1261226
* Impact of Total Column Water Vapor Measurements on Short- to Medium- Range Forecasts of North American Monsoon Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Christopher Castro, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2015
* USD 492,332.00

The objective of this research is to evaluate the ability of observations of
total column precipitable water (TPW) from ground-based Global Positioning
System (GPS) receivers to improve forecasts of precipitation occurring as part
of the North American Monsoon (NAM). The NAM begins in southern Mexico in May
and expands north and westward along the Sierra Madre Occidental, reaching the
US Southwest in late July and early August. The bulk of NAM precipitation comes
from mesoscale meteorological processes, including squall lines and mesoscale
convective complexes, and thus successful numerical weather prediction requires
the use of a high-resolution nonhydrostatic weather forecasting model. In
addition, previous work suggests that successful prediction of NAM precipitation
must include observations from the regions of convective initiation, and
adequately represent low-level surges of moisture into the NAM region. Thus,
this project examines the ability of the Advanced Research Weather Research and
Forecasting model (WRF ARW), integrated using a nonhydrostatic high resolution
inner domain, to produce skillful NAM precipitation forecasts using continuous
TPW observations from a network of GPS ground stations in the US (Suominet) and
in Mexico (TLALOC-Net, a 100-station network currently under construction), with
further experiments incorporating observations from the more distant COCONet
network in the Caribbean. GPS receivers detect TPW as a consequence of the delay
in GPS signal propagation from the transmitter satellite to the ground-based
receiver due to the presence of atmospheric water vapor. In addition to these
fixed networks, the PIs will work with colleagues at the National Autonomous
University of Mexico on a field campaign in which 10 GPS receivers will be
deployed in Northern Mexico (in the region of convective initiation) over the
2013 NAM season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its scientific merit, the
work has broader societal impacts due to the importance of the NAM, which
accounts for approximately 50-70% of the annual precipitation in northwest
Mexico and the Southwest US. The NAM impacts water supply and demand, severe
weather, extreme heat, drought and wildfire during the warm season. In addition,
the work will foster collaborations between US and Mexican scientists in a
research area of interest to both countries, and the work will support and train
a graduate student.