* 1261614
* PECASE:  Compressive Cooperative Sensing and Navigation in Mobile Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2015
* USD 335,330.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to develop the foundations of sensing and navigation in mobile cooperative
networks from a compressive sampling perspective. A mobile ooperative network
faces an abundance of information in its environment. Since there is not enough
time for direct measurement of the whole terrain, finding the fundamental
minimum sensing required for high-integrity and cooperative reconstruction of
the parameter of interest is considerably important and an open problem.
Currently, there is no analysis and design theory for ooperative mapping based
on a severely under-determined data set. onsequently, a avigation framework that
can guide the vehicles to the locations better for sparse sensing is also
lacking. Inspired by the recent breakthroughs in non-uniform sampling theory,
this proposal shows how the network can exploit the sparse transformation of the
parameter of interest for cooperative mapping based on a considerably small
observation set. The approach provides an answer to the question of "the next
best positions for sensing" in mobile networks and guides the vehicles to the
locations that are better for compressed sensing/mapping. To ensure
uninterrupted cooperation, it furthermore complements this by proposing a
foundation for communication-aware compressive mapping. Along this line, it
shows how to build realistic communication objectives that are reflective of
communication unreliability such as path loss, shadowing and fading, and
integrate them with compressive sensing/mapping objectives. The research is
fundamental in nature as it seeks to unveil the minimum sensing and
communication needed for the robust operation of cooperative mobile networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will make a significant
contribution to the understanding and optimization of mobile cooperative
networks in realistic communication environments. Emergency response,
exploratory missions, security and surveillance are a few examples of the
applications that have to operate in an information-rich environment robustly
and in a timely manner, and can therefore benefit tremendously from the work.