* 1261393
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Relationships between Dual-Polarimetric In-cloud Microphysics and Satellite-Observed Cumulus Cloud Properties to Predict Lightning Character
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Eugene McCaul, Universities Space Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 124,859.00

With this award, the investigators will examine physical processes occurring in
growing and evolving convective clouds as they begin to produce lightning. The
study will utilize: Satellite-based cloud observations and retrieved cloud
properties, including time-series (5-15-min) of Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite (GOES) and Meteosat Second Generation (MSG) visible and
infrared (IR) measurements; S-band dual-polarimetric National Weather Service
Surveillance 1988 Doppler (WSR-88D) radar observations across the United States;
Ground-based VHF Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) observations (e.g., over Northern
Alabama, Central Oklahoma); Observations collected during the Cloud processes of
the main precipitation systems in Brazil: A contribution to cloud resolving
modeling and to the Global Precipitation Measurement(CHUVA) campaign; Retrieved
aerosol observations from satellites such as MODerate resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS), and ground, such as from the AErosol RObotic NETwork
(AERONET). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award seeks to address a fundamental
question in lightning prediction: How does the combination of multi-scale
processes influence total lightning production? The corollary to this is: How do
we obtain a longer lead time (&gt;10-15 min) in lightning
forecasting?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals are: (1) To improve
understanding of the physical processes and precursory signals of lightning
evolution within the 0-1 h timeframe through the collection and interpretation
of high-temporal and spatial resolution space- and ground-based remote sensing
observations of hydrometeor and aerosol type, amount and distribution; (2) To
seek improvement in lightning amount nowcasting skill for longer lead-time
(~30-45 min) and higher accuracy using combined data from geostationary
satellite observations, radar and models; (3) To significantly bolster graduate-
and undergraduate-level university education directly through transition of
scientific discoveries to students, and indirectly via curriculum
enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts will be improving
understanding of lightning processes that are inherently difficult to observe,
more skillful 0-1 hour quantitative lightning nowcasts, and exploitation of
WSR-88D dual-polarimetric data. Improved lightning nowcasts will benefit the
general public, and especially the aviation industry that suffer substantial
costs due to lightning-disrupted ground operations. Relatively few studies have
developed physical relationships related to lightning nowcasting using combined
datasets with a focus on satellite data. Use of WSR-88D radar in conjunction
with satellite is timely in light of new observations from the GOES-R Advanced
Baseline Imager and Geostationary Lightning Mapper expected in 2016, and from
the Meteosat Third Generation Lightning Imager in ~2019. In addition,
collaboration with other university scientists and graduate students will
further extend this research to the larger academic and educational community.