* 1262416
* ABI Innovation: A Systematic Computational Approach to Creating Libraries of High-Quality Mass Spectra for Unidentified Metabolites
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Xiuxia Du, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 580,611.00

An award is made to the University of North Carolina at Charlotte to develop a
computational workflow that will create libraries of high-quality mass spectra
for unknown metabolites that are observed repeatedly by mass spectrometers in
metabolomics studies. Metabolomics is a rapidly developing field of ?omics?
research concerned with the high-throughput identification and quantitation of
small molecule metabolites in the metabolome. Since the metabolome constitutes a
wide array of compound classes that are crucial for the normal functioning of a
biological system, the metabolomics approach promises to offer new insights in
many areas of biological investigation. Recent metabolomics research benefited
greatly from advances in mass spectrometry and chromatography. These advances
allow researchers to detect many metabolites that could not be detected
previously. However, a sizable fraction of these compounds are unknown and a new
computational infrastructure is required for processing the complex mass
spectral data and identifying and characterizing these metabolites. This project
addresses this need by developing a computational workflow that will create
libraries of high-quality mass spectra for unknown compounds from many samples.
These resulting libraries will enable the identification of many currently
unidentified, but commonly observed components by their spectra. Equally
important, the workflow will allow more precise quantitation of metabolites and
subsequent differential analysis of metabolic profiles. The most biologically
interesting unknown compounds in the library can then be subjected to further
attempts at structure elucidation.

The project will contribute to the training of postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students in bioinformatics methods. The PI will develop modules covering
metabolomics bioinformatics methods for a graduate course. Materials developed
for the class will also be made available online and presented at a
bioinformatics workshop hosted at UNC-Charlotte.