* 1262269
* Small Business Programs, Innovation, and Growth: Estimating Policy Effects Using Comprehensive Firm-Level Panel Data
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2013,07/31/2017
* John Earle, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 07/31/2017
* USD 438,449.00

In an unusual partnership of university and government researchers working
together to link and analyze several very large firm-level databases, this
project evaluates the growth and innovation effects of small business support
programs. Adapting and extending labor market program evaluation methods, the
researchers link administrative program data to universal long-panel data and to
a variety of survey data. The main estimation method is based on longitudinal
matching combined with regression, and besides estimating the basic average
treatment effect on the treated, the project investigates treatment intensity
(loan/grant size), analyze potential general equilibrium effects, and examine
the heterogeneity of effects by type of program, loan conditions, type of firm,
and economic context. The results will enable the first rigorous estimates of
government program effects on firm-level innovation and growth.

Intellectual Merit:

In addition to its direct policy relevance, this project contributes to
theoretical and empirical questions about small firms, growth, innovation,
finance, and fiscal policy. Do small business support programs foster growth and
innovation? Innovation is proxied in several ways: sales and employment growth,
productivity, skill-biased employment change, patents, R&D personnel, and
survey-based measures; the analysis distinguishes market-expanding from
business-stealing effects. Results for loan programs will contribute to the
growth-finance debate by analyzing specific policy interventions varying at the
firm level, which avoids many of the econometric problems plaguing estimates
based on aggregate data. Other issues concern the degree to which firms are
financially constrained and the size of the government spending multiplier, for
which the project uses firm level microdata to estimate the impact of government
programs on small business growth (the first-stage effect), and how it varies
over the business cycle.

Broader Impacts:

The broader impacts of this research appear, first, in the contribution to
urgent policy debates. The question is not only whether the support programs on
average increase growth and innovation at recipient firms, but whether these
benefits are offset by negative spillovers (displacement effects) or enhanced by
positive spillovers (e.g., shared innovation), and also whether they are more
effective in some environments (e.g., after negative shocks), for some types of
firms (e.g., young start-ups), or for some types of program design (e.g.,
eligibility criteria and loan terms). Romania is included to provide an
international replication, because of the interest in microcredit and financial
development in transition economies, and because of the excellent data available
for analysis. The project also makes methodological contributions of broader
usefulness: exploiting the long panel data to extend matching methods,
introducing new types of multiple control groups for more credible
identification, and developing new approaches for analyzing the general
equilibrium effects of economic policies. The project advances the broad
research agenda of linking and analyzing diverse sets of microdata, one of the
most promising recent developments in empirical economics. The ideas and methods
could serve as models for researchers analyzing other policies, both in the US
and in many other countries where similar programs and data exist. The specific
data generated by the project through linking of many large databases will have
considerable value, and another broad impact may result from making the data
available to other researchers. PhD students can and will benefit from learning
to work with the data, participating in professional conferences, and writing
dissertations on the basis of the data and project.