* 1262499
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-team System Design for Maximizing Scientific, Technological, & Policy Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Stephen Zaccaro, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 216,000.00

There is conflicting evidence about the capacity for scientific collectives
(i.e., teams, centers) to seed grand innovations. On the one hand, sociological
research convincingly argues for the "dominance of teams in the production of
knowledge," particularly in the production of "high-impact" knowledge. On the
other hand, research shows that many science teams, particularly the ones most
prized for their diverse and distributed "dream teams" are especially prone to
underachieving when it comes to publications, patents, and commercialization.
This program of research investigates a large number of scientific collectives,
from their initial formation to their maturity, in order to uncover the dynamic
interplay between structure (i.e., how the collective is designed) and process
(i.e., leadership and member interactions). Although collaboration across
disciplines and units has been frequently recognized as one of the key obstacles
to innovation, research is needed to determine how system design affects the
multi-level processes that facilitate collaboration within and across teams and
units. This research integrates psychological, organizational, and network
science perspectives in a multilevel system model to detail the impact of goals,
leadership, and system design on key drivers of collaboration within and across
teams in innovation systems. Four empirical studies are being conducted over the
course of two years in order to evaluate the impact of variations in the
architecture of scientific innovation systems on resulting innovation. This
research investigates scientific collectives comprised of students working
across two universities, three disciplines, and two countries who must work
collaboratively to solve interdisciplinary challenges in environmental
sustainability.

Broader Impacts. The project develops an evidentiary-base for informing policy
on how to manage scientific collaborations to foster innovation. In particular,
this project will enable concrete prescriptions about the optimal integration of
science and policy. The project identifies the structural and interactional
building blocks of successful collaboration in scientific collective in which
teams are distributed, are affected by complex social and motivational forces,
and interact through virtual technology to innovate using knowledge across
temporal and spatial boundaries. This project will yield greater understanding
of how to improve, through design and leadership interventions, knowledge
generation and policy implementation in multiteam science. A second set of
broader impacts of the project concern the education of four communities: (1)
future scientists, (2) science policy leaders, (3) academics, and (4) students.
This project is enabling the training of future scientists who will work as part
of distributed multidisciplinary international science teams. An estimated 10
PhD students and 10 research-oriented undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to work directly on this research, engaging in virtual scientific
collaboration. The project will create new curricula in distributed
multidisciplinary teamwork at Georgia Tech aimed at computing and engineering
students. At George Mason, this project will foster a continuing collaboration
between instructors in the Environmental Science & Policy and Psychology
programs. This collaboration has as its goal the design of integrated curricula
to help students understand how to use both principles of ecology and social
psychology to foster greater environmental sustainability. Finally, the project
contributes to the teamwork training of more than 2,000 Engineering, Ecology,
Psychology, and Business students who will participate in this research.