* 1262278
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: A Global Partnership Approach to Clean Energy Technology Innovation: Carbon Capture and Storage
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2013,01/31/2016
* David Sonnenfeld, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 01/31/2016
* USD 25,213.00

Innovation does not happen in isolation but rather within interactive systems.
Successful innovation leads to economic prosperity and national competence, but
additional research is needed on the innovation process itself, particularly on
interactive learning dynamics among and between major institutional actors.
Emerging global collaboration in innovation of clean energy technologies
presents an important opportunity for innovation systems scholarship. The recent
emergence of state-led, bilateral research partnerships to develop new
technologies for carbon capture and storage (CCS) raises critical research
questions: In what ways and to what extent do international collaborations
facilitate the innovation process of clean energy technologies? What are the
national and international policy implications of the globalization of
innovation in the clean energy sector? And what analytical model(s) can
effectively explain and be used to evaluate this phenomenon? Using the US-China
Advanced Coal Technology Consortium as a case, this research draws on two
approaches: the 'functions of innovation systems', and 'resources-based
perspective on research partnerships' approaches, respectively, to more deeply
understand the mechanisms and effectiveness of state-led, international
technology research partnerships. This field-based, doctoral dissertation
research project examines the policy rationales, mechanisms and effectiveness of
the Advanced Coal Technology Consortium (ACTC) of the United States-China Clean
Energy Research Center, initiated by Presidents Obama and Hu in 2009. Data are
gathered from Chinese and American participants in the ACTC through survey
research, in-depth interviews, site visits, event participation and other
available sources. Secondary, comparative analysis of China's CCS research
partnerships with Australia, the European Union, Japan and the United Kingdom is
included, as well. This research project will collect new data and develop
models of collaborative, international technology innovation that can be used in
the analysis of policy options for clean energy technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Utilizing data collected in
China and the United States, this project will create original analytical models
that can be used to examine multi- and bilateral technology innovation
partnerships, and help policymakers better understand and evaluate the strengths
and limitations of international collaboration in the development of clean
energy technologies. Key findings will help inform the design of effective
public policy related to research and development of large-scale, low-carbon
technologies and energy systems, and will help strengthen international
partnerships in clean energy technology innovation.