* 1262588
* ABI Innovation: Identification and evolutionary studies of mobile genetic elements
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Michael Lynch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2018
* USD 900,151.00

Indiana University is awarded a grant to develop computational methods to
identify and classify mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in the genomic sequences of
eukaryotic and bacterial species. MGEs can jump within or between genomes,
generating deleterious mutations as well as contributing to the innovation of
novel biological functions in their hosts. This project will identify novel MGEs
using model-based probabilistic approaches such as Hidden Markov Models to find
novel MGEs and identify insertions in large-scale population genomics and
metagenomic projects. The tools will be tested on eukaryotic and bacterial
genomes as well as metagenomic datasets to identify potential MGEs. The project
will produce software tools for MGE identification in genomic and metagenomic
sequences, provide annotation of MGEs in emerging model organisms, and create a
database of identified MGE sequences,&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Finding and
understanding MGEs has applications to many fields of life sciences, such as
environmental biology, ecology, food science, agriculture, and biotechnology.
This project will provide key publicly-available software tools and data
resources for MGE research. The research will be incorporated into graduate
courses in bioinformatics and evolutionary genetics. The PIs will involve
undergraduate students from North Carolina A&amp;T State University in summer
research projects.