* 1262645
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Visualization and Statistics for Spatial Population Genomic Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Peter Ralph, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2017
* USD 314,260.00

The University of Southern California and the University of California Davis are
awarded collaborative grants to create methods and software to generate maps
from genomic data, as well as to solve the related problem of placing samples of
unknown origin on the map. Organisms that are more closely related to each other
have more similar genomes. Often, an organism and its relatives live fairly
nearby, so in principle genome similarity between many different organisms can
be used to construct a map of the local geography. In this map, distances
correspond to how easy it is for the organism to travel; so the map will display
the landscape "as the organism sees it". Specifically, the methods developed
here will construct these maps in a way to allow optimization of several
different criteria, and will use randomized algorithms for pattern
identification to allow efficient computation on large genomic datasets. The
other, related suite of methods will use emerging tools from geostatistics to
place other individuals on these maps, with rigorously quantified uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The description of geographic patterns from genomic data,
and location of unknown samples, will have many applications. These tools could
be used to identify the origin of a newly invading parasite, or to identify key
barriers dividing the range of an endangered species. They will be of interest
for inferring ancestry, and might be used to locate, for instance, the likely
home of a person's grandfather to within 100km or so. They can also be used to
visualize the relationships between modern populations; for instance, of humans,
whose modern distribution reflects a complex history of large- and small-scale
migrations; or of other species for which we often know little about their
migration ecology. The simple, interactive, animated graphics developed as part
of this proposal will help give researchers a new way of displaying
information&lt;br/&gt;and contribute to the field of next-generation data
visualization. To further enable effective communication of genetic results,
short workshops will be offered both locally and at national meetings, with the
post-doctoral fellow and/or graduate students hired through this proposal taking
a leading role. The resulting tools will be distributed and discussed at
http://ralphlab.usc.edu/ and http://gcbias.org/.