* 1262651
* Contracting for Innovation: The Governance of University-Industry Parterships
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Steven Casper, Keck Graduate Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2017
* USD 173,260.00

An important trend in university-industry relationships is the negotiation by
companies, particularly within the pharmaceutical industry, of multi-year
partnerships with universities. Such partnerships provide significant
unrestricted and sponsored research funding to universities, often in exchange
for the right of the company to license intellectual property from university
discoveries in fields of interest and the opportunity to develop collaborations
with university scientists. The performance of university-industry partnerships
has varied, though many completed partnerships from the 1980s and 1990s appear
to have performed poorly and were not renewed by the industry partner. In recent
years several pharmaceutical companies have negotiated new partnerships with
universities that have significant changes in governance arrangements. The newer
partnerships include formal contracts that replace up-front funding to
universities with milestone based funding arrangements based on the performance
of the partnership, and emphasize close day to day technical collaboration
between university and industry scientists through the co-location of industry
laboratories near university campuses. This project studies the goals,
governance, and performance of several university-industry partnerships
sponsored by pharmaceutical firms. The project examines whether the performance
of university-industry partnerships can be explained by differences in the
formal and informal governance mechanisms used within partnerships. It also
studies whether the performance of university-industry partnerships can be
improved through innovation in the design of governance arrangements. The
project implements a mixed methodology case study approach to examine the goals,
governance arrangements and performance of partnerships. The research combines
descriptive data obtained through bibliometric and patent research with evidence
developed through interviews with university and industry alliance managers and
scientists involved in sponsored research collaborations within partnerships.
Broader Impacts. Multi-year university-industry partnerships are an important
mechanism by which academic science is being commercialized, involving many of
the country?s elite universities and science departments. The project
contributes to the field of science and technology policy through creating in-
depth case studies of the goals, governance, and performance of several multi-
year university-industry partnerships. The governance of university-industry
partnerships is malleable to policy: the formal contracts, informal norms, and
patterns of technical collaboration created within partnerships can be changed
to mirror improved practice. The results of the project are likely to be of
particular interest to university and government officials involved in creating
policy surrounding university-industry relationships and the commercialization
of science.