* 1262774
* Practicing Development in the American South: Public and Private Agricultural Extension in the Early 20th Century
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Mona Domosh, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2017
* USD 149,979.00

This project seeks to better understand the historical-geographical
underpinnings of international agricultural development policies and practices
undertaken by the United States government and private corporations in the post-
World War II period. It does so by documenting and analyzing public (the United
States government - specifically the United Stated Department of Agriculture,
USDA) and private (the International Harvester Corporation, IHC), agricultural
extension efforts that targeted the American South as a site of underdevelopment
in the first decades of the 20th century. Scholars have traced the roots of the
concept of 'development' within the European context to the advent of modern
liberalism and the age of empires in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but
few have brought the insights of postcolonial theory to an understanding of
American forms of development. As a result, the understanding of the historical
and geographical contexts that gave rise to US forms of development is partial
and limited. The specific goals of this research project are: 1) to query the
history and nature of development practices through the case of agricultural
extension services; 2) to question how and why the South became a space of
difference; and 3) to understand the ways in which experts, expert knowledge,
and public policies, were shaped and in turn helped shape the social
construction (class, race, and gender) of the US South in the first decades of
the 20th century, and by so doing, to contribute to an understanding of the
fluidity and complexity of bio-political efforts to develop the world in the
post-World War II period. Using a case-study approach, and through archival and
document analysis, the investigator will analyze IHC's and the USDA's
agricultural extension practices and encounters in three states (Alabama,
Mississippi, and Arkansas) in the first three decades of the 20th century
(1900-1929). The research will be accomplished primarily through the analysis of
the content, language, and image style of archival material (accounts of
agricultural extension agents, photographs of extension activities, contemporary
documents produced by IHC and USDA, particularly their educational pamphlets,
regional and thematic maps, letters between agents and government and corporate
officials, contemporary newspaper accounts) held at ten different institutions
throughout the United States. The research will provide an in-depth and
contextually-rich exemplar of the ways in which the language, practices, and
ideas that underpin contemporary US development policies were formulated and
took shape in the early 20th century in the American South. Ultimately, this
project will contribute to a more complete understanding of the making of
American development practices, an understanding that is crucial for any
critical examination of its contemporary non-military interventions throughout
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By involving students from underrepresented
groups this research project will enhance the goal of diversifying geographical
education and research, and will broaden the scholarly infrastructure for
research by forming educational partnerships with four historically-Black
institutions of higher education. This research will be disseminated widely
through teaching activities, publications, conference presentations, and
lectures at universities in Alabama, Mississippi, and Arkansas. Since the
research findings have the potential to speak to contemporary policy debates in
terms of agricultural extension services and agricultural development, the
findings will also be disseminated through discussions and presentations at
appropriate local, regional and national agricultural policy forums.