* 1262064
* Strawberry Growers, Farmworkers, and Responses to a Changing Pesticide Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Julie Guthman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2018
* USD 101,992.00

This project investigates how growers and farmworkers are responding to new
knowledge about the negative effects of certain pesticides used in California's
strawberry industry. This concern arises in the wake of a contentious battle
over methyl iodide, a highly toxic soil fumigant associated with birth defects
that was designed to replace methyl bromide, an ozone depleting chemical that
will be phased out by 2015 under the Montreal Protocol. Vociferous opposition
led to the withdrawal of methyl iodide from the US market in 2012. Since then,
the California strawberry industry has been seeking a viable replacement for
methyl bromide, at the same time that it seeks to maintain access to a range of
other soil fumigants to sustain high production. While the industry argues that
these chemicals are necessary to provide healthy fresh fruit for mass markets,
their potential to cause birth defects have produced new concerns for
farmworkers and nearby communities. However, farmworkers are politically
vulnerable and this thwarts their ability to contest agro-chemical use or to
advocate for more protective application protocols or less toxic alternatives.
Compounding their vulnerability is the issue of proof, given the mobility of
chemicals and workers, combined with generational time lags in the manifestation
of potential negative effects from exposure. At stake, then, are fundamental
questions of what populations are deserving of health and well being, how
uncertainty of exposure plays out in these calculations, and therefore how
protection, whether in the form of technology-forcing regulatory restrictions or
more restrictive application protocols, will be implemented. To analyze these
issues, the project will seek to determine 1) the use of methyl bromide relative
to other chemical and non-chemical alternatives during the most recent phase-out
period; 2) how enhanced visibility of farmworker health issues, combined with,
and complicated by, continued regulatory uncertainty and the contingencies
associated with exposure, have influenced grower decisions on the use of
chemical and non-chemical substitutes to methyl bromide; and 3) how farmworkers'
political and biological status have shaped their perspectives and self-advocacy
on chemical and non chemical alternatives to methyl bromide and their respective
application protocols. To answer these questions, researchers will gather and
analyze data from pesticide use permits to determine how fumigant use has
shifted over the past decade. In addition, they will conduct interviews with
both growers and farmworkers in two different strawberry-producing regions: with
growers to consider factors that shape growers' decisions to employ the various
alternatives to methyl bromide and with farmworkers to learn whether the battle
over methyl iodide has emboldened them to advocate for less toxic methods and/or
enhanced their employment of self-protective practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
phase-out of methyl bromide represents a profound and unique opportunity to
learn what growers do when faced with a regulatory change. This project will
elucidate the relative roles of public outcry, economic need, ethical concern,
and the availability of similarly toxic and less toxic substitutes in decision-
making around toxic chemicals. It potentially demonstrates the power of
regulatory battles to shape on-the-ground practices, even when actual regulation
is less than practically optimal, especially for a group that lacks rights and
capacities to shape regulation and contest violations. In addition, the project
will have a substantial outreach and education component that will disseminate
research to those who have a role in affecting regulation and a stake in
minimizing exposure. Outreach will take place through published reports,
industry conferences, and public meetings. Sharing the results of the research
will potentially lead to safer practices, better training in the use of
chemicals, and will possibly encourage the further development and dissemination
of less toxic alternatives. The research includes engagement with people from
underrepresented groups in both the research and outreach and will thereby
fulfill goals of inclusion.