* 1262984
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Experience in Mobile Computing Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Feng Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 359,964.00

This award establishes a new CISE REU site focused on mobile computing security
at Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis. A team of faculty will
lead undergraduate students in hands-on projects based on the latest research on
mobile device security, mobile cloud security, and mobile social network
security. Working together in small groups, the students will learn how to plan,
implement, and evaluate research projects. Participating students will have
access to an internal cloud computing platform as well as smartphones and tablet
computers. Through this program, participants will gain first-hand experience in
research and graduate student life, which will help them make informed decisions
in pursuing postgraduate studies as well as in choosing professional careers.
This project is co-funded by the CISE Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The intellectual merit of this
proposal includes a faculty with expertise in mobile and cloud computing
security, an important and timely area of computing that is of national
interest. Students will acquire first-hand experiences with state-of-the-art
technologies, which are often inaccessible to them due to high acquisition and
maintenance costs. Through this REU grant, students will work with faculty
mentors in completing cutting-edge research projects that have the potential to
change our everyday computing experiences. By the end of program, students will
acquire valuable skills, gain a broader and deeper understanding of research,
and develop greater confidence in their abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The broader impact of this proposal is to help students tap into
cutting-edge research, to boost their interests in science and engineering, and
to inspire them to pursue postgraduate education in these fields. The team is
committed to recruiting underrepresented minority and female students, as well
as students from institutes with inadequate resources to conduct research in
mobile computing security. Thus the project has the potential to produce new
computer science graduate students and faculty members and to advance discovery
and understanding while promoting learning.