* 1262033
* Measurement of Inorganic Bromine during CONTRAST (CONvective TRansport of Active Species in the Tropics)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lewis Huey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,981.00

As part of the larger CONTRAST measurement campaign (Convective Transport of
Active Species in the Tropics) which has a main objective of measuring the
transport of reactive chemical species into the topical Tropopause Transition
Layer (TTL) over the western Pacific warm pool, Georgia Tech researchers will
measure a number of short lived reactive bromine compounds (BrO, BrCl, the sum
of Br2 and HOBr), and also pernitric acid (HO2NO2). These molecules will be
detected and quantitated using a chemical ionization mass spectrometer (CIMS)
flown on the NSF G-V research aircraft during CONTRAST.

During northern winter, surface tropospheric air masses containing these
reactive species may be transported by intense tropical convection high into the
TTL lower stratosphere over the Pacific warm pool. Here they may substantially
impact the chemistry of the lower stratosphere, including its ozone chemistry.
Accordingly, knowing the sources, chemical environment and abundance of reactive
halogen and short lived halogen containing species such as bromocarbons in the
TTL will help inform our understanding of the bromine chemistry of this
understudied region of the earth's atmosphere. The observation of pernitric
acid, which provides constraint on HOx-NOx radical reactivity, will be modeled
photochemically providing an additional test for our understanding of how TTL
photochemistry may be impacted by tropical deep convection. The unique low-ozone
environments in the upper troposphere are expected to result in very small
levels of OH radicals, which can be expected to increase the lifetime of
reactive gases whose main loss is through OH radical oxidation. The simultaneous
occurrence of deep convection and prolonged lifetime of organic compounds in the
TTL can have significant impact on the stratospheric halogen budget.

With field work based out of Guam, the project will support one Ph.D. student
and provide the bulk of her thesis research work. In addition, one undergraduate
student will be provided with an extensive research experience. The timing of
the CONTRAST experiment has been designed to take advantage of collaborations
with two international airborne studies planned for the same time and geographic
location. These are the NASA EV1 project ATTREX (Airborne Tropical Tropopause
Experiment) and the European CAST (Coordinated Airborne Studies in the Tropics).
With complementary instrument payloads, coordinated flights of the NSF GV, the
NASA Global Hawk and the UK BAE146 will provide an unprecedented examination of
the full atmospheric column, from surface to >19 km, in the Tropical Western
Pacific.