* 1262565
* ABI Innovation: Compressed Single-Cell Sequencing of Bacterial Communities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Hamidreza Chitsaz, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 12/31/2014
* USD 507,357.00

Characterization of environmental bacteria, the vast majority of which elude
cultivation, is necessary for many applications including detection of
biological warfare and biothreats as well as discovery of rare novel species.
Recent advances in DNA amplification technology have enabled whole genome
sequencing directly from individual cells without requiring growth in culture.
These methods amplify femtograms of DNA extracted from a single bacterial cell
into micrograms of DNA needed for current sequencing platforms. Based on these
advances, the PI and colleagues developed a specialized software tool called
Euler+Velvet-SC for assembling sequencing reads from single cells and applied it
to assembly of two known genomes, E. coli and S. aureus, and an unknown marine
genome, SAR324 Deltaproteobacterium. These draft de novo single cell assemblies,
with no efforts to close gaps and resolve repeats, identify more than 90% of
genes. However, a bacterial community may contain millions of cells. There are
high-throughput robotic solutions for amplification of every bacterial genome,
but naive deep sequencing of every amplified genome is prohibitively time-
consuming and costly. Moreover, there are often biological replicates in the
environment whose deep sequencing would be redundant. Current cell sorting
methods have limited capability in detecting replicates; therefore, efficient
adaptive or compressive sequencing strategies that capture almost all species in
a bacterial community are needed. The goal is to assemble the genomes of all
species in a sample with minimal asymptotic sequencing effort. In this project,
adaptive algorithms that iteratively determine the proportion of sequencing from
each single cell, co-assemble the sequencing datasets, and compare and cluster
them to identify species will be developed. In each iteration, the belief state
is updated based on new sequencing data, and this process ends once the belief
state reaches a steady state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to
enable high-throughput environmental research at single cell resolution, which
will have significant impact on renewable energy and public health among top
national priorities. W omen-in-bioinformatics events will increase the
participation of women in computer science. This project will provide Michigan
Louis Stoke Alliance Minority Participation (MI-LSAMP) minority scholars with
research experiences through the Summer Research Academy (SURA), an effort
targeted primarily to first and second year undergraduate students at Wayne
State. A demonstration of genomics concepts will be offered annually to middle-
school students who participate in the Computer Science summer camp on the Wayne
State University campus. Additionally, the results will be disseminated by
providing educational movies posted on YouTube, articles added to Wikipedia, and
also regular scientific communications in journals and conferences. The open-
source tools developed in this project are expected to enhance the national
education and research infrastructure.