* 1262901
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in Computational Biology at Mississippi State University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Andy Perkins, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 286,304.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) award has been made to
Mississippi State University that will provide research training for 10
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. Undergraduate students
will work on interdisciplinary research projects in computational biology.
Students will work closely with their faculty mentors on projects in the areas
of genome analysis, functional genomics, artificial intelligence, scientific
visualization, and bioinformatics algorithms, among others. Recruitment will be
targeted at colleges and universities within Mississippi and the surrounding
states with the goal of providing a meaningful research experience to promising
undergraduate students who otherwise would not have had the opportunity to
engage in research. There is a particular focus on increasing the participation
of underrepresented groups in computational biology research. Educational and
professional development sessions will be conducted to train students in the
basics of computational biology and to provide information on graduate school
and pursuing scientific careers. Students will also receive training and
mentoring in the responsible conduct of research. The program will culminate
with a poster session where the students will present their research findings to
the computational biology community at Mississippi State University. Program
objectives will be assessed through the use of a common web-based assessment
tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs. Students will be tracked to document their
educational and professional path through periodic communication with students
via email and social media. More information about this program can be obtained
by contacting the project PI, Dr. Andy Perkins (perkins@cse.msstate.edu) at
(662) 325-0004, or by visiting the project website at
http://www.cse.msstate.edu/~compbio/.