* 1262610
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Advancing Map of Life's Impact and Capacity for Sharing, Integrating, and Using Global Spatial Biodiversity Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Robert Guralnick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 04/30/2015
* USD 141,784.00

An award is made to Yale University, the University of Colorado at Boulder, and
Cornell University to advance content provision and development of the existing
prototype Map of Life platform. Knowledge about the geographic occurrence of
species is at the heart of much of ecology, evolution and conservation, and of
tremendous societal importance. While digital species distribution products
exist, they remain un-integrated and cannot serve critical societal needs. The
Map of Life platform was developed to begin to solve this need. A key goal of
this project is to use novel approaches to mobilize and integrate diverse types
of data such that their collective strengths overcome individual weaknesses.
Specifically, this project will combine, on a single website, a variety of
distribution data types from many different sources, range products that
integrate these, deductively and inductively modeled predictions, and reports
about the spatial and environmental knowledgebase for species. When completed,
users from across a broad spectrum, from researchers with published data to
citizen scientists, will be able to upload data, edit input or output and
directly improve or comment on maps, iteratively leading to improved species
distribution knowledge. Users will be able to directly query or download any
redistributable content. Map of Life will thus facilitate a dramatically
improved and rigorous accounting of the spatial context of species in science
and will likely benefit scientists across the biological, environmental and
social sciences.

Given that species range maps are one of the most commonly used and familiar
information products in biology, the potential broader impacts and benefits of
Map of Life to society are remarkable. Species distribution knowledge ties to
one of the greatest challenges of our time: explaining the links between
biodiversity, ecosystems and human health, and how ongoing global environmental
changes are impacting our natural heritage and capital. Opportunity abounds for
strong educational uses of the Map of Life infrastructure. An exciting step will
be the production of video tutorials covering how Map of Life works and how it
can serve an important role in biodiversity knowledge creation, along with
explaining core concepts about species ranges, biodiversity, and how to measure
its change. Such videos are scalable means to reach large audiences and will be
coordinated through the PIs and their institutional outreach programs. More
information about this project can be found at: www.mappinglife.org.