* 1262463
* Collaborative Research:   ABI development:  A toolbox for analysis of long-term ecological dynamics using the Kepler Workflow System
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Matthew Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2018
* USD 472,188.00

The University of Wisconsin Madison, The University of New Mexico, and the
University of California Santa Barbara are awarded grants to develop a toolbox
for automating the process of analyzing community change. Long-term data sets
will be used to demonstrate data and system accessibility and functionality, and
through implementation of new metrics we will gain insights into what drives
change in ecological communities on a continental scale. Data will be accessed
via the DataONE portal and the LTER Network Information System using the
Ecological Metadata Language, and analyzed with R statistical routines within
the Kepler Scientific Workflow Environment. The species makeup of ecological
communities varies over time in response to changes in the environment. Analysis
of this variability has a long history in ecology, yet because of the lack of
long term data, ecological change in different localities has been studied in a
so-called ?place for time? approach. That is, environmental conditions in one
locality are considered to be comparable to the future conditions in another
place. Although, this approach allows some insight into general trends it does
not provide much information about rates and patterns of change. NSF programs
like LTER and LTREB have generated long term observations of different
ecological communities to allow for more realistic measures of how ecological
communities change over time. This record will grow as automated observing
platforms like NEON and GLEON contribute significantly to the long-term record.
Along with the increasing availability of long-term datasets in on-line
repositories, new methods for community change analysis are being developed.
This open access toolbox will make community analysis more accessible and in
turn expose a variety of indices to wider use, thorough testing, and improvement
for measuring and visualizing ecological dynamics. Existing workflows will help
reduce effort in data preparation and foster unprecedented potential for
collaboration. Value added data products of community change indices across
habitats are particularly valuable for education and outreach, and in broader
synthetic activities related to environmental health, management, and dynamics
at larger scales. Through the LTER Schoolyard program these data and
understanding of environmental change will reach a large number and diversity of
schoolchildren. For further information about the project and its software
products, visit http://lter.limnology.wisc.edu/research/community-analysis-
toolbox.