* 1262561
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Breaking through the taxonomic barrier of the fossil pollen record  using bioimage informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Surangi Punyasena, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2017
* USD 514,016.00

The practice of identifying pollen has a large number of scientific applications
and is used in fields as diverse as archaeology, biostratigraphy (the dating of
rocks), and forensic science. Pollen and spores play a particularly important
role in paleontology, because they form the most abundant and extensive record
of plant diversity, dating back hundreds of millions of years. However, the most
critical hypotheses in plant ecology and evolution (e.g. the assembly of plant
communities, speciation and extinction) cannot be fully tested with pollen data
due to the extreme difficulty of recognizing species from pollen and spore
material. This project develops new methods to probe the shape and fine
structural and textural properties of the grains using high-throughput, super-
resolution structured illumination microscopy and automated image analysis in
order to transform species identification from a subjective, by-eye procedure to
a quantitative, computational practice. Since it is not known a priori which
morphological features are phylogenetically meaningful, new machine learning
techniques are being developed to model pollen images at multiple scales,
identify aspects of shape and texture that are statistically informative, and
infer their relation to the underlying phylogenetic structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the ambitious long-term goal of creating a
high-throughput system for analyzing pollen data that incorporates meaningful
characterizations of pollen and spore morphology, provides testable hypotheses
of biological affinity, and is open and available to the entire scientific
community. This will allow researchers to break through the current taxonomic
limitations of pollen identification and fundamentally change current practices
in the discipline on many levels, from the basic task of identification and
counting to the interpretation and use of these data in global climate-
vegetation models. The project brings together a diverse, interdisciplinary team
including international collaborators at the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute in Panama and will train graduate and undergraduate students from
multiple scientific disciplines and backgrounds in an emerging area of
interdisciplinary research. A public outreach component is in development that
will include a virtual microscopy web site using images generated by this
research to introduce non-experts to the beauty, complexity, and relevance of
pollen morphology. Additional information about this project can be found at:
http://www.life.illinois.edu/punyasena