* 1262937
* REU Site: Computational Science for Undergraduate Research Experience (CSURE)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Gregory Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 04/30/2017
* USD 325,879.00

The Computational Science for Undergraduate Research Experience (CSURE) REU Site
project will allow a group of undergraduate students to explore and apply
computational science models and techniques to an array of data- and
computation-intensive scientific questions, using the supercomputers at the
National Institute for Computational Sciences (NICS). This project will prepare
the participating students for the demanding task of running scientific codes on
a scale beyond thousands of processing units. To ensure cutting-edge science,
CSURE will partner with teams of scientists at the UT/ORNL Joint Institute for
Computational Sciences, who are working at the forefront of computational
research in the areas of mathematics, chemistry, biology, physics, and
engineering. To broaden participation, CSURE will partner with smaller regional
colleges and with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), to
recruit students who would benefit from access to computational resources beyond
the capacities of their home campuses.

The CSURE program focuses on five different scientific domains: chemistry and
material sciences, systems biology, engineering mechanics, atmospheric sciences,
and parallel solvers on emergent platforms. The program for each summer will
start with a two-week intensive introduction to the supercomputing environment
and to the core computational methods and tools in that summer's focus area.
Each student will then be assigned a project appropriate for his or her
background and skill level, and will be encouraged to work on the project's
salient computational modeling problems, under the supervision of a team of
mentors and advisors. Activities will include individual and collaborative
computational analysis, meetings and discussions with project personnel, group
presentations and feedback sessions, attendance at research seminars, and a
final report and public presentation.

CSURE will provide scientific adventure and discovery to undergraduates from a
range of science domains, unified by a coherent intellectual focus on scientific
computing. Integrating the expertise of faculty researchers and scientific
computing specialists, this program will enable each undergraduate to conduct
meaningful original research, through the use of supercomputing tools to
investigate current significant research problems. The key mission of this
program is to convey the importance of computational science and supercomputer
infrasatructure for scientific discovery and innovation.