* 1262012
* RAPID Proposal: Modification of the impact of insect disturbance on carbon cycling by fire
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Russell Monson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2014
* USD 199,684.00

This RAPID project takes advantage of a wildfire from the summer of 2012 to
study the impacts of multiple disturbances on the functioning of pine forests in
the Rocky Mountain region. The High Park Fire was the largest and most damaging
in Colorado history, although fires of its magnitude are expected to become more
common throughout the region in a warmer future. In this case, the range of
disturbance histories within the perimeter of the fire area provides a rare
opportunity to study the impact of pre-fire disturbance history on forest carbon
and nutrient cycling. The investigators will make measurements of the amounts
and distribution of remaining living and dead organic matter and chemicals in
vegetation, on the ground and in the soil in burned and unburned forest patches,
while also noting whether or not the patches had been previously infested by
mountain pine beetles. This will enable tests of the additive impacts of insect
outbreaks and wildfire and enable more informed predictions about potential
forest conditions in the future in this region. Instruments will be installed by
university scientists in plots burned in the fire that were also either infested
or not by beetles during the most recent outbreak and compared with unburned
plots. The U.S. Forest Service will measure trees, ground cover and soil
conditions on the ground in the plots that can be resampled and compared to
measurements made in the future. New analytical techniques will be applied to
characterize soil organic matter composition and age. Finally, a newly available
aircraft from the National Ecological Observatory Network equipped with
hyperspectral and LIDAR sensors will be flown to provide blanket coverage of
immediate post-fire surface conditions in the entire fire area so that results
can be extrapolated from plot measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves a novel collaboration of multiple universities in Colorado and Arizona,
NEON, and the U.S. Forest Service that will provide valuable information to
forest managers as they contemplate a future with more fire, as well as unique
scientific insights into how history affects the responses of forest ecosystems
to multiple stressors.