* 1262522
* The executive science network: University trustees and the organization of university industry exchanges
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sheila Slaughter, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2017
* USD 399,053.00

This study explores how the external interests of university trustees and senior
university officers influence innovation between academe and industry. Previous
research has noted a difference in the composition and function of the trustees
of private and public universities belonging to the American Association of
Universities (AAU). Trustees of private universities are often heads of science-
based corporations and simultaneously members of boards of directors of other
corporation(s). Over time trustee research interests and those of the
universities of which they are stewards become more similar with regard to areas
in which they patent and broad fields of science in which their universities are
funded. The trustees and senior university management of private AAU
universities form a dense network, in which one member is not more than half a
step away from any other, constituting an executive science network that creates
channels for innovation between academe and industry. Trustees of public AAU
universities are not part of this network. This study gathers additional data
extending the temporal coverage of the earlier research while broadening the
scope to include trustees of public university foundations (arms-length
organizations) because pilot research suggests that these trustees may be part
of the network and create channels of innovation between public universities and
industry rather than public university trustees who are political appointments.
The data are analyzed using network analysis and regression analysis to
understand how the network functions (i.e., whether trustees? firms? position in
biotechnology networks or sub networks or computer science sub networks predicts
success in university research funding; whether trustees? firms are likely to
patent with or have partnerships with the universities of which they are
stewards). These quantitative data are augmented by interviews with 60 trustees
at 4 universities to gain in-depth understanding of trustees? corporate
exchanges with the universities they govern and how these contribute to
technology development and economic innovation. However, if trustees and senior
university officers are managing their universities as firms and establishing
exchanges with their corporate firms (whether as CEO or member of a board of
directors) the possibility of institutional conflict of interest arises. While
trustees firms? and universities may both benefit by these exchanges, there is a
possibility that pursuit of technology development may harm university science
(i.e., by emphasizing some types of science over others). Thus, the interviews
focus not only on trustee-university exchange with regard to technology
development, but also on how trustees and senior management handle institutional
conflict of interest.

Broader impacts of this project are several. First, this project advances our
understanding of the part research university trustees play in bringing
innovative science to the market place, enhancing U.S. ability to compete
internationally. Second, the research compares public and private university
trustee channels between academe and industry, identifying trustee
characteristics that promote innovation. Third, the project examines how
trustees involved in exchanges with the universities they govern manage
institutional conflict of interest, suggesting best practices for other research
universities. All three of these broader impacts will be helpful in developing
policy to enable research universities to better participate in technology
development and economic innovation that will lead to economic growth.