* 1262543
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Experience in Physics at the University of Michigan
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* James Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2016
* USD 263,844.00

This award supports the renewal of the physics Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Michigan. Each year, the REU
program will provide ten students from around the United States an opportunity
to participate in a ten-week summer research program. REU students work closely
with a faculty mentor on a ten-week research project. In addition, they are
exposed to a variety of research topics and methodologies through a series of
research seminars. To assist in their professional development, students also
participate in tutorials on ethics, applying to graduate school, scientific
writing and giving scientific presentations. At the end of the program, the
students participate in a two-day REU symposium where they present their
research results to their peers and faculty mentors. They also prepare written
project reports that can lead to peer reviewed publications. Research work is
augmented by an extensive array of educational and social activities, including
safety training, machine shop and electronic shop classes, lab tours, research
seminars given by faculty, and a variety of lunches with other students and
faculty. These activities allow students to put their research experience in a
wider perspective, to build a network of professional contacts, and to develop
professional skills in a scientific environment.