* 1262876
* REU Site: Collaborative Earth System Science Research - Atmospheric Modeling, Sensing and Societal Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Keith Schimmel, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 08/31/2016
* USD 361,394.00

This program provides research experience for undergraduates (REU) in Earth
systems science by offering them with opportunities to work in interdisciplinary
groups on problems that reflect a complex, real-world situation. Students will
be trained in the development of portable, reliable sensors and deployment of
sensors capable of acquiring environmental observables and data and use the data
in the studies of climate and weather modeling and their social and economic
impacts. Undergraduate students will have the opportunity to observe research
collaborations between scientists and engineers working to develop and evaluate
sensors for detecting volatile organic compounds, deployable water sensing with
miniaturized Raman spectrometers to understand how aerosols are transferred to
surface waters to predict and understand water health, MEMS-based atmospheric
sensing, and improving resolution from a constellation of small satellites for
space-based measurements. They will be trained in computational techniques used
in climate and weather models. They will investigate the inherent tradeoffs
between environmental protection and economic growth, as well as the intricate
balance between law and its impact on the reduction of greenhouse gases and
attitudes toward climate change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern workplace is
highly interdisciplinary. Graduates entering the workforce require a much higher
level of skills across different disciplines Recruiting and retention of
students in STEM areas can be facilitated by enhanced interdisciplinary
education and research since students are strongly attracted to research with
societal relevance and show increasing enthusiasm about problems that have
practical consequences. This approach can enhance student learning outcomes and
prepare students for the complexity of real world issues. This undergraduate
research program exposes students to interdisciplinary approaches to problem
solving by the use of existing national lab, industry, and university
partnerships to provide cutting-edge research, educational, and professional
development opportunities for undergraduate students and opportunity to work
with members of different academic departments in an interdisciplinary setting.
Students will develop skills in: technical oral communication, technical
writing, research ethics, analytical analysis, numerical analysis, statistical
analysis, hardware development, and effective communication across different
disciplines. The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.