* 1262292
* Collaborative Proposal: ABI Innovation: Rapid, Interactive, Visual Mining of Biological Motion
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Anna Dornhaus, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 279,288.00

Across the biological sciences, high-quality, high frame-rate images and video
are widely used in analysis of sub-cellular organelles to individual organisms.
The use of video has become so pervasive, that many research teams accumulate
much more data than can be reasonably analyzed by current methods. This project
will develop algorithms to allow the rapid and affordable mining of very large
video sets for motion behaviors of interest in the study of the collective
behavior and emergent properties of complex systems of organisms. This work is
motivated by the needs of domain experts in various areas of biological motion
analysis and incorporates research in computer vision, image processing, user
interfaces, and visualization. A key part of the project is a fast, semi-
automated biological object tracker that leverages the computational power of
off-the-shelf hardware and incorporates simple user interactions to dramatically
improve tracking accuracy in the types challenging cases that frequently arise
in biological image analysis. Domain experts will be able to search motion
databases through visual query by selecting an example motion of interest. The
system will be evaluated on three biological research applications: honeybee
behavior, ant colony networks, and cell motion analysis.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Groups of organisms can display a rich and sophisticated behavioral
repertoire and are able to make complex collective decisions. Studying these
interactions provides insight into collective decision-making, adaptive
networks, and division-of-labor. Understanding these complex interactions over
large time scales requires new methods of data analysis that this project will
address with an interdisciplinary collaboration between biologists and computer
scientists. The outreach components of this work include demonstrations and
explanations of the complex behavior of groups of organisms and how these
behaviors can be studied using computing. The system is intended to be widely-
applicable and will be disseminated to other researchers by making the software
available for download online.