* 1262717
* Determining Qualitative Geographic Sample Size in the Presence of Spatial Autocorrelation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Daniel Griffith, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2015
* USD 145,000.00

This research project will examine impacts of the tendency for individuals with
similar attributes to cluster in geographic space on the sample size of a
qualitative research study. Sample size is a crucial feature in empirical
scientific research projects, affecting generalizability and
manipulation/control in quantitative studies and transferability and discovery
in qualitative studies. Selecting a minimum number of observations helps ensure
the adequacy of a sampling strategy. An insufficient sample size can undermine
the soundness of research findings and/or waste resources. Because of the
tendency for individuals with similar attributes to cluster in geographic space
rather than to be distributed randomly, a characteristic known as spatial
autocorrelation, special care must be taken in the design of research projects.
This project will seek to determine the appropriate sample size for qualitative
research in the presence of spatial autocorrelation. The theoretical foundations
of this project draw on Thomas Schelling's Nobel Prize-winning work, adapting it
for use in a geospatial context. The investigators will use a set of simulation
experiments to assess metrics that can be used as guidelines for determining
appropriate sample sizes for a set of different sampling approaches. They also
will conduct a qualitative sampling project to evaluate the computer laboratory
findings with real world field work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will advance understanding of sample size determination for qualitative research
conducted in the presence of spatial autocorrelation. The project will address
the controversial issue of qualitative sample size determination in the more
general literature, supplement what is known for quantitative sample size
determination, furnish numerical evidence for selecting a qualitative sample
size, and make qualitative researchers more aware of spatial autocorrelation
impacts on their research. The project will provide a new tool to bolster the
rigor of qualitative spatial research, thereby helping to make its execution
more efficient and its findings more widely acceptable. The project will
contribute numerical evidence for determining qualitative research sample size,
and it will help qualitative spatial researchers better understand how spatial
autocorrelation complicates their data collection and impacts their findings.
The project also will yield a real-world example of the use of this new
spatially informed qualitative sampling method.