* 1262829
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program at Kitt Peak National Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Kenneth Mighell, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 04/30/2017
* USD 324,758.00

This award supports renewed funding of the National Optical Astronomy
Observatory (NOAO) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Kitt
Peak National Observatory (KPNO) in Tucson, Arizona. The REU program will be
offered annually to six qualified applicants, with an emphasis placed on
recruiting women or students from minorities that are underrepresented in the
scientific community, as well as recruiting students from institutions lacking
access to first-rate research staff and facilities. The primary goals of the REU
program at KPNO are to encourage undergraduates to pursue careers in science, to
foster high levels of scientific literacy among the future science, technology,
education, and mathematics (STEM) workforce, and to stimulate a lifelong
interest in the achievements and welfare of U.S. astronomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety of REU projects will be offered to students
during this summer program. These include: using luminous galaxies to trace the
growth of the universe; understanding the evolution of stars; and pioneering
research into light pollution. As part of their research activities, REU
students will gain first-hand experience with KPNO's state-of-the art telescopes
and instrumentation, and develop expertise in the tools of data analysis
specific to astronomical research. In addition, they will participate in a
series of lectures and workshops designed particularly to expose them to a range
of research topics, techniques, and astronomical facilities. Finally, the REU
Site offers the opportunity for students to present their research at the
American Astronomical Society meeting, which is a major international
conference.