* 1262222
* REU Site:   Microbiology at The University of Iowa
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* David Weiss, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2016
* USD 286,712.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to The
University of Iowa that will provide research training for 8 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The scientific focus of the research
program is microbiology. The purposes of the program are to encourage students
to pursue a career in basic science and give them the skills to succeed in that
path. The Department of Microbiology has about 25 faculty who will serve as
mentors. Each student will conduct an independent laboratory research project
under the guidance of a faculty and a graduate student co-mentor. Lectures,
workshops and social activities will expose students to graduate school and
other career options, will include training in ethics and the responsible
conduct of research, and will promote informal interactions. At the end of the
summer, students will present their findings at a University-wide symposium.
Students will also be encouraged to present their findings at regional and
national meetings. Students will receive a stipend and money for travel and
living expenses. The program is open to undergraduates who are interested in
scientific research and are U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Recruitment
will use both traditional mailings and various forms of electronic outreach.
Special emphasis will be given to recruitment of students from demographic
groups that are underrepresented in the sciences and/or students from small
colleges where opportunities for research are lacking. Students are selected
based on academic record, research performance, and potential for outstanding
research in the biological sciences. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. The impact and success of the
program will be assessed by various means, including tracking of students and
use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.medicine.uiowa.edu/microbiology/summer/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
David Weiss at david-weiss@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Linda McCarter at linda-
mccarter@uiowa.edu).