* 1262435
* ABI Innovation:  Predicting the combined impact of multiple mutations on protein functional adaptation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Rachel Karchin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 03/31/2017
* USD 692,851.00

An award is made to Johns Hopkins University to develop a new method to model
higher order mutation interactions, by combining evolutionary genetics, network
models, and protein sequence analysis. The study of how the effects of
individual mutations combine to impact the overall function of a protein is a
key question in evolutionary biology. It is also a very difficult question, as
the effects multiple protein mutations can combine non-additively. In this case,
higher order interactions (beyond pairwise) between mutations need to be
considered, and the number of interactions increases exponentially as a function
of the total number of protein mutations involved. Therefore, if a model?s
parameters are mutation interactions, these parameters will far exceed the
number of possible experimental observations needed to determine them. As a
result, existing bioinformatics methods are limited in their exploration of
higher-order evolutionary interactions. Specifically, detailed modeling of how
protein mutations combine as steps in the evolutionary path of a protein toward
new function is currently lacking. In this project, systematic evolutionary
analysis of protein sequence will be conducted to ensure that only residue
positions most relevant for evolving new functions are considered. Next, mutated
positions will be linked together in a network model. This modeling framework
dramatically reduces the number of modeling parameters and incorporates higher
order interactions in a tractable fashion. Because nodes in the network
correspond to mutated protein positions, any complex combination of mutations
can be represented as a path through the network. Using graph theory, metrics
will be developed to assess the relationship between path importance within the
network and the successful adaptation of a protein to its environment. This work
focuses on a simple biological model system -- the evolution antibiotic
resistance by the enzyme TEM beta-lactamase in Escherichia coli bacteria. In
this system, there is a direct correlation between the evolution of a new
function (antibiotic resistance) and survival at the level of the whole organism
(bacterial growth). Computational predictions will be systematically tested by
introducing mutations of interest into bacterial cultures and measuring survival
under exposure to a given antibiotic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work promotes
close interaction between the computational sciences and biology communities: It
combines expertise in computational/statistical modeling of mutations in
proteins and applied evolutionary genetics in microbial systems. The broader use
of this work will be to anticipate the emergence of drug resistance in
clinically relevant proteins. It will also have great utility for protein
engineers who seek to design proteins with new or improved functions.
Furthermore, it will contribute to the design of therapeutic regimens for
diseases driven by bacteria or viruses, in which the evolution of drug
resistance is commonplace. The educational goals of the project include new
course components for undergraduates and graduates at the universities where the
project investigators teach and outreach to underrepresented minority students
in science and engineering. More information about the project can be found at:
http://karchinlab.org/.