* 1262924
* REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering -- From Biomaterials to Stem Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Charles Roth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 361,286.00

This three-year REU site program at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
is supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers. The REU will
engage ten undergraduate students each year in cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary
research in the field of Cellular Bioengineering. Several projects fall within
the Biomaterials realm, which generally features elements of chemistry (e.g.,
synthetic, analytical, and/or physical) with contributions from
interdisciplinary fields such as molecular bioengineering (e.g.,
biofunctionalization of substrates), nanoscale and microscale patterning of
materials, and interfacial thermodynamics and transport phenomena. Projects
within the Stem Cell Bioengineering theme may involve the development of new
technologies to analyze properties of stem cell niches or the directed
manipulation of stem cell cultures for expansion and/or differentiation. A few
projects involve development of technologies that are applicable to a variety of
cellular systems, and may or may not utilize stem cells directly, such as
microfabircated devices and novel biomedical optics. Specific examples of
projects include: Multi-modal cues for phenotypic control of neural cells;
Targeted systemic and intracellular delivery of oligonucleotides; Reprogrammed
Stem Cells and 3-D Microenvironments; Metabolic engineering of liver cells for
transplantation; and Label-free microscopy for analysis of subcellular
structural dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this REU program
is to continue to provide unique opportunities for a diverse population of
undergraduate students to perform cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary research in
the field of Cellular Bioengineering. The program provides invaluable training
and experience to under-represented students, including those with limited prior
research exposure, and has standardized elements of research training and
professional development to accelerate the learning curve and inoculate the
students into active laboratories pursuing high-impact research. Unlike the
traditional mono-disciplinary research that undergraduates typically conduct, in
the past three years this program has successfully leveraged broad-based
training related to 'engineering' research projects, but integrated across life
sciences and physical sciences. The research experience is enriched with a range
of activities designed to spark a lifelong interest in the field and to foster
the students' individual career development. Active mentoring, collaboration,
and monitoring of the student experience have been critical to achieving the
programmatic goals. The Cellular Bioengineering Boot Camp has introduced
Scholars to laboratory and imaging skills that facilitate their integration into
their research labs. Exciting research projects that rely heavily on
interdisciplinary collaboration introduce the Scholars to a broad array of
topics grounded in Cellular Bioengineering. A new focus on Innovation and
Entrepreneurship, with substantial industry involvement, parallels the recent
NSF I-Corps initiative for translational research to capitalize on the potential
for new technology that emanates from the research and provide an even broader
impact of the program. Weekly seminars and discussion groups allow tracking and
monitoring of the Scholars' experiences while concurrently engaging them in
professional development. Incorporation of a mentoring workshop for the graduate
students who serve as 'near-peer' mentors expands the impact of the program
beyond the undergraduate participants.