* 1262904
* REU Site: Summer Research Program in Materials Science and Nanotechnology
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU)
project supported by the NSF Division of Materials Research will recruit
undergraduate students primarily from several cooperating Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) for a summer research experience focused on
materials and nanotechnology at the University of New Orleans. By recruiting at
HBCUs, the program will maximize involvement of students that are 1) from
underrepresented groups and 2) attending a primarily undergraduate institution
with limited research exposure. Along with conducting research, students will
participate in a variety of enrichment activities including: 1) interactive
weekly training meetings to provide participants with basic research
information, 2) meet the Faculty programs that provide student-faculty
interaction in an informal setting, 3) ethics training, 4) end of summer poster
presentations by participants (including prior training on preparation and
presentation skills), and 5) travel awards to allow students to present their
research results at a national scientific meeting. Participating teachers will
work in research labs alongside undergraduate students and will participate in
all enrichment programs. The teachers will also attend a graduate course that
will train them to incorporate research concepts into their teaching practices.
Following summer participation, each teacher will introduce into their
classrooms at least one new teaching module focusing on nanoscale science or
materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;Science and technology are major economic drivers in society, and
nanomaterials is a burgeoning area of economic importance. This Research
Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site at the University of New Orleans will
provide opportunities for students to become familiar with relevant career and
educational paths so that they can enter the growing field of nanomaterials. The
REU site will recruit from schools with large minority populations in an effort
to help diversify the scientific work force. In addition to participating in
cutting edge research, students will also partake in various enrichment
activities to sharpen their scientific and presentation skills. The project will
also involve high school science teachers, and this aspect will help extend the
benefits of the project to even younger students by training the teachers how to
engage their students in the study of nanomaterials. Overall, the project will
help train American undergraduates to enter the field of nanomaterials and
eventually contribute to US technical and economic strength.