* 1262985
* REU Site:   Visualization of Macromolecules in Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Joel Schildbach, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2018
* USD 567,798.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Johns Hopkins University that will provide research training for 10 weeks for 10
students for summers 2013-2017. The organizing scientific theme for this intense
and immersive research program is the application of imaging and structural
techniques to achieve better understanding of biological systems. In the course
of pursuing a research project, students will be exposed to reading scientific
literature, designing experiments and controls, learning various experimental
techniques, and collecting and analyzing data. In addition, students will engage
in activities designed to improve oral and written communication skills as they
build a sense of community. Students will be instructed in the responsible
conduct of research and will be expected to conduct their research accordingly.
Participants will be recruited nationally through the NSF REU website,
informational booths at SACNAS and ABRCMS meetings, and contacts at various
institutions across the country and in US territories, in addition to the
program website. Students having limited research opportunities at their home
institutions, or belonging to groups underrepresented in academics will be
especially encouraged to apply. Selection will be based on recommendation
letters, grades, and statements of research interest and career goals. Following
the program, participants will be contacted annually to determine their progress
toward a degree, their career plans, and enrollment in graduate or professional
school. Outcomes of the program will be determined using a common assessment
tool. Information about the program may be obtained from the director, Joel
Schildbach (phone: 410-516-0176; e-mail: joel@jhu.edu), or at the program web
site (http://www.bio.jhu.edu/BioREU).