* 1262442
* Collaborative research:  ABI Development:  Making Advanced Statistical Tools Accessible for Quantitative Research Synthesis and Discovery in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Thomas Trikalinos, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 02/28/2015
* USD 502,667.00

An award is made to build an easy-to-use program for carrying out and teaching
meta-analysis in in the fields of ecology and evolution (E&amp;E), by adapting
and developing an existing medical meta-analysis program for the unique needs of
the scientific community in these fields. Meta-analysis is the quantitative
synthesis of independent studies. It has become an important approach for
summarizing research results and generalizing from their findings in E&amp;E, as
it has in medicine and the social sciences. There is a compelling need for new
statistical software for meta-analysis in E&amp;E employing current, cutting
edge methodology. Making these statistical tools widely available is highly
likely to propel new scientific advances and insights, as did the first
generation of meta-analysis software in E&amp;E. This new software, called
OpenMeta for Ecology and Evolution (OpenMEE), will be open-source and cross-
platform program, will facilitate implementation of statistical methods
appropriate for meta-analysis of ecological and evolutionary data, and will
include a user interface specifically designed for the unique challenges and
conventions of research synthesis in these fields. Then intuitive graphical user
interface (GUI) will seamlessly integrate with analytic routines written in the
popular open-source statistical programming language R. Novice users will thus
be able to take advantage of such routines to carry out sophisticated meta-
analyses without needing to know advanced programming. Furthermore, OpenMEE is
designed so that those users who are competent programmers can incorporate new
statistical developments in a straightforward manner, allowing OpenMEE to be
developed and updated indefinitely by the user community. OpenMEE will be
introduced with cutting edge statistical developments for meta-analysis in
E&amp;E, including complex meta-regression models and phylogenetic analyses.
Putting much more powerful tools for quantitative research synthesis into the
hands of scientists in E&amp;E will have dramatic effects on research progress
in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists working on this project
have a solid record of successfully mentoring high school students,
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, including those
belonging to underrepresented groups, and will continue to work actively to
recruit and train people at all of these levels. OpenMEE will be disseminated in
workshops and short courses, as well as electronically. In recruiting
participants for these courses, the researchers will work to identify and
attract graduate students and postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented
groups as well as others; they will be able to structure the fees for the
courses so as to be able to offer travel fellowships for students lacking
support to attend the courses. Finally, underrepresented minority students and
others will be recruited for research experience through the
NSF&amp;#8208;funded Center for Science and Mathematics Education at Stony Brook
University, and by recruiting from the rich resource of the high
underrepresented student population at University of South Florida. More
information about this project may be found at:
http://www.cebm.brown.edu/OpenMEE.