* 1262156
* Collaborative Research:   ABI Development:  Integrated X-Ray Motion Analysis Software and Video Data Management for the Comparative Biomechanics Community
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Elizabeth Brainerd, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2017
* USD 906,192.00

X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM) is a new technology for
visualizing bones and joints during rapid motion, such as birds in flight, frogs
jumping, and humans running. XROMM has already transformed studies of vertebrate
animal motion, but the current software available for XROMM analysis is
cumbersome and poorly integrated with data pipelines. This project will apply
best practices of software engineering to create an open-source XROMM analysis
package that is integrated with an online data management system. The software
products will improve user experience, speed, robustness, and reproducibility of
the XROMM analysis process. The low throughput of current tools is a problem
because a fundamental goal of comparative biomechanics is to compare species,
and thereby to extract robust relationships between form and function. The new
tools developed through this award will significantly increase the throughput of
the XROMM process, and also provide integrated analysis and management of
complex data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially enhance
the cyberinfrastructure for comparative biomechanics research, and increase US
economic competitiveness through technology development and advanced training of
the scientific workforce. All software products and documentation will be open
source and made freely available, and all source code will be deposited in a
public code repository. Undergraduate and graduate students at Brown University,
and undergraduates at Providence College (a primarily undergraduate
institution), will gain interdisciplinary training in biology, engineering, and
computer science. As part of this project, at least 45 students, researchers,
and educators will participate in XROMM Short Courses at Brown (15 per year for
3 years). The XROMM Short Courses at Brown are an effective way to teach complex
XROMM methods to researchers and educators at a range of career levels and from
diverse types of institutions, including schools, colleges, and museums as well
as research universities. All products from this project will be made available
through www.xromm.org.