* 1262047
* Topological and Geometrical Problems in Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Randall Kamien, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 575,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of
Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical
research and education to advance and elucidate the theory of knotted fields.
Though it has been well known for more than three decades that topological
defects can act on each other through commutation, it is only in recent times
that we can: a) knot defects by design; b) tie and manipulate knotted
disclinations; and c) study biaxial nematics, a physical system with a non-
Abelian fundamental group. The stream of experimental results that has already
started will be ample fodder for studying the topological dynamics of these
knots. What makes this most exciting is that these are now questions that can be
probed directly through experiment. A second thrust of the research is the
topological characterization and classification of defects in translationally
ordered media. The PI will focus specially on smectic liquid crystals because
translational order is only broken in one direction and thus there is only one
associated Nambu-Goldstone mode. In addition to dislocations and disclinations,
smectics enjoy a different class of geometrically precise configurations, focal
conic domains. The interaction between focal conic domains and topological
defects is largely underexplored. Finally, and most importantly, because
smectics are so soft, dislocations, disclinations and focal conic domains are
easy to observe and manipulate in experiment. Building on the work of the PI and
his group over the past three years, the PI will formulate a theoretical
description to combine the three types of building blocks in the case of three-
dimensional smectics.

This award also supports the PI's efforts to convey the science of liquid
crystals effectively to K-12 and college students, high school teachers, and the
general public.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of
Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical
research and education to advance the theory of soft matter. The PI has a track
record of learning and applying modern mathematics and incorporating it into his
research. In turn, these insights have been applied directly to experiments that
employ traditional microscopy, polarizing filters, and hot plates. The focus of
this research project is on liquid crystals, materials that pervade our modern
life, from our phones and watches to our computers and cars. The optical
properties that make them the backbone of a $100 billion/year industry arise
from a beautiful interplay between chemistry, theoretical physics, geometry, and
topology. The PI will study the generalization of the fluid vortices that shed
off the tip of a canoe paddle or an airplane wing. To do this, the PI will
integrate the fields of materials physics, statistical mechanics, topology, and
geometry, challenging traditional disciplinary lines with the hope of
substantial technological and intellectual progress. Visually compelling, the
field of liquid crystals has and will allow the PI to reach out effectively to
K-12 and college students, high school teachers, and the general public.