* 1262246
* I-Corps:  ResolveAble: A Proposal to the National Science Foundation I-Corps Teams Program
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* James Prescott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project explores the viability of automated bargaining software to more
efficiently and effectively resolve disputes between courts and (potentially
anonymous) individuals accused or convicted of minor offenses. The U.S. legal
system grants judges the authority to resolve minor infractions such as unpaid
parking tickets and failure to appear for low-level misdemeanors. There is the
potential for this judicial discretion process to be improved and increase its
benefit through technological advances. The current system requires offenders to
either hire lawyers or appear in court to resolve certain legal issues.
Frequently lawyers can be costly and court appearances may involve risk of
sanctions including potential incarceration. Often many offenders choose not to
appear which potentially limits many aspects of their lives. Technology that has
the potential to 1)Enable judges to reach binding arrangements without the need
for court appearances of legal representation and that 2)offer defendants the
ability to negotiate anonymously with the government, can facilitate dispute
resolution by reducing costs and potentially mitigating negative impacts of
traditional surrender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, tens of millions of
people in the U.S. have outstanding, minor problems with courts, such as bench
warrants and unpaid fines (exact numbers are unknown, but most states have
backlogs in at least the hundreds of thousands). These large backlogs impose
costs on state and local governments by forgoing significant revenue and
consuming limited enforcement resources. By facilitating mutually beneficial
deals between courts and affected individuals, the technology may improve these
private and social problems. Additionally, the technology may have many v
alternative applications: The technology can be modified to automate legal tasks
that currently require the direct involvement of multiple, highly-compensated
attorneys, such as plea bargaining. The technology may also have uses in non-
legal fields, such as automating college admissions and financial aid decisions.
Lastly, by learning more about the offender decision making process, the project
may provide court personnel, judges and policy makers with useful insights into
how to improve court efficiency and offender compliance rates.