* 1262670
* REU Site: American Student Placements in Rehabilitation Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 383,724.00

The American Student Placements and Internships in Rehabilitation Engineering
(ASPIRE) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program is funded by the
National Science Foundation Division of Engineering Education and Centers.
Rehabilitation engineering employs a systematic approach to the design,
modification, customization and/or fabrication of assistive technology for
persons with disabilities. Research efforts in rehabilitation engineering are
focused on identifying and addressing problems critical to achieving and
maintaining the highest possible level of function in areas related to mobility,
communications, sensory (e.g., hearing, tactile, vision), and cognition and in
activities associated with employment, independent living, and education. The
primary objective of the ASPIRE REU program is to provide an exemplary mentoring
and resourceful environment that enables undergraduate students to 1) transition
from dependent to independent thinkers, 2) develop a sense of excitement about
entering an engineering or technical field and 3) be well prepared for their
future careers. Recruitment initiatives emphasize minorities and students with
disabilities. Additionally, students who come from institutions with limited
research opportunities will receive special consideration. Seminars, workshops
and field trips supplement the educational experience outside of the
laboratories. Students in this REU Site are an active participant of a multi-
disciplinary research team and acquire ownership of part of a larger-scale or
pilot research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the ASPIRE
REU program is about empowering undergraduate students with the confidence,
experience and skills necessary to excel in graduate studies and in their future
careers as engineers or scientists, all within the context of rehabilitation
engineering projects whose byproducts increase the independence of people with
disabilities. Program mentors are well experienced in providing the appropriate
level of guidance needed to support the students' independent development of
these attributes. Students in this REU develop a sense of worth that comes from
being an integral part of something 'bigger'. Moreover, this REU Site provides
opportunities for students to work on projects that have direct application to
the betterment of society. Having this experience early in their academic
careers not only raises awareness to the social obligations of being an
engineer, but also provides a "beyond the classroom experience" that brings
purpose and meaning to an engineering curriculum.