* 1262481
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Enabling discoveries across disciplines through a synthesis of time-calibrated evolutionary histories
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Stephen Hedges, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 10/31/2014
* USD 377,661.00

This project builds a tree of life calibrated to geologic time, called a
timetree of life. A unified computational knowledge-base (TimeTree) synthesizes
the results of published research studies and delivers the timetree of life to
scientists and the public at large. That is, everyone will be given easy access
to knowledge contained in thousands of individual studies that have reported
relationships and divergence times among species. Through graphical
visualizations and knowledge integration, TimeTree will enable scientists to
generate new insights into biological and other phenomena, including connections
between Earth history and the evolution of species. Such cross-disciplinary
comparisons have previously led to major discoveries in science, where a pattern
in one field (e.g., biology) has been explained by a mechanism in another field
(e.g., geology). Timetrees are now widely used in diverse fields and are
important for researchers who study biodiversity and conservation, and the
threat of environmental change to the survival of species now and in the future.

TimeTree is accessible to students and scientists freely through the web,
smartphones, and tablets, and is used as an educational tool in the classroom.
Anyone with a high school education can use TimeTree to find the time of
divergence between two species and be in touch with their evolutionary history.
TimeTree facilitates basic research in many areas of science from geology to
medicine and genomics. Its unique hierarchical synthesis of the world's timetree
data integrates into any database, including the major, global, biological
databases and cyber-encyclopedias. TimeTree products are served to researchers
through a web interface that facilitates in-depth analyses of well-curated data
by the community at large. Work on the database itself involves postdoctoral,
graduate student, and undergraduate training. More information about this
project can be obtained from http://www.timetree.org.