* 1262226
* Dynamic Component Exchange in Hybrid Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 693,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research program, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, is to explore dynamic component
exchange (DCE) in metal-organic framework (MOF) materials. While many studies
suggest that some MOFs are 'inert' to certain solvents and reagents (e.g.
acids), it has been discovered that such materials can undergo ligand exchange
reactions (i.e. DCE) even under mild conditions. This discovery was initially
made by utilizing aerosol time-of-flight mass spectrometry (ATOFMS) to analyze
the composition of individual MOF microcrystals. These studies were the first
use of ATOFMS in materials science (including nanomaterials) and are part of a
unique collaboration between synthetic inorganic and analytical environmental
chemistry at the U.C. San Diego. This research program will study DCE in detail,
to identify which MOFs readily undergo DCE and to understand the mechanism of
the DCE process. This program will also utilize DCE as a methodology for
functionalization of MOFs and to determine whether DCE can involve both ligand
and metal ion exchange. Finally, this project will further develop ATOFMS
methods to quantify DCE and to broaden the analytical use of this method for
nanomaterials. The preliminary findings to date demonstrate that DCE is an
important phenomenon that is more common among MOFs and other nanomaterials than
previously recognized. The discoveries made in this research program will have
important implications for the use of MOFs in technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;New materials
are essential for the advancement of many technological fields including
medicine, renewable energy, aerospace engineering, and others. This research
program is investigating a new class of porous materials and how they can be
tailored for specific applications. These new porous materials act as high-tech
'sponges' that can 'soak up' other ions or molecules. As such, they may find use
in fuel cells, batteries, and other important applications. As part of a broader
outreach and educational mission, this proposal will support the Science Policy
Internship Program (SPIP), a unique internship program, which sends STEM
undergraduate students to Washington D.C. to learn about the interface of
science and public policy.