* 1262452
* International Partnerships and Technological Leapfrogging in China's Clean Energy Sector
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Joanna Lewis, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,970.00

Clean energy technology cooperation is an expanding area of international
efforts to curb climate change. By harnessing the technical expertise of
multiple nations, multilateral and bilateral cross-border collaboration on clean
energy research, development, demonstration and deployment promises to speed
clean energy innovation and utilization. Because China is the largest national
energy consumer and greenhouse gas emitter, energy technology decisions there in
the coming decades have implications for both energy security and environmental
sustainability, and will shape future technology and policy decisions in the
United States and around the world. China has therefore become the primary
target of international clean energy collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines factors that determine the efficacy of cross-national clean
energy partnerships. The results of this research will contribute to an improved
understanding of how clean energy technology collaboration between various
countries and China is occurring, how to improve the effectiveness of
international partnerships, and how to measure and evaluate such programs. The
focus on partnerships targeting clean energy technologies at different stages of
technical maturity and with differing technical characteristics promises to
elucidate lessons for intellectual property management within a variety of
cross-national research collaborations. Additionally, in measuring the outcomes
of existing partnerships, this research will contribute to the development of
empirically-grounded innovation metrics and new ways of measuring innovative
activity in China, while also informing innovation systems theory in emerging
economies. This project will also improve our understanding of China's
innovative capacity in critical clean energy technology sectors, and the role of
international partnerships in reducing China's greenhouse gas
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will inform the
global management of innovation in an area of technological development that
benefits both global society and the global environment. The findings of this
work will help to inform policy debates on pathways towards low carbon
technology development, the respective capabilities of developed and developing
countries in innovation and manufacturing, and concerns about intellectual
property rights and competition in a globalizing world. Furthermore, it promises
to provide new insight into how productive international technology partnerships
occur, and how such partnerships may present new opportunities to curb global
carbon emissions and to engage with China.