* 1262475
* ABI INNOVATION:  PHYLOGENETIC METHODS FOR IMPUTING MISSING PLANT TRAIT VALUES IN GLOBAL DATABASES
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Nathan Swenson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 407,018.00

An award is made to Michigan State University to develop methods to use the
known shared evolutionary history of species to estimate the trait values
missing in global databases. Ecologists have demonstrated a strong linkage
between the diversity of how plants function and the health and stability of our
ecosystems. This linkage can therefore be utilized to generate predictive models
of how vegetation responds to climate from local to global scales. However such
modeling on global scales is fundamentally limited by a lack of detailed maps of
the diversity of plant function on continental scales. This limitation is
generally the result of large holes in global plant trait databases that will
not be adequately filled through additional field campaigns in the near future.
Thus a key challenge this project will address by developing derive
computational tools is the estimation of missing trait values in global
databases. In particular, previous work has shown that closely related species
tend to have similar traits due to common descent. This evolutionary non-
independence in trait data already collected can be harnessed to make reliable
estimations of trait data that cannot be collected in the near future. This
project tests the suitability of estimation methods on real and simulated
datasets to determine when, where and why the methods are robust. The ultimate
goal of this research is to identify and test a series of methods that can
rapidly and reliably fill in the gaps of global trait databases to facilitate
the mapping of plant function on continental scales. It is expected that such
maps will then be utilized to generate more refined models of vegetation
structure and dynamics in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes
training and mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher and graduate student and
collaborative research with colleagues in Denmark. The project also includes
phylogenetic and functional trait training workshops for graduate students and
early career researchers. The research will make several previously unpublished
datasets publicly available and will lead to the development and and
dissemination of novel R code to impute functional trait values in global
databases using large phylogenetic trees. More information on the project can be
found at: https://www.msu.edu/~swensonn