* 1262736
* Geographies of Health and Medical Programs in a Conflict-society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,04/30/2015
* James Tyner, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 04/30/2015
* USD 134,535.00

This project investigates the practice of medicine by the Khmer Rouge during the
Cambodian genocide. Genocide includes two very different approaches, including
the well-known and well-documented policies and practices designed to eliminate
unwanted individuals but also lesser-known policies and practices designed to
help those individuals believed to be worthy of life. Drawing on insights from
political geography and health geography, this project constitutes an in-depth
study of the production and distribution of medicine during the genocide as well
as the daily medical practices during the genocide. Currently it is not known
how the Khmer Rouge intended to develop a health system within Democratic
Kampuchea; nor is it well-documented how medicine was actually practiced during
the genocide. This project therefore constitutes an effort to enlarge basic
theoretical and empirical understanding of the geographies of health within
genocide. The project will consist of two components. First, the investigators
will document the spatial organization of the Khmer Rouge's planned health
system. This will be accomplished through three analyses: a detailed
reconstruction and mapping of the spatial organization of the distribution of
medicine; a reconstruction and mapping of the production and distribution of
pharmaceutical factories and pharmaceuticals; and the documentation and mapping
of hospitals that were established during the genocide. Second, they will
reconstruct the day-to-day activities of the practice of medicine during the
genocide. Through the specific study of the Cambodian genocide, detailed and
empirical knowledge of specific practices that led to genocide will be
identified. This information will enhance efforts by both scholars of genocide
and those involved in legal proceedings related to activities of former Khmer
Rouge leaders. This project therefore will facilitate the on-going and long-term
process of truth and reconciliation. Documentary evidence and interpretive
findings of this project will be disseminated via interactive web-sites linked
to the Documentation Center of Cambodia. Two U.S. graduate students and one
undergraduate student will gain valuable research and education opportunities,
and the project will facilitate cross-cultural collaborative efforts among
researchers in the United States and Cambodia.