* 1262469
* BCSP: ABI Innovation: Collaborative Research: Predicting changes in protein activity from changes in sequence by identifying the underlying Biophysical Conditional Random Field
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Raghu Machiraju, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 411,434.00

Proteins are the molecular machines that are responsible for a vast array of
functions that are necessary for life. Understanding how they work is critical
to both a better scientific understanding of the fundamental processes of life,
and to modifying or improving their function. Despite the fact that proteins are
physically 3-dimensional structures of cooperating parts, the current state of
the art for representing and studying proteins uses a description that is simply
a sequential list of the parts used in their assembly. This sequential-list
style of description has biased the development of tools for protein analysis to
accentuate the sequential properties of these molecules, and to ignore the fact
that the parts must work together in unison for the protein to function. This
project will adapt a recently-developed statistical technique, the Conditional
Random Field (CRF), that can quantitatively represent densely-connected networks
of features, and a recently-developed visualization tool that enables
interactive exploration of these networks, for the task of describing proteins.
Structurally, Conditional Random Fields appear to recapitulate the process by
which evolution has selected for parts that cooperate in proteins, and protein
descriptions based on CRFs will be able to predict whether a change to a protein
- a mutation - would have been tolerated by evolution, or selected against as
non-functional. This information will aid in predicting the effect of a
mutation, or multiple mutations to a protein, using much more of the available
information, than is currently utilized by state-of-the-art tools.

This work will broadly impact the study of proteins, improving a range of
activities from basic scientific studies of function, to endeavors in protein
engineering. In addition, the "change in protein sequence to change in protein
function" problem is a "model organism" for many other types of biological and
non-biological systems where rich interactions between parts of the system
demand a sophisticated statistical approach. To-date, in most of these fields,
models that are similarly limited to those currently used in proteins are the
de-facto standard. Developing the tools necessary for applying CRFs to protein
data, and methods of establishing testable ground-truth in this system, will
enhance the application of CRFs to many other domains where they may provide a
significant advantage over current methods. The products of this project will be
made freely available to the research community as online tools, and the methods
will be incorporated in coursework, first in the Biophysics Graduate Program at
The Ohio State University, and as the teachable component matures, made
available as lesson-plan material appropriate for both primary and secondary
education. By developing a tool that makes interdependencies between features
visually explorable and modifications of these dependencies quantifiably
predictable, we will promote more thorough consideration of the true complexity
of data and systems in many domains.