* 1262530
* REU Site:   Multidisciplinary Training for Students in Environmental and Social  Sciences through Archaeological Research
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Jeremy Wilson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2016
* USD 267,204.00

This REU site integrates undergraduates into research focused on reconstructing
the environmental, cultural and temporal landscapes of Angel Mounds, a palisaded
Mississippian town located on the Ohio River. The REU objectives are to provide
students with 1) significant field and laboratory training in archaeology,
geoarchaeology, geochemistry and geophysics, including: excavation, remote
sensing, hands-on use of instruments, modern laboratory analyses, and the
assembly and dissemination of results, 2) an opportunity to build cohort and
professional networks that will serve them throughout their careers, and 3) an
opportunity to participate in a project of regional and historical significance.
The project will be evaluated by formative and summative assessments. Long-term
success will be measured with post-program mentoring and tracking of the
professional engagement of REU alumni.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Angel Mounds is a National Historic Landmark that figured prominently in the
late prehistoric socio-political and population dynamics of the Midwest. The
site is the furthest upstream Mississippian town in the Ohio Valley and, like
its sister sites Kincaid in the Black Bottom and Cahokia in the American Bottom,
its settlement was a major socio-political and population reorganization for the
area. Unlike these other sites, its chronology, developmental history, and place
within the local settlement and ecological systems are less well understood.
Using multidisciplinary methods and instruction, REU undergraduates will be
trained to examine questions surrounding anthropogenic transformation of the
landscape, environmental change during the Medieval Warm and Little Ice Age, and
local and regional patterns of warfare and demography. Because most excavation
at Angel Mounds occurred during the WPA-era, some gaps will also be filled via
reanalysis of legacy collections curated at the GBL. In addition, targeted
geophysical survey, solid-earth coring and selective new excavation will be used
to contextualize and modernize the earlier, less rigorously collected data.
Students undertake these investigations through directed research as part of the
REU Site. The development and evolution of the site and region are examined
through: 1) earthwork construction episodes, 2) paleoenvironmental
reconstruction for region, 3) the timing and relationship of palisade
construction, and 4) the excavation of detected ?neighborhoods? on site to
determine their chronological association with settlement growth during the
Medieval Warm and village abandonment during the Little Ice Age. From this
perspective, the proposed project simultaneously addresses the landscape and
built environment of Angel Mounds. The REU students participate in every phase
of the project from research design and data collection to laboratory analyses,
archival research, and interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Archaeological research has evolved from the prototypical multiyear site exams
to more targeted research projects with refined questions and multidisciplinary
research teams that build upon the accumulated body of knowledge. The Angel
Mounds REU creates such a research environment. Talented students from the
natural and social sciences and institutions with limited STEM research
opportunities are actively recruited and encouraged to apply to the program.
Given the underrepresentation of Native Americans in archaeology, recruitment of
students from descendant communities are actively pursued through extant, IUPUI-
based relationships. With rotating on-site projects designed to answer specific
questions and the reanalysis of extant collections, the Angel Mounds REU
prepares students to conduct targeted projects that rely simultaneously on
traditional and state of the art field and laboratory methods. Project
participants are expected to present the results of their research projects at
conferences, such as Midwest Archaeological Conference (MAC). Students will also
publish their research reports in the Report of Investigations (GBL-ROI) series.