* 1262249
* Drivers and Effects of Technology Adoption
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Diego Comin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 03/31/2019
* USD 308,660.00

The competitiveness of a country is to a large extent determined by the
technology used in production by its companies. For example, recent concerns
regarding the competitiveness of the United States can surely be traced to the
technology used by American companies and to the fact that the technological
advances of foreign competitors may have reduced, or even eliminated, the
technological advantage American companies had a few decades ago. Even in
advanced countries like the U.S., technology is mainly determined by the
adoption decisions of companies. Understanding the drivers of technology
adoption is therefore essential for designing and implementing policies that
foster economic growth. Unfortunately, we still know relatively little about the
technology adoption processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will shed
light on the drivers of technology as well as on how various dimensions of
technology contribute to productivity growth. The research is divided in two
parts. The first will deepen our understanding of the consequences of technology
adoption by studying the role that technology adoption has played in the
evolution of the cross-country distribution of per-capita income over the last
200 years. The second part of the project studies the determinants of technology
adoption, focusing on on three types of factors pinpointed by the existing
theoretical literature: financial market development, geographic distance to
adoption leaders and political institutions. One significant drawback of the
existing literature is that the relevance of these factors for technology is
based almost entirely on anecdotal evidence. In contrast, this project will
explore the generic importance of these factors by exploiting a comprehensive
dataset, the CHAT dataset, that covers the diffusion of more than 100
technologies in over 150 countries during the last 200 years. Taken together,
these two complementary lines of research will increase significantly our
knowledge about the connection between technology and growth as well as about
the fundamental determinants of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: By developing new empirical approaches to use the CHAT dataset to study
technology diffusion, this project will encourage researchers to consider
additional factors that influence technology diffusion and use CHAT to evaluate
them. Additionally, better understanding of the drivers of technology adoption
will provide guidance in the formulation of adequate policies directed to
enhancing the productivity and competitiveness of the U.S. economy. Last, but
not least, the project will introduce both graduate and undergraduate student
assistants to state of the art techniques and datasets that shall shape their
training as economists.