* 1262184
* REU Site: From Field to Lab: Bringing Science to Underserved Undergraduate Students through Archaeology
* SBE,SMA
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2016
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 246,246.00

Students participating in the Rock Art Ranch Research Enrichment for
Undergraduates (RAR-REU) program gain experience in archaeological survey and
excavation while in the field for five weeks at a private ranch on the Colorado
Plateau in Arizona followed by two weeks in diverse research labs at the
University of Arizona campus in Tucson. While in the field, students are
immersed in a research program that explores the history of the region over the
past 5000 years. The goals of RAR-REU are to involve and engage undergraduates
in all aspects of this research process. Engagement is achieved through lectures
by archaeologists, indigenous anthropologists, and staff, and through field
trips to experience local archaeology and indigenous cultures. Involvement
includes hands-on experiences with excavation and survey methods, mapping,
documentation, and work in the field lab. Each student identifies a research
project that is conducted with guidance from faculty mentors and presented on
the last two days of the REU period. On the University of Arizona campus the
students have two weeks to work in conservation, zooarchaeology, biological
archaeology, and ceramics/lithics labs at ASM to gain experience in analytical
methods essential to answering modern archaeological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Two years of survey on RAR has
discovered 14 preceramic, Basketmaker II (BMII) sites along canyons on the west
side of the ranch, not including the previously documented BMII petroglyph site
in Chevelon Canyon. The RAR-REU program will focus its research on this
community seeking to provide a context for the meaning of the glyphs and to
indirectly date them through collection of radiocarbon samples from burned
features that are abundant in the BMII sites. The concentration of BMII sites on
RAR and the presence of extensive imagery in the canyon provide an opportunity
to understand BMII land and resource use, the length of time sites were in use,
whether or not the settlements were focused on farming or hunting and gathering,
and the role of petroglyph sites in the creation of the BMII
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts and Integration of Research and
Education: RAR-REU is designed to provide an immersive, science-based experience
to undergraduate students through interaction with numerous professionals
representing different disciplines and perspectives, including native scholars,
field archaeologists, conservators, and museum professionals. Students work
closely with faculty mentors to develop their research projects. Recruitment to
RAR-REU focuses on local universities, colleges, and community colleges having
significant Native American representation. We also work with tribal cultural
preservation programs to help recruit participants. In addition, we target small
colleges and community colleges having significant underrepresented groups,
including women. Collaborations on research projects between students and
faculty are presented at local and national professional archaeology meetings
and published as multi-authored articles and book chapters. The benefits of the
proposed research and activities to society are in modeling numerous careers in
social science that are possible for underrepresented groups and in
demonstrating the process of scientific enquiry and its value in increasing our
understanding of not only the present world, but of past worlds and societies.