* 1262895
* REU Site: Biomaterials Research Initiative Dedicated to Gateway Experiences (BRIDGE)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 03/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The intellectual focus of this REU/RET Site, supported by the
NSF Division of Materials Research and NSF Engineering Directorate is the
fundamental study and application of biomaterials and bio-inspired engineering.
Students and teachers will participate in research and educational projects that
range from developing fundamental understanding of how biomaterials form and
perform in nature, to designing and characterizing the use of new materials in
soft and adaptive robotic or assistive devices. Projects will have a strong
focus on learning from nature - how to interpret sophisticated functionalities
and approximate these functionalities by modifying, manipulating or creating new
materials. Projects are organized around 3 central themes: 1. Nano- and
microscale structures for biology and medicine 2. Tunable materials for tissue
engineering and drug delivery 3. Materials and strategies for soft and adaptive
robotics

Participants will contribute to ongoing research projects that combine
experiment with theory and/or simulation in the study and design of interfaces
between cells and surfaces; tunable structures, gels and networks; drug delivery
systems; tissue culture scaffolds; and multi-functional biomaterials such as
photonic and electronic biomaterials. K-12 teachers and community college
faculty will work with faculty and students to translate this research into
classroom and laboratory activities.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The theme for the REU Site: Biomaterials Research
Initiative Dedicated to Gate Way Experiences at Harvard University is the
interplay of materials science and bioengineering via 3 themes: (1) the study
and design of microscopic structures for biology and medicine; (2) tunable and
responsive materials for tissue engineering and drug delivery; and (3) soft and
adaptive robotics. The topics are chosen to appeal to a wide population of
students who are at early stages of their academic development, and who have
limited awareness of career paths. The REU Site at Harvard will have a strong
emphasis on students with little or no previous research experience. The program
includes recruitment and support for students from underrepresented groups,
students at non-research intensive institutions, and non-traditional students
who have re-entered college, in particular veterans of the armed forces. In
addition, teachers and faculty from highly diverse local K-12 schools and
community college will work with faculty and students to develop hands-on
classroom and laboratory activities designed to introduce students to current
research in biomaterials and bio-inspired engineering. The Site's professional
development activities will have a strong focus on scientific communication
skills and innovation. This work is supported by the NSF Division of Materials
Research and NSF Engineering Directorate.