* 1262049
* REU Site: Functional Genomics Research Projects for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robert Braun, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 08/31/2017
* USD 383,850.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to The
Jackson Laboratory (JAX) that will provide a residential summer research
experience for 10 undergraduates and 2 incoming college freshmen per year. The
program focus is functional genomics, a rapidly evolving scientific discipline
that seeks to understand how the information encoded within a genome determines
the development and function of a living organism. Under the guidance of 11
available faculty mentors, the program challenges students with hands-on
projects that utilize diverse interdisciplinary approaches linking the
biological, physical, and computational sciences to investigations of genome
function. A strong emphasis is placed on ethics education and professional
development training, and institutional commitment includes student access to
on-campus courses and conferences, state-of-the-art instrumentation, dedicated
program direction by the Education Office, and housing in a JAX-owned facility
overseen by professional staff. The REU program is as an integral part of the
10-week JAX Summer Student Program (SSP), an internationally recognized research
opportunity that annually welcomes 30-40 undergraduates and high school
students. A weekly stipend, subsistence allotment, and travel assistance
provided to each intern enables economically disadvantaged students to forgo
summer jobs and participate in this life-changing educational experience. The
SSP has well-established administrative procedures for recruitment, program
design and management, mentor guidance, and alumni tracking to determine lasting
influences of the research experience. REU participants are chosen through a
competitive, nationwide application process that targets students with a strong
interest in functional genomics. Members of underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply and actively recruited, and at least half are selected from
academic institutions where research opportunities in STEM are limited.
Professional third-party evaluation is conducted by the University of Maine, and
the program is guided by the common assessment tool available to BIO-funded REU
PIs. More information is available at
http://education.jax.org/summerstudent/index.html, or by contacting PI Robert
Braun, Ph.D., or Lisa John, Training Coordinator, at (207) 288-6924 or
summerstudents@jax.org.