* 1262903
* I-Corps:  Gel-Tethered Molecular Beacons
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Molecular Beacons are self-reporting DNA hairpin probes that have been used in a
variety of real-time detection applications. When they hybridize to an
oligonucleotide target they fluoresce, thus removing the additional requirement
of fluorescently labeling the target itself. Consequently, molecular beacons
have found substantial scientific success over the past two decades. Molecular
beacons have rarely been used in microarray-based applications. When tethered to
solid substrates a large background emerges due to beacon-substrate
interactions. This large background is absent when beacons are used un-tethered
in an aqueous solution. Researchers have discovered that the signal-to-
background ratio of molecular beacons can remain relatively high if they are
tethered to a solid substrate by means of a hydrogel. This high performance has
been attributed to the fact that the crosslink density of surface-patterned
microgels gradually approaches infinity at the microgel-water interface, and the
beacons conjugated to the microgel surface find themselves in as water-like an
environment as possible. This project is designed to demonstrate the effective
use of surface-tethered molecular beacons in clinically relevant DNA
assays.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Since their invention in the mid-1990's, molecular
beacons and beacon-based assay platforms have served multiple scientific and
commercial roles. However, one large applications area where beacons have rarely
been used is in microarray technology where the oligonucleotide probes must be
tethered to a solid surface. Site-specific surface tethering is important,
because the nature of a specific probe and its target can be identified by
position rather than by fluorophore color. Thousands of discrete surface
positions can be interrogated simultaneously whereas the practical number of
different fluorophores is less than ten. Applications involving the rapid
identification of bacterial strains responsible for a broad range of different
infections, the ability to simultaneously probe for tens or hundreds of genes
can have substantial impact in health-care settings has the potential to be
enhanced through the results of this project.