* 1262715
* REU SITE:  Undergraduate Biology Education Research Program
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Barbara Crawford, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 260,236.00

The Undergraduate Biology Education Research (UBER) REU Site engages
undergraduates in studying important issues specific to the teaching and
learning of biology, with mentorship from faculty in the Division of Biological
Sciences and the Mathematics and Science Education Department at the University
of Georgia. The goals of this nine-week summer program are to develop
undergraduates' knowledge and skills in biology education research, encourage
undergraduates to pursue doctoral study of biology teaching and learning, expand
the diversity of the talent pool in biology education research by strategically
recruiting and mentoring underrepresented and disadvantaged students, strengthen
and expand collaborations among faculty and students in education and life
sciences, and contribute to the development of theory and knowledge about
biology education in ways that can inform undergraduate biology instruction.

A programmatic effort to introduce undergraduates to the discipline of biology
education research is unprecedented nationwide. Biology education research as a
discipline is quite young, and systematic involvement of undergraduates has not
been part of the culture or practice in biology or education. UBER aims to
promote cultural change that expands the involvement of undergraduates in
biology education research and raises awareness among undergraduates that
biology teaching and learning are compelling foci for study that can be pursued
at the graduate level and via various career paths. UBER utilizes a combined
strategy of broad and strategic recruiting to attract underrepresented minority
students as well as students who do not have access to biology education
research opportunities at their own institutions. Evaluation plans involve
tracking UBER participants over time to understand the trajectories of students
who complete undergraduate training in biology education research.

Significant co-funding of this project is provided by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure in the NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences in recognition of
the importance of educational research in the discipline of biology. The
Division of Undergraduate Education and the Division of Research on Learning in
Formal and Informal Settings also provides co-funding.