* 1262974
* REU Site: Research in Radio/Radar Astronomy and Atmospheric Sciences at Arecibo Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Robert Minchin, Universidad Metropolitana
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 03/31/2017
* USD 382,878.00

The project will support a Research Experience for Undergraduates Site at the
Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico, which hosts the world's largest single-
aperture radio telescope. Nine undergraduates and one high-school teacher per
year will perform research in two principal areas: radio astronomy, and space
and atmospheric sciences. Through a wide variety of research projects, students
will be exposed to topics that include pulsars, extragalactic astronomy, near-
earth asteroids, the Earth's atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as gravitational
waves. The will also educate its participants in cutting-edge topics and
techniques through an extensive program of lectures, workshops, and site
tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site will recruit from both Puerto Rico and the
rest of the United States. A substantial number of its participants will be from
Puerto Rico, which represents a minority community that is underrepresented in
STEM fields. Numerous formal and informal cultural activities will further
engender a spirit of collaboration between students from a wide variety of
backgrounds. Finally, the project will strengthen the partnership between the
Arecibo Observatory and the Jicamarca Radio Observatory (JRO) in Peru by sending
two students to perform summer research at JRO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Office
of the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences.