* 1262592
* ABI Sustaining: A visualization and analysis resource for comparative microbial ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Mark Welch, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 702,663.00

The Marine Biological Laboratory is awarded a grant for sustaining operation of
the web service VAMPS (Visualization and Analysis of Microbial Population
Structures, http://vamps.mbl.edu). VAMPS is a free, open-source database-driven
website that allows researchers using data from massively-parallel sequencing
(MPS, or ?next-generation sequencing?) projects to analyze the diversity of
microbial communities and the relationships between communities, to explore
these analyses in an intuitive visual context, and to download analyses and
images for publication. VAMPS currently hosts more than 200 projects
encompassing more than 5000 datasets and over 250 million sequence tags, and is
used by nearly 900 investigators from around the world. The rapid expansion of
MPS technologies with the concurrent drastic drop in sequencing costs has
revolutionized molecular microbial ecology by making the detailed analysis of
complex communities over time and space a tractable research pursuit for small
research groups. The ability to generate 104?107 reads with relative ease brings
with it many downstream complications. Beyond the computational resources and
skills needed to analyze data, it is difficult to compare datasets, which may
represent spatial or temporal community gradients, changes to a community in
response to nutrients or stress, the response of a biota to its host, or other
relationships, in an intuitive and interactive manner that leads to hypothesis
generation. VAMPS was developed to address these challenges and to facilitate
research by individuals or collaborating groups working on projects of any
scale. Sequence data and associated metadata can be uploaded directly to VAMPS
by users or by sending data to the VAMPS project team; MPS reads can be
automatically quality filtered and assigned to both taxonomic structures and to
taxonomic-independent clusters. These can then be linked to metadata and
compared using a wide variety of analytical and visualization tools. Each result
is extensively hyperlinked to other analysis and visualization options,
promoting data exploration and leading to a greater understanding of data
relationships. A major strength of VAMPS is that researchers can compare not
only datasets within their own projects but can compare these with datasets from
projects such as NSF-funded Long Term Ecological Research projects, the
International Census of Marine Microbes, the Human Microbiome Project, and
hundreds of other individual projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the advent of
MPS methods has allowed microbial ecologists to ask meaningful questions with
ever-greater precision, it brings significant challenges to individual small
laboratories struggling to manage megabytes or even gigabytes of data. VAMPS
obviates the need for individual research groups to make the considerable
investment in computational infrastructure and bioinformatic support otherwise
necessary to process, analyze, and interpret MPS data for microbial ecology. Any
web-capable device can be used to upload, process, explore, and extract data and
results from VAMPS, and the VAMPS development team is available to assist in all
aspects of data processing and analysis. VAMPS encourages researchers to share
sequence and metadata, and fosters collaboration between researchers of
disparate biomes who recognize common patterns in shared data. VAMPS has been
used in more than 50 publication and at least 13 NSF-funded projects. VAMPS
provides unique educational opportunities through its combination of data from a
variety of environments, its integration of sequence cluster-based and taxonomy-
based analytical and visualization tools, and the instruction provided by
project developers. In addition to uncounted students among its registered
users, the VAMPS website is used by graduate students in the Brown-MBL IGERT
Reverse Ecology: Computational Integration of Genomes, Organisms and
Environments; in the MBL's graduate/postdoctoral level Microbial Diversity
summer course, and in the MBL Special Topics course Strategies and Techniques
for Analysis of Microbial Population Structures, which draws graduate students,
postdocs and principle investigators from around the world.