* 1262934
* REU Site:   Interplay between Genes and the Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 476,067.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to
Boston University (BU) that will provide research training for ten students, for
ten weeks during the summers of 2013-2016. The program is coordinated by the BU
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP), and approximately 35 faculty
from the Biology Department and related programs serve as research mentors.
Molecular, cellular, ecological, genomics, evolutionary, and computational
research methods are used by students and mentors to address biological
problems, primarily as they relate to the effects of environmental influences on
gene expression or function. Students perform full-time intensive research as
part of a research team consisting of a faculty member and a graduate student or
post-doctoral mentor. In addition to research, students attend weekly summer
workshops on topics including scientific publication, professional
presentations, career opportunities in science, graduate school admissions, and
scientific ethics. Students give several oral presentations during the summer
and return to BU in the fall semester to present at the Annual Undergraduate
Research Symposium. Social events designed to integrate students into the
research environment are included. After completion of the program, students
will be tracked to determine continued interest in research and career paths.
Research stipends, housing and travel are provided. Students are selected based
on academic record, letters of recommendation, potential for outstanding
research in the program?s research area, and matching interests with research
mentor, with special focus on students from underrepresented minority groups or
smaller colleges. The program?s recruitment efforts consist of traditional "hard
copy" formats, on-line advertising, and networking activities with previous
students and at national research conferences. Information about the program
outcome will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.bu.edu/surf/program/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Tom Gilmore,
gilmore@bu.edu) or the Program Manager (Ms. Tina Fresta, urop@bu.edu).