* 1262535
* Discovering Collaboration Network Structures and Dynamics in Big Data
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Stanton, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 306,566.00

Understanding how individual scientists interact with one another and how such
interaction impacts research productivity and knowledge diffusion is important
for understanding the dynamics of scientific research collaboration. At the same
time, information about patterns of collaboration and their consequences have
implications for science policy. In quantitative research on collaboration
networks, publication co-authorships and citation-linkages have been the primary
source of data. As large data repositories, one of the signposts for
cyberinfrastructure-enabled, data-driven science, become increasingly prevalent,
however, they offer an alternative source of information about networks of
scientific collaboration. This project investigates research collaboration
networks emerging around one such international data repository, GenBank, and
develops data products to support data-driven science policymaking and research.
By utilizing this novel data source the project provides an unprecedented
opportunity to validate and expand the theory of complex networks while
generating rich data outputs and products to support science policy research and
policymaking. This study fills a number of theoretical and methodological gaps
identified by the 2008 roadmap for Science of Science Policy (SoSP), with a
specific focus on how scientific collaboration networks form and evolve. The
outcomes of this study address the lack of models and tools for network
analysis, visual analytics, and science mapping outlined in the 2008 roadmap for
SoSP. To accomplish the data collection and processing required for this project
new computational programs will be developed to parse, extract, store,
transform, split, merge, and filter the data; these will be applicable to the
analysis of other similar data sources for science policy and innovation
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. By making available dataset
product prototypes the project will allow researchers, policy makers, and
students to explore research networks in GenBank from longitudinal, thematic,
geographical, institutional, and author dimensions. The multi-dimensional,
interactive presentations of such datasets enable data-intensive science policy
research and support science policymaking through filtering, sorting,
associating, and visualization capabilities. The datasets and data products will
be made available through an open access mechanism, so educators and
undergraduate and graduate students have ample opportunities to use these
resources for teaching and research. Students enrolled in Syracuse University's
newly established Certificate for Advanced Study in Data Science (CAS DS)
program will be able to participate in the project and gain skills in
programming for data collection and processing, data quality verification,
analysis, and visualization. In addition, the collaboration network analysis
provides interested doctoral students an opportunity to do independent study or
dissertation research. Findings from studying cyberinfrastructure-supported data
sharing and knowledge diffusion is expected to advance policymakers' ability to
properly assess the outcomes of federally funded research.