* 1262270
* The Initial Career Transitions of Science & Engineering PhDs
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Henry Sauermann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 284,407.00

Although academic research has traditionally been regarded as the most desirable
career path for science and engineering PhDs, the U.S. has witnessed an
increasing share of PhDs entering employment in the private sector. While some
observers suggest that challenges in securing a tenure-track faculty position
push graduates away from academia, others argue that the private sector attracts
PhDs by offering higher pay, access to leading edge technologies, and an "open
science" atmosphere. Using a novel longitudinal survey, this project follows a
national sample of science and engineering PhDs over the course of their
graduate training and into their first post-graduate positions to examine why
some PhDs enter research careers in academia, while others pursue careers in
industry. The first study in this project investigates PhDs' training
experiences over the course of their program to assess changes in graduate
students' career preferences over time and to examine potential drivers of such
changes. The second study contrasts PhDs' career preferences prior to graduation
with the positions they actually obtain after graduation. It also probes more
deeply which PhDs are able to pursue their preferred career (or not) by
examining how individual preferences, ability, and labor market conditions shape
initial career transitions.

This project contributes to the research on scientific labor markets and
innovative human capital in several ways. First, prior literature often relies
on the notion that PhD scientists are socialized during graduate training to
aspire to an academic research career. This notion, however, seems at odds with
emerging evidence showing that students' interest in academic science declines
over the course of graduate training. This project empirically assesses changes
in students' career preferences over time and examines how career preferences
are shaped by a broad range of factors such as peers and advisors, learning
about one's own skills, labor market conditions, and the job attributes
associated with particular career paths. Second, this study complements prior
work that has described aggregate patterns of labor flows by providing micro-
level insights into how scientists' and engineers' initial career trajectories
are shaped by their own preferences and ability as well as by labor market
opportunities.

Broader impact. By examining the career preferences and career transitions of
science and engineering PhDs, this research provides an important empirical
basis for the ongoing debate regarding science and engineering labor market
conditions, including the potential "mismatch" between graduates' career
aspirations and the positions actually available to them. The results also
provide insights regarding how graduate curricula can be improved to better
prepare students for a range of academic as well as non-academic career paths.
The project's findings regarding changes in career preferences during graduate
training have implications for university administrators, graduate student
advisors, and policy makers who are concerned with shaping graduate student
experiences. They are also important for students, who can benefit from thinking
more explicitly about their career goals and from learning about the career
opportunities available in different sectors of the economy.