* 1262729
* Amyloid Regulatory Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Regina Murphy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 390,001.00

CBET-1262729&lt;br/&gt;Murphy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diseases such as Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, and diabetes are distinctly different in etiology, symptoms, and
progression. Yet they share one common feature: the deposition of proteins on
affected organs. The deposited proteins are unique to each disease, and their
normal shape and function are distinctly different. Yet, in each case, the
proteins undergo a change in shape and structure, causing them to stick together
into clumps of fibrillar aggregates. The process of converting normal soluble
proteins to insoluble fibrillar aggregates is called amyloidogenesis. The
deposits in each disease are comprised mainly of a single protein, unique to
each disorder; in other words, the deposits are formed through 'self'
association. This self-association arises as a result of the structural features
that the proteins adopt at some point during the amyloidogenesis process. These
structural features arise in all proteins on the amyloid pathway, at an
intermediate point along the pathway, no matter what the disease. The similarity
of structural features could lead to 'non-self' association: association between
two different proteins that are both at a similar intermediate point. Data with
one pair of such proteins, transthyretin (involved in senile systemic
amyloidosis) and beta-amyloid (Alzheimer's disease), demonstrate clearly that
such non-self association does exist. Furthermore, the binding of transthyretin
to beta-amyloid halts beta-amyloid aggregation and, more importantly, prevents
beta-amyloid from killing neuron cells. In this project, the examination of non-
self association between amyloidogenic proteins will be expanded beyond
transthyretin and beta-amyloid. About 100 different pairs of proteins will be
probed to determine if the proteins interact. If the answer is yes, experiments
will be conducted to define the specific parts of the proteins that are involved
in the interaction, and to measure the effect of the interaction on progress
along the amyloidogenesis pathway. The hypothesis underlying this project is
that a regulatory network exists, that this network contains many amyloidogenic
proteins, and that 'non-self' interactions are important in intervening in
'self' interactions. As with transthyretin and beta-amyloid, such 'non-self'
interactions may prevent the toxicity that arises due to 'self' interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, no longer will scientists think about
protein aggregation as an isolated event involving a single protein, but rather,
as a network of interacting proteins that co-regulate each other's self-
association. Results from this project could contribute innovative new
strategies for combating these protein aggregation disorders.