* 1262850
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Scientific Computation at Ohio Wesleyan University
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Brad Trees, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2017
* USD 225,453.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) site at Ohio Wesleyan University. Each undergraduate participant will work
on a ten-week research project under the guidance of an Ohio Wesleyan University
faculty member in one of the following disciplines: astronomy, computer science,
mathematics/statistics, neuroscience, and physics. Project participants will
represent a wide range of interests, experiences, and backgrounds. The projects
will focus on one or more aspects of scientific computation, such as: numerical
(coding in a "traditional" programming language), symbolic (using a computer
algebra program such as MathematicaÂ®), and data visualization. Seven to eight
mentors from the fields listed above will guide student explorations into a wide
range of important scientific problems. Weekly meetings, in which individual
research groups give progress reports and all participants are able to discuss
the projects, will foster a sense of community among the participants and point
out the strengths of computational techniques to tackle problems in varying
disciplines. A parallel computing cluster, owned by the university, will be
available for participants to use on their projects. A series of weekly, half-
hour, faculty-led seminars will introduce participants to widely used
computational tools. A research symposium will be held at the end of the
research period for participants to present their results. This award is funded
by the Physics Division and the Division of Mathematical Sciences within the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.