* 1262095
* Enabling Participation of Hispanic Students in SHPE 2012 Graduate Activities; Fort Worth, Texas; November 14 - 18, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2013
* Olivia Graeve, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2013
* USD 29,620.00

Technical Abstract This award will allow 54 undergraduate students to
participate at the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) annual
meeting in order to enhance students, graduate school and academic prospects, as
well as to connect students with engineering educators. Specifically, this grant
will provide travel funds for undergraduate students, both from 2-year and
4-year colleges and graduate students, to participate in the SHPE 2012 annual
meeting (November 14-18, 2012, Fort Worth, TX) for three purposes: (1) to allow
students to participate in the SHPE annual undergraduate and graduate technical
paper and poster competitions; (2) to allow students to participate in graduate
school and young investigator workshops, through the GEM GRAD Lab and Graduate
Institute of the SHPE conference; and (3) to connect students and Hispanic
Engineering faculty in order to open opportunities for postdoctoral positions,
Research Experiences for Undergraduates, and research collaborations.

Non-Technical Abstract By fostering the participation of 54 undergraduate
students at Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) annual meeting,
the program supported by this award has the the potential to become an
important, large-scale, activity to increase the number of Hispanic engineering
faculty numbers in the United States, as it consists of a multi-tiered approach
starting with undergraduates and moving all the way up to current faculty
members.