* 1262117
* I-Corps:  Accurate and energy-efficient sensory stream analysis via configurable trigger signature detection
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Cyber-physical systems rely on continuous sensing of real-world phenomena to
guide data collection, storage, analysis, computation, communication, decision-
making, and actuation. The sensors and the sensory processing system are often
deployed in highly energy-constrained environments, where the power consumed to
analyze the raw data stream dominates the energy profile of the entire platform.
Typically, the data stream must be analyzed for temporal and spatial trigger
signatures that either identify that an event of interest has occurred or,
conversely, rule out the possibility of such an event. Trigger signatures can be
detected flexibly in software by analyzing the sensory stream as it arrives, but
this requires a significant energy budget. This project plans to develop a low-
power reconfigurable hardware/software substrate that is tailored for 1)
identifying temporal and spatial trigger signatures in the input data streams
and 2) dynamically invoking software routines for further processing and on-the-
fly reconfiguration. The hardware substrate may be suitable for processing
multiple input modalities and time scales, will be easy to train and reconfigure
for a broad range of trigger signatures, and will consume minimal energy,
thereby making it suitable for continuous deployment in practical scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work described in this proposal may enable widespread
deployment of continuous sensing applications at lower cost and in mobile or
remote environments with strict energy constraints. There are many domains
impacting society that may be applicable for such systems. Many new and emerging
end-user applications in the mobile space also rely on environmental sensing to
trigger context- and location- aware computation or communication. For example,
mobile phone accelerometer data can be used to infer the type and level of
activity of the user, as well as his or her specific location or context (e.g.
climbing into the driver's seat of a car generates an identifiable accelerometer
signature which can be used to disable text messaging while driving). The
ability to flexibly deploy continuous sensing for these and other applications
has the potential to change these markets and create entirely new and unforeseen
application domains.