* 1262851
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Astrophysics at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2017
* Christine Jones, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 10/31/2017
* USD 674,997.00

The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) will continue its Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Summer Intern Program which offers the
opportunity for ten undergraduate students each year to conduct research with
scientists at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA). The primary
focus of the SAO summer intern program is the student research. Intern projects
are solicited from the CfA scientific staff. A wide range of research topics
will be offered in the following areas: planetary and exoplanetary science,
theoretical studies in astronomy and in atomic and molecular physics, the
interstellar medium, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, large scale structure,
active galactic nuclei, laboratory astrophysics, and detector development. Each
student writes an internal research paper and gives an oral presentation of
their results at an Intern Symposium held at the end of the summer. The research
experience is completed by a trip to the winter American Astronomical Society
meeting, where the intern presents a poster paper and interacts with other
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the training interns receive by
performing a focused research project, students are involved in a variety of
complementary activities, including a series of six scientific colloquia given
by CfA scientists at a level appropriate for undergraduates, a series of short
lecture courses in cosmology and exoplanets, and several organized lunches
including one with current graduate students and one with faculty members from
the Astronomy Department graduate admissions committee, as well as one to
discuss graduate school fellowships. Students are recruited with an emphasis on
women, under-represented minorities, and students from colleges where research
opportunities in astronomy are limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is co-
funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the National Science
Foundation REU program.