* 1262711
* Role of Free and Forced Boundary Conditions on Beachface Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Christopher Houser, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2014
* USD 67,384.00

This research project will examine how the evolution of the nearshore profile
determines beachface erosion and accretion through changes in both the supply
and transport of sediment within the swash zone. The lack of information about
this set of processes remains a central barrier to the development of theories
regarding coastal evolution and beach-dune interaction that can be translated
across scales and field sites. Most swash zone studies have considered
hydrodynamics and transport without explicit consideration of the beach-state in
which the field observations were collected and the dynamic nature of this
boundary condition. In this project, the researchers will assess how swash-zone
hydrodynamics and sediment transport are dependent on the transformation of the
incident wave field across the evolving nearshore profile. The project will
involve a complex field-study that simultaneously monitors swash-zone
hydrodynamics, sediment transport, and bed elevation change in response to
changes in beach-state and nearshore morphology. Field instruments that will be
used include ultrasonic distance sensors and current meters in the swash zone,
wave and tide sensors in the inner-surf zone, and a terrestrial laser scanner
and remote cameras to monitor beachface evolution. The project is expected to
yield a rich dataset of evolving swash-zone hydrodynamics and sediment transport
in response to changes in the nearshore profile, an important and unique first
step to developing a predictive model of beachface evolution.

The impact of a tropical storm or hurricane on a barrier island is dependent on
the ability of the beach and dune system to recover since the last storm. The
recovery of dunes is dependent on the transfer of sediment from the nearshore to
the beachface, where it may become available for aeolian transport to the
backshore and dunes. The factors that control the rate and mechanism of swash-
zone evolution therefore are of great interest to coastal managers who need
improved information and models for predicting the type of impact expected
during succeeding storms and for determining whether beach or dune restoration
is required to protect property and infrastructure. This project also will
provide valuable education and training for a promising graduate student.