* 1262820
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduate Minorities in Marine and Environmental Sciences.
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Peter Kingsley-Smith, South Carolina Department of Natural Resources
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2016
* USD 285,473.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources located in
Charleston, SC. The proposed 12-week summer internship program will provide
laboratory and field-based research expertise to eight undergraduate students
from across the nation each summer for three years. The REU Site draws mentors,
facilities, equipment and experiences from the closely situated Federal and
state research institutions that comprise the Marine Resources Center at Fort
Johnson, Charleston, South Carolina. Students will be required to design and
complete independent mentor-guided research projects and will attend classes on
statistics, scientific writing, and presentation skills to train them for
successful future careers in the marine and environmental sciences. As final
products of the program, students will be required to prepare both a written
final report and an oral presentation on the findings from their projects. Oral
presentations will be given as part of a day-long research colloquium. Following
the program, students are encouraged to attend a professional meeting or
conference to present their work.&lt;br/&gt;Funding supports student stipends,
student travel to and from Charleston, dormatory housing during the program and
some administrative expenses.