* 1262281
* Early Fraction Learning: Links with Prosociality and Self and Other Perspective Taking
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Lynne Chronister, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 03/31/2015
* USD 124,318.00

The goal of the proposed work is to advance our understanding of the ways in
which thinking in the mathematics domain is related to the emergence of other
cognitive building blocks in the early years. The project will examine whether
children are better at reasoning about fractions when questions are framed in
the context of social, rather than physical relationships, thereby avoiding the
whole number bias that hinders understanding. The work is a collaboration
between a cognitive scientist and a mathematics educator at the University of
Southern Mississippi and the work will largely take place in preschools and
daycare center in the Southern Mississippi Gulf Coast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will study about 180 preschoolers in a series of randomized,
controlled experiments. They will present children with simple fraction and fair
sharing problems in which they will be required to reason about how one should
(a) share items among friends or (b) distribute items into containers. Each
problem will also be presented to the children along with prompts that are
either metacognitive or not metacognitive in order to determine whether
prompting children to reflect on their own thoughts and feelings facilitates
their ability to solve such tasks. By systematically manipulating these
strategies and contexts, the researchers hope to determine whether social
cognition facilitates problem solving outside of the social domain. By examining
the relationships among children?s developing fundamental cognitive capacities
and their rational number concepts, the researchers hope to determine whether
they develop independently or scaffold up one another. The results could have
significant implications for mathematics curriculum development.