* 1262252
* Upgrade of the Earth &amp; Environmental Science Electron Microprobe Laboratory at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2015
* USD 54,558.00

This project is to upgrade the Earth &amp; Environmental Science's Electron
Microprobe Laboratory (EMPL) housing a Cameca SX-100 Electron Probe
Microanalyzer at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). The upgrade involves
the installation of a new computer workstation running Probe for EPMA and Probe
Image interfaced with the instrument. This upgrade was justified on the basis of
three main criteria: First, examples were provided of major limitations imposed
by the current vendor-supplied software package (Cameca's Peak Sight) that may
be overcome using software available from Probe Software, Inc including (1) new
algorithms to improve minimum detection limits, precision, and accuracy; (2)
superior time-dependent intensity corrections; and (3) improved X-ray mapping
capabilities. Second, a description was presented of ongoing and future projects
that have compelling scientific merit and require characterization using a
state-of-the-art electron microprobe. Third, this facility has had an excellent
track record of high quality science with current instrumentation, a successful
and sustainable maintenance and administration plan, numerous collaborative
research efforts, and a highly diverse user base. An upgraded Electron
Microprobe Laboratory at RPI will benefit both the larger Rensselaer Community
and the broader Upstate New York/New England Region by enhancing current
capabilities as a regional facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMPL has been and
will continue to be open to the public along with undergraduates, graduate
students, post-docs, research faculty, and professors at Rensselaer and
elsewhere. In addition to providing analyses free of charge to undergraduates
completing various projects, this facility participates annually in the
ExxonMobil Bernard Harris Summer Science Camp, a free two-week program for fifty
middle school students (grades 6-8) from the New York Capital Region designed to
instill a life-long interest in math and science. This upgrade will greatly
enhance the learning experiences of students, visitors, and new users alike
thanks to the fully-integrated, user-friendly nature of Probe for EPMA which
visually emphasizes important considerations (background models, time-dependent
intensity corrections, wave scans, etc.).