* 1262779
* The Salish Kootenai College Mathematical Sciences Program
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2020
* Steven Dupuis, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,949,436.00

The Salish Kootenai College (SKC) is proposing to develop a Mathematical
Sciences (MS) program with two options for students. The first option is an
Associate of Science in Mathematical Sciences (ASMS) and the second option is a
Bachelors of Science in Secondary Education-Mathematics(BoSSEM). The program
will be a collaborative effort between the SKC Education Department, SKC's STEM
Division,&lt;br/&gt;and the Indigenous Math and Science Institute primarily,
with valuable input from tribal elders, education professionals, and other
tribal community partners. The overall goal of the SKC-MS program is to improve
the achievement and representation of American Indian people in math and math
education. This goal will be realized through specific objectives and activities
designed to facilitate an effective and efficient transition of qualified
students through each program. This proposal is driven by the urgent need for
mathematicians and mathematics teachers, especially American Indian teachers for
reservation schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SKC-MS Program will follow the
developments within the K-16 mathematics education initiative, which is to be
jointly administered by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department
of Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The SKC-MS
Program will use innovative and transformational strategies in implementing the
new culturally competent Mathematical Science and Secondary Education in
Mathematics programs. Likewise, the project's evaluation focus will ensure the
programs are on track and lead to successful outcomes. The program stakeholders
will work closely with the evaluation team to gather and analyze data from the
program. Program outcomes will be used to generate a new conceptual framework
for supporting the growth of American Indian mathematicians and secondary math
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The SKC-MS Program
will have broader impacts as evidenced by an increase in the numbers of American
Indian math teachers who can support American Indian middle and high school
students effectively. In addition, the SKC-MS Program will make a significant
impact within the mathematical sciences discipline through cultural integration.
SKC faculty will gain added skills in and understanding of culturally competent
teaching and will generate new culturally competent courses through interactions
with tribal elders and educators. The addition of higher level mathematics will
enhance other STEM programs at SKC, improving SKC's ability to support student
achievement in all academic areas of the college, possibly leading to additional
STEM BS programs. The results and outcomes from the SKC-MS Program will be
disseminated in professional publications and conferences that will add to the
knowledge base surrounding mathematics and mathematics education. SKC will be
the first tribal college to offer a Secondary Mathematics Education degree
program. The SKC education department can build upon the success of both the
Secondary Science and Secondary Mathematics programs and potentially expand into
other STEM education disciplines. The program results will be disseminated
widely for use by teacher preparation programs at other tribal colleges and
universities.