* 1262418
* Expanding Understanding of the Innovation Process: R&D and Non-R&D Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* John Walsh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 213,109.00

While R&D is an important input to innovation, there is growing evidence that a
significant share of innovation is not born from formal R&D activity. Given the
importance of innovation for economic growth and the central role of innovation
in policy debates, the project will expand the study of innovation to include
non-R&D innovations and analyze the drivers and outcomes of non-R&D compared to
R&D-based innovations. The project includes three key parts: a detailed review
and analysis of new and traditional indicators of innovation, including
estimates of the rates of non-R&D innovation; modeling and empirically testing
the relation between knowledge environments and innovation type (R&D v.
non-R&D); and examining the impact of innovation type on willingness to
participate in markets for technology, and how invention idiosyncrasy affects
this relationship. The research also addresses more fundamental questions in the
science of science and innovation policy on the nature of knowledge in the
innovation process and the likely outcomes of inventions embedding different
characteristics.

Broader Impacts: The project's goal is to broaden the understanding of
innovation and leverage this broader understanding in order to develop theories
of innovation and improve the empirical foundation for innovation policy.
Findings will contribute to ongoing efforts at NSF to develop more sophisticated
innovation measures, as well as make important contributions to understandings
of non-R&D innovations and helping organizations build their strategies for
innovation related to knowledge environments. In addition, the findings on
willingness-to-license by invention type may help firms devise better strategies
for commercializing their new technologies. One objective is to broaden
understanding of the innovation process and build an empirical base to guide
policymaking that would address this broader universe of innovative activity,
including building new models of the R&D decision, new metrics (non-R&D
innovation, idiosyncrasy) and new results on the innovation process.