* 1262771
* REU site: Great Lakes Educational Exchange (GLEE) at the University at Buffalo, State University of New York
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jason Benedict, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 313,161.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) Site for the summers of 2013-2015 led by Janet Morrow
and Sarbajit Banerjee of the University at Buffalo, State University of New
York. The Site will support ten students per summer for a ten week program. The
Site will focus on interdisciplinary collaborative research with an emphasis on
sustained engagement throughout the academic year. A special thrust will focus
on recruiting at least two community college students each summer to provide
them access to research opportunities at an early stage of their career. Broader
impacts stem from the introduction of students to modern research methods and
projects. Collaborative research activities during the academic year will
promote student involvement in the organization of data in presentations and
manuscripts. The Site will focus on students who may not normally have the
chance to participate in research in a large university setting and increase the
likelihood of their participation in graduate-level science and engineering
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary research projects are
available in several areas; including, 1) synthesis and characterization of
nanomaterials, 2) organic synthesis, 3) chemical biology/medicinal chemistry, 4)
environmental chemistry, 4) computational chemistry, 5) polymer and materials
chemistry, and 6), inorganic materials for biomedical diagnostics and imaging.
Participants will meet weekly as a group for discussions on laboratory safety,
manuscript writing, research ethics, graduate education and career choices.
Students will also hear from industrial researchers through a biweekly seminar
series, which will provide further exposure to career choices. Students will
have multiple opportunities to present their work in oral and written
communication in the summer program and at professional society meetings.
Additional activities will include field trips to local industries and research
centers across Western New York's thriving manufacturing, life science, and
biomedical industry.