* 1262201
* EAGER:  Dynamic Modification of the Spectral Radiative Properties of a Fluid via Core-Shell Multifunctional Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Patrick Phelan, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 193,594.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1262201&lt;br/&gt;Otanicar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Th
e project aims to dynamically control the spectral radiative properties of
nanoparticles dispersed in a fluid. Nanoparticles are known to offer a variety
of benefits for thermal transport, and of particular relevance here the vast
changes to the radiative properties that can be achieved through the dispersion
of nanoparticles. With the advent of nanoparticles it is possible to control the
radiative properties of dispersions as opposed to just passively observing such
properties. In particular, a dispersion of core-shell multifunctional
nanoparticles will be created that are capable of dynamically changing their
volume and thus their spectral radiative properties. Preliminary experiments
have shown that these multifunctional nanoparticles are capable of being
synthesized to achieve temperature sensitive volumetric changes. To date most of
these particles have been synthesized with polymer shells and inorganic cores
while this proposal plans to reverse this with polymer cores and inorganic and
metallic shells to achieve large radiative property shifts in the visible-
infrared wavelengths. This proposal addresses this question through a
comprehensive set of experiments and analyses. The experiments will largely
focus on measuring the spectral radiative properties of different dispersions at
different temperatures and thus different volumes using spectrophotometric
techniques. These measurements will then be correlated with modeling results to
improve fundamental understanding of the dynamic control of radiative transport
as a function of the core material, shell material, size and volumetric shift
achievable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;The potentially transformative
nature of the proposed project is the exciting capability to dynamically (and
reversibly) change the radiative properties of a dispersion of nanoparticles.
Fundamental questions will be addressed such as: can a single dispersion of
core-shell multifunctional nanoparticles be controlled so that it can serve as
either an absorber, or as an emitter of energy? Can this control be achieved in
a passive manner? Can this be done using cost effective, environmentally benign
materials? By coupling radiative property control with the dynamic capabilities
offered by multifunctional nanoparticles innovative passive control methods will
be investigated addressing further questions such as: Can volumetric changes be
effected with changes in temperature? How many times can the dispersion go
through the reversible volume change process? What are the fundamental
structure-property relationships in these core-shell materials that give rise to
changes in absorbance and how can this relationship be tuned?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project come from the
technological opportunities that may be enabled by developing dynamically
controllable radiative properties within the proposed nanoparticle dispersions.
One potential system that may result from such a system is a dual-use solar
thermal collector and night-sky radiator. The use of nanoparticles acting as
direct absorption receivers has been shown to offer improved efficiencies over
conventional surface-based receivers. Another intriguing option is the ability
to create a thermo-optical switch. Such a switch would allow for creating a
liquid filter that at times is transparent while at other times could be opaque.
Another impact lies in the direction of undergraduate research and the
recruitment of under-represented minority.