* 1262090
* Orographic Influences on Lake-Effect Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,980.00

The Ontario Winter (OW) Lake-effect Systems (LeS) field campaign will involve
multiple university and non-profit organizational groups who week to better
understand mechanisms controlling the timing and location of heavy snowfall and
associated cloud structures over and around the U.S. Great Lakes region.
Observational assets to be deployed during OWLeS include the University of
Wyoming King Air, the CSWR Doppler on Wheels mobile radars, multiple sounding
systems, the Millersville University Profiling System, the UAH Mobile Integrated
Profiling System, and a variety of other surface in-situ instruments. The focus
of this particular research team's activities is on the intersection of LeS and
influences of higher terrain, e.g. as represented by the Tug Hill Plateau region
of upstate New York. They will make use of climatological analysis, field
research, real-data numerical modeling and idealized large-eddy simulations to
address two overarching questions related to LeS: 1) How does the interplay
between environmental conditions, cloud processes, lake shape and size, and
terrain scale and geometry affect orographic precipitation enhancement during
lake-effect storms?; and 2) Under what conditions does orography modify the
morphology of LeS and the generation, distribution, and intensity of
precipitation over surrounding lowland areas?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
regions of study will be areas around the Great Salt Lake and the Tug Hill
Plateau downwind of Lake Ontario. This team plans to contribute two snow
observation stations and a deployable rawinsounding system to OWLeS field
effort. The intellectual merit of this effort is centered on evaluation of the
following three main hypotheses: 1) The height of the capping inversion or
stable layer relative to the downstream barrier crest regulates orographic
precipitation enhancement and the lowland to mountain precipitation ratio; 2)
Ice particle growth and fallout from the lake-effect system and boundary layer
turbulence are important contributors to orographic precipitation in unblocked
lake-effect events; and 3) Large lake-land temperature contrasts and associated
land-breeze convergence yield lake-dominated events, whereas terrain-dominated
events occur during periods with weaker lake-land temperature contrasts. Broader
impacts of the project will include the participation of undergraduate students
in data collection, education and training of two graduate students, one of
which is drawn from an underrepresented group in atmospheric sciences, and
various outreach activities. This research has the potential to contribute to
improved prediction of lake-effect heavy snow storm events, which would in turn
support both societal and economic benefits.