* 1262414
* ABI Development: The Arabidopsis Information Portal
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Christopher Town, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,992,581.00

The small plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a "model organism" that is studied in
great depth as a model for other plants. This project will develop the
Arabidopsis Information Portal (AIP), a new resource to bring together the ever-
increasing amounts of Arabidopsis data into a single, user-friendly location
using the latest web technologies and web services. It will adopt a modular,
federated model which ensures that responsibility for generation and maintenance
of valuable data remains in the hands of the individual data providers and
spreads the burden of supporting such resources across a potentially wider range
of funding agencies and countries. The AIP will be developed by a team with deep
experience in scientific infrastructure, data integration, and community
engagement, and will take advantage of significant NSF investments in the plant
biology research community. Key elements of the new AIP include the development
of modular, community-extensible web-based interface that will include user work
spaces that can be configured with data retrieval, analysis, and visualization
applications, implementation of an Arabidopsis-specific instance of InterMine, a
data integration platform that is widely accepted in the animal model organism
database community, and the design and construction of a web services layer that
facilitates data access, integration with iPlant Collaborative resources,
federation with other data providers, and development of analytical workflows.
The project will implement a sustainability strategy that embraces adoption of
existing scientific infrastructure, use of virtualization, federated provision
of data, collaborative development of new resources, and pursuit of alternative
funding sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arabidopsis thaliana has been recognized
as a model organism for plant research for many decades and was the first plant
species to have a fully sequenced genome. For the past twelve years, The
Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) has served a large, worldwide community
of research scientists, educators and students as a central resource collecting,
curating and disseminating information about the organism's genome, genes,
mutants and other information. The TAIR database receives over 36,000 unique
visitors and 1.8 million page views per month. With the retirement of TAIR, the
AIP will take on a similar role but with a new spectrum of responsibilities. In
addition to providing the community with facile access to broader and richer
data sets, including genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic
and phenomic data, the AIP will cooperate with the iPlant project to provide
access to a sophisticated suite of tools that can be used to analyze, visualize,
and interpret the data. The AIP will continue the TAIR model of educational
engagement with the plant science community and with students and educators at
the K-12, Community College and 4 year college level. It will provide reviews
and demonstrations of the developing AIP functionalities at appropriate national
meetings and host workshops for potential developers of new tools and resources.
Not only will AIP modernize the bioinformatics capacity of the Arabidopsis
community, it will provide a foundation for multi-agency, multi-national
collaboration in building and funding biological informatics capabilities.