* 1262754
* Collaborative Proposal: BRIDGES: Building Resources through Integrating Disciplines for Group Effectiveness in Science
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Theresa Lant, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2017
* USD 189,050.00

Finding solutions for many of society's most challenging problems requires the
collaboration and integration of teams of individuals from diverse fields of
science. Millions of dollars are spent in the public and private sectors to
support research collaborations among scientists who possess the breadth and
depth of expertise to address these complex problems. An increasingly prevalent
approach to integrating diverse expertise is the use of interdisciplinary
science teams. Although interdisciplinary scientific collaboration has many
success stories, it is also true that in many cases these teams fail to
successfully integrating the knowledge needed to address a problem. The goal of
knowledge integration among diverse scientists is often elusive due to the make-
up of the teams, lack of understanding about best practices for managing
collaborations, and team leaders who are scientific experts but have not been
trained to lead diverse teams of professionals. The consequence can be a costly
investment in scientific endeavors that do not reap the expected benefits. It is
critical that interdisciplinary science teams have the capability to collaborate
and integrate their knowledge. A team's integrative capacity is a core
competence necessary for these teams to perform successfully. Integrative
capacity is a capability that is sustained through an interactive system linking
social, psychological, and cognitive processes and emergent states in the team
that can provide them with the resources needed to succeed. This research
investigates how the development of a team's integrative capacity and subsequent
knowledge outcomes are impacted by: (1) boundary-spanning leadership behaviors
and (2) communication structuring interventions. Exposure to these interventions
can nurture team members' trans-disciplinary intellectual orientation, the
enduring values, beliefs, skills, and behaviors that support collaboration with
teammates who have diverse disciplinary backgrounds, which in turn fosters the
development of integrative capacity.

Broader Impact. Given the reliance of society on interdisciplinary science teams
for advancement in key areas such as medicine, education, security, and
technology, the development of theoretical and practical knowledge about how to
build and maintain integrative capacity in these teams is imperative. This
research directly supports the aims of the SciSIP program and the NSF by
investigating the structures, processes, and interventions that facilitate the
development of usable knowledge by interdisciplinary science teams. First, this
study sheds light on how leader and communication interventions can enhance a
team's integrative capacity and team members' trans-disciplinary intellectual
orientation, both of which can support teams working across boundaries to
generate new solutions to complex problems. Second, training material and
digital metrics developed in this research can be leveraged to foster improved
scientific collaboration in teams beyond those included in this study. The
insights gained from this research can foster improved scientific collaboration
and the resulting scientific breakthroughs that are the promise of
interdisciplinary science teams.