* 1262621
* ABI Innovation: Target - template structural and functional relationships in modeling of protein - protein interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ilya Vakser, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 757,958.00

Traditional approaches to prediction of the structures of protein-protein
complexes (protein-protein docking) sample the binding modes with no regard to
similar experimentally determined structures (templates) of protein-protein
complexes. The docking problem assumes the knowledge of the participating
proteins structures. Thus, it provides the possibility of aligning the
structures of the proteins and the template complexes. The progress in the
development of template-based docking and the vast experience in template-based
modeling of individual proteins show that, generally, such approaches are more
reliable than the free modeling. The key aspect of this modeling paradigm is the
availability of the templates. The current common perception is that due to the
difficulties in experimental structure determination of protein-protein
complexes, the pool of docking templates is insignificant, and thus a broad
application of template-based docking is possible only at some future time.
However, the results of a recent large scale, systematic study show that,
surprisingly, in spite of the limited number of protein-protein complexes in the
Protein Data Bank, docking templates can be found for complexes representing
almost all known protein-protein interactions, provided the components
themselves have a known structure or can be homology-built. This finding
dramatically expands our ability to model protein interactions, and has far-
reaching, paradigm-changing implications for the protein docking field in
general. The major goal of this project is to investigate target-template
structural and functional relationships and develop corresponding approaches to
modeling of protein-protein interactions. The Objectives of the research are:
(1) generate multiple diverse sets of structural templates according to
different structural and functional criteria, (2) investigate target-template
structural and functional relationships in protein-protein interactions (PPI)
modeling, and (3) implement a publicly available database for template-based
models. Existing sets of structural templates for PPI modeling are based on
structure and/or sequence criteria. Libraries of templates based on a broad
range of available information, including oligomeric state, molecular function,
biological process, cellular localization, and physicochemical properties, will
be generated. Representative diverse sets of protein-protein targets will be
modeled by different structural alignment approaches, using different template
pools. Target-template matching scores will be systematically analyzed and
optimized. Target refinement procedures will be designed and implemented. The
modeling approaches will be systematically validated on comprehensive benchmark
sets of X-ray and modeled structures. The structures of protein-protein
complexes from PPI sets will be generated, validated, and provided in a
database, which will become a publicly available source of structural
information on PPI. The advancement of the template-based modeling of PPI will
transform the field of protein-protein docking by radically changing the docking
paradigm, from currently universally accepted free docking, to comparative
modeling. This will make possible much more accurate and reliable modeling of
protein complexes, opening new frontiers in biological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be utilized by
the larger research community interested in studying protein interactions in
biological systems. They will be included in Bioinformatics course materials.
Minority students and women will be involved in different parts of the proposed
research. The PI's Laboratory is one of the centers of bioinformatics research
and educational activities on campus, involving faculty, research staff,
postdoctoral fellows, and students. The participants of the proposed project
will be actively presenting their results at various multidisciplinary
conferences, as they have done in the past. The PI's bi-annual Modeling of
Protein Interactions meeting is an important event in the Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics field, bringing together top experts on the broad subject of
this proposal. The meeting provides a unique opportunity for the young
scientists - students and postdocs - to prominently present their research and
to interact with the leaders of the field. The results of the project will
significantly contribute to the national and international community-wide
efforts to structurally characterize protein interactome. The outcome of the
proposed research will enhance research capabilities in fundamental biological
research, biotechnology, and other areas of molecular biology, including
interpretation of information encoded in genomes.