* 1262750
* REU Site: Chemistry of Materials for Renewable Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2017
* USD 277,335.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site led by Professors
Andrew Greenberg and Robert Hamers, both at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
The REU Site entitled "Chemistry of Materials for Renewable Energy" (CMRE REU)
will fund 11 to 12 undergraduate students for a 10 week summer research
experiences. Students will conduct individual research projects focused on
chemical research applied to problems in renewable energy. The CMRE REU program
will help students to strengthen their written and oral communication skills
through proposal presentations, mid-experience report writing, and poster
presentations. A novel aspect of the CMRE REU program is the encouragement of
students to participate in an outreach experience with the Institute for
Chemical Education's (ICE) "Fun with Chemistry Camp" to teach 5th-8th students
about solar energy. To ensure proper mentoring and development of CMRE REU
students, this project includes a mentoring workshop for graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, and faculty working directly with the REU Program.

Broader Impacts of the award involves young scientists who will be exposed to
modern research methods and tools as part of their training. This REU site aims
to provide cutting-edge research training in the chemical sciences to these
students who might not otherwise have this opportunity. The research projects in
chemistry will have an impact in the areas of energy and sustainability. The
diverse student cohort participating in research at this site will be well-
prepared for graduate school, and eventual employment as part of the country's
technical workforce.