* 1262451
* ABI Innovation: Querying Massive Dynamic Biological Network Databases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Tamer Kahveci, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 492,584.00

Understanding the functions served by different biological entities, such as
genes, proteins and metabolites, through interactions in biological networks has
been a prime goal in biological studies. One promising way to reach this goal is
to perform comparative analysis among biological networks. Recently, there has
been significant work in collecting and constructing biological networks. As a
result, enormous amount of network data is already available. Biological
databases today are very large in size and dynamic in nature. This project aims
to develop scalable algorithms and tools that enable comparative analysis of
very large and dynamic biological network databases. More specifically, it
addresses the following problems. i) Develop scalable and accurate algorithms
that allow comparing pairs of biological networks quickly while ensuring
mathematically provable confidence bounds on the optimality of the results. ii)
Develop efficient mining methods tailored to find small sets of representative
subnetworks in massive sets of alternative biological network topologies. iii)
Develop dynamic indexing methods for searching subnetworks in large collections
of biological databases that can adapt to changes in the database (i.e.,
insertion of new networks, interactions or molecules as well as removal of
existing ones) and the query network
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have both practical
and theoretical impact. The developed methods will enable mapping subnetworks of
different networks with similar functions. This will improve our understanding
of how organisms operate through interactions. The primary impact of this
project will be on applications that involve biological networks. It will also
impact the studies on other fields such as social networks, distributed
computing and homeland security, where a set of operations depend on each other
through a complex network. The PI will organize workshops and seminars to
disseminate this project throughout the research community. Finally, the code
developed as a part of this project will serve as an excellent educational tool
to analyze and query biological networks.