* 1262480
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RCN EukHiTS: Eukaryotic biodiversity research using High-Throughput Sequencing
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Eisen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 296,485.00

The University of New Hampshire and the University of California, Davis are
awarded a grant to develop a Research Coordination Network focused on eukaryotic
biodiversity research using high-throughput sequencing (RCN EukHiTS).
Microscopic eukaryote species (organisms <1mm, such as nematodes, fungi,
protists, etc.) are abundant and ubiquitous-yet invisible to the naked eye-in
every ecosystem on earth. The biodiversity and geographic distributions for most
of these species are largely unknown, and represent one of the major knowledge
gaps in biology. High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies now allow for deep
examination of virtually all microscopic organisms present in an environmental
sample. For microbial eukaryote taxa, en masse biodiversity assessment using
traditional loci (rRNA genes) can be conducted at a fraction of the time and
cost required for traditional (morphological) approaches. Despite this promise,
current bottlenecks include the lack of useful distributed tools for analysis
and common data standards to allow global comparisons across individual studies
as well as missing links between molecules and morphology. The EukHiTS RCN will
focus on developing community capabilities for computational approaches focused
on eukaryotic taxa and the infrastructure, both cyber and human, needed for
effective interpretation of large high-throughput datasets. The steering
committee of RCN EukHiTS includes expertise from computational biology,
functional genomics, computer science, taxonomy, ecology, database resource
management, and representatives of end user communities to ensure that all
aspects of the community are well-represented.

RCN EukHiTs will offer extensive scientific outreach, education and training,
including a heavy focus on technology and social media tools. Key network
activities will be devoted to training the next generation of scientists to take
up the challenges of global biodiversity assessment; a strong focus on
undergraduate opportunities ("Bioinformatics Bootcamps" and institutional
research exchanges) will enable students to develop their research skill set
through interdisciplinary training, and gain career insight though planned
social interactions with established researchers at different career stages.
Research coordination activities will include yearly catalysis meetings (held as
satellite events to well-attended, interdisciplinary scientific conferences),
working groups, and RCN-sponsored conference symposia. An RCN portal website
will disseminate RCN activities and inform the wider community of eukaryotic
biodiversity research priorities and long-term goals. Similarly, web-based
content, including blog posts and Twitter feeds, will serve to engage public
audiences and raise awareness of new DNA sequencing technologies and the role of
microbial eukaryotes in natural ecosystems.