* 1262048
* Analysis of Mobile Doppler Radar and Lidar Data of Severe Convective Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 654,934.00

This research project seeks to further our basic physical understanding of
severe convective storms and tornadoes, with an emphasis on tornadoes produced
by supercells. The overall goal will be accomplished through the analysis of
data collected by state-of-the-art mobile Doppler radars and a mobile Doppler
lidar (TWOLF: Truck-Mounted Wind Observing Lidar Facility). The former include:
1) a rapid-scan (mechanically scanning), polarimetric, X-band radar (RaXPol); 2)
a rapid-scan, phasedarray, X-band radar (MWR-05XP); and 3) a high-resolution,
W-band radar (University of Massachusetts-Amherst's W-band
radar).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the radar data to be analyzed includes
datasets collected during VORTEX2 (The 2nd Verification of the Origin of
Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment) in the springs of 2009 and 2010. The remainder
of the radar data to be analyzed include RaXPol and MWR-05XP data collected a
during a small, local, field program during the spring of 2011, RaXPol data
collected during the spring of 2012, RaXPol and TWOLF/MWR 05XP data collected
during the spring of 2013, and RaXPol data collected during the springs of 2014
and 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Using the rapid-
scan radars, the evolution of vortex signatures in time and space will be
explored in both supercells that produce tornadoes and those that do not. This
information can be used to help assess the mechanism(s) of tornado formation.
The polarimetric radar will be used to infer information about microphysical
processes within supercells and how they might relate to storm structure and
evolution, and tornado formation. The high-resolution W-band radar data already
collected during VORTEX2 will be further analyzed to document the fine-scale
structure of tornadoes and tornado-like vortices. TWOLF will be used mainly to
measure the vertical variation in winds in and near tornadoes and mesocyclones
in the lowest 100 m, an undertaking, owing to ground clutter contamination, that
is difficult with radars and is extremely challenging by in-situ probing. Very
little is known about the boundary layer in tornadoes or under storms when they
form. The character of the boundary layer is thought to be a very important
factor in determining the potential intensity of intense vortices such as
tornadoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that forecasts and warnings of tornadoes and other severe weather phenomena such
as large hail and straight-line winds will be improved with an increase in a
physical understanding of them. The results from this project may be useful to
the National Weather Service and private forecasting companies, and could help
mitigate property damage and save lives. Graduate students will be trained and
become part of the pool of the next-generation of researchers.