* 1262075
* REU Site: Multifunctional Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* David Lederman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 03/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With funding provided by the National Science Foundation's
Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry, West Virginia University will
host a Multifunctional Nanomaterials Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site. This project focuses on solving fundamental engineering and
scientific problems related to surfaces, toxicity and fluid transport in a
variety of configurations both experimentally and theoretically. Projects will
focus on multifunctional nanomaterials and fabrication of complex devices with
applications to biometrics, environmental monitoring, early disease detection,
and energy efficiency. The approach includes: use of scanning probe acceleration
microscopy to study nanoscale mechanical responses of biologically relevant
surfaces; synthesis of fullerene fragments as templates for carbon nanotubes;
use of ultrafast laser spectroscopy to characterize and coherently control
nanophotonic materials for optical detection and light harvesting devices; use
of microsurgery to assess microvascular toxicity after exposure to engineered
nanomaterials; cell-based monitoring assays and characterization of cell fate to
assess toxicity of nanomaterials; modeling of liver functions using P450 enzymes
attached to self-assembled monolayers with subsequent elucidation of the role of
substrate binding in controlling electron transfer and enzyme activity of P450;
and fabrication and characterization of a) multiferroic thin films for
integration into memory devices, b) non-mechanical valves composed of nanogels
for point-of-care testing, and c) microfluidic polydimethylsiloxane tissue
bioreactors for characterization of carbon nanotubes and their chronic effects
on lung epithelial cells. REU participants carry out their research in
collaboration with faculty and graduate students and are trained on modern
scientific equipment (AFM, X-ray reflectivity and diffraction, capillary
electrophoresis, photolithography, SEM, etc.) and/or in the use of computer
modeling software. The project includes training that is important to the
development of future scientific leaders, e.g. scientific ethics, laboratory
safety, communication, collaboration and technical presentation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Undergraduate student
participants (10 per year) in this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site are integrated into scientific investigations in order to train the next
generation of U.S. scientists and engineers. This project primarily supports
participation of women, underrepresented minorities, U.S. Armed Forces veterans
and persons from economically depressed areas (e.g., Appalachia). Involvement
will improve the likelihood that participants will enroll in graduate-level
science and engineering education programs, thereby improving the scientific
workforce of the U.S. Participants are provided with a comprehensive program
that rapidly moves them toward research independence. This preparation includes
day-to-day research work on nanomaterials-related projects intermingled with
training in: the research process and cutting-edge scientific instrumentation;
laboratory safety and scientific ethics; and communication and collaboration.
Research projects are geared to the eventual development of new hybrid
electronic and photonic devices that will lead to a new generation of biometric,
environmental monitoring, early disease detection, and energy efficient device
applications.