* 1262182
* ABI Innovation:   Robotics-inspired modeling and design of proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Tanja Kortemme, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2016
* USD 806,177.00

The University of California San Francisco is awarded grant advance approaches
that can capture and engineer structural changes in proteins. This is important
both to make designs more accurate and to engineer functions that require
structural changes. Computational protein design has enormous potential to
transform many areas of science and engineering by creating proteins with useful
functions: new enzymes to build biological synthesis pathways that can produce
important chemicals and fuels; selective signaling molecules that can process
biological information; and new protein materials with sophisticated functions
mimicking their biological counterparts. This research seeks to develop
computational methods to ultimately make such complex protein functions
designable. Specifically, project will produce (i) methods to model changes in
enzymatic specificity and improve the design of active sites; (ii) methods to
model and design signaling proteins that act as switches; and (iii) benchmarked
and documented protocols available to biologists and biological engineers.

Recent design successes that created novel enzymes, protein-protein
interactions, and nanomaterials are spurring both academic and industrial
interest in proteins with modified, new, and useful functions. Combined with a
considerable expansion of technological capabilities (such as large-scale de
novo construction and characterization of biological "parts"), there will be an
increasing need for more predictive design methods, such as the ones developed
here, to create proteins with new and more complex activities. Applications span
broad areas including computational and structural biology, metabolic
engineering, and synthetic and cellular biology. The new methods developed under
this grant will be used in graduate courses and team projects in molecular
engineering designed to foster collaboration between students from the
biological and physical/engineering sciences, as well as in undergraduate and
high-school research activities at UCSF. Improved computational methods will be
disseminated broadly as source code via the Rosetta suite of computational tools
(www.rosettacommons.org) and via easily accessible web applications.