* 1262930
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduates in Algebra and Discrete Mathematics at Auburn University
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Peter Johnson, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 202,758.00

Eight undergraduates will assemble for eight weeks at Auburn University in each
of the summers 2013-2015 to conduct research in areas of algebra and discrete
mathematics. Our aim is to provide participants with an authentic research
experience and get them excited about graduate school and research careers. The
essential part of our program is that we lay out a lot of research problems, and
participants can work on any one of them with faculty, graduate students, other
participants, or by themselves. They can work on more than one thing; they can
work on questions imported from elsewhere, or on questions of their own
devising. We conduct the program this way because we believe that this is
essentially how mathematical research has always been done for at least 2500
years. So the pattern of activities will therefore be as in our previous REU
programs: intensive introduction to problems and problem areas in the first two
to three weeks, capped by an obligatory "ice-breaker" presentation by each
participant in the third week, followed by a "research institute" in the
remaining five weeks, capped by a final presentation by each participant at the
end of the final week. During the research institute phase, there will be at
least one research presentation every day by faculty and graduate students of
our Department of Mathematics and Statistics, visiting luminaries, and the
participants themselves, but the main feature of that phase will be research
carried on by the participants in various combinations with faculty, graduate
students, and themselves. Publishable results will be written up either by the
participants themselves, with advice from the project directors, or, in the case
of joint work with faculty, by a faculty member in consultation with the
participant(s). Communication will be maintained with participants after the
program ends for the purpose of conducting further research, presenting results
at national and international conferences, recruiting for subsequent programs or
graduate study, and for assessing the impact of the program on their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the measure of mathematical discoveries made by
the participants, we have been quite successful. By the time all the results
from our 2011 and 2012 programs have been published, there will be well over 30
papers in refereed journals and numerous others still in preparation arising
from our nine programs. However, the success we aspire to is not so easily
quantifiable: we want the participants to emerge from the program enlightened as
to what mathematical research might be like, that they may better decide what
they want to do with their lives. So far, around half of the alumni have gone on
to graduate study in mathematics, and another significant fraction has gone to
graduate school in computer science, statistics, or mathematics education.