* 1262126
* REU Site: Bug Wars: A Collaborative Software Testing Research Experience for Undergraduates
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Renee Bryce, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/29/2016
* USD 300,699.00

This funding establishes a new CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;(REU) site at Utah State University. The project,
called&lt;br/&gt;Bug Wars, exposes students to research on software testing and
AI&lt;br/&gt;planning through both competition and collaboration. This project
will&lt;br/&gt;create new knowledge about user-session-based testing, model-
based&lt;br/&gt;testing with AI planning, and the combination of these two
techniques&lt;br/&gt;as applied to web applications. A novel feature of this REU
is that&lt;br/&gt;it encourages both competition and collaboration. The students
initially&lt;br/&gt;split into two teams that strive to find the most faults in
web application&lt;br/&gt;systems under test. One team collects, reduces, and
prioritizes&lt;br/&gt;user-session-based test suites. A second team uses machine
learning to&lt;br/&gt;build models of the software and AI planning to generate
test suites.&lt;br/&gt;Students compete to show the merits of their approach on
the same systems&lt;br/&gt;by considering the sizes and fault detection
effectiveness of their&lt;br/&gt;test suites. The students then critically
discuss their work and propose&lt;br/&gt;combining the different approaches to
further improve effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are that twenty-four students over a&lt;br/&gt;three-year period have
the opportunity to participate in a supportive&lt;br/&gt;environment that
encourages them to pursue graduate studies in Computer&lt;br/&gt;Science. The
students are better prepared for graduate school as they gain&lt;br/&gt;basic
research skills, including the formulation of research
questions,&lt;br/&gt;design of experiments, critical evaluation, and written and
oral&lt;br/&gt;communication.