* 1262189
* ABI Innovation: Protein Functional Sites Identification Using Sequence Variation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Daisuke Kihara, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 480,195.00

Purdue University is awarded a grant to develop novel computational methods that
identify functional regions of proteins by revealing mutations patterns, which
are constrained by functional requirements. Protein sequences and the tertiary
structures have been accumulated in an exponential pace partly due to large-
scale genome sequencing and structural genomics projects. An urgent task for
bioinformatics includes the development of methods for annotating the flood of
new sequences and structures with their functions and the location of sites
where these functions occur. Two types of methods will be developed: The first
type of methods examine amino acid mutations specific to known functional
regions of proteins. The second type of methods identifies positions in proteins
that mutate simultaneously in a mutually constrained fashion. A strong advantage
of the methods is that it is general enough so that it can be easily extended to
predict many types of functional sites and structure features of proteins. The
project capitalizes on tremendous efforts and progress made by experimental
sequence and structure determination by developing a new generation of
computational tools that detect structured variation, rather than conventional
conservation, in protein sequences.

The project incorporates the concept of the structured variation into the field
of biological sequence analysis. Because the methodology is general and
versatile, the method can be applied to other bioinformatics methods, such as
sequence alignments, protein structure prediction methods, and single nucleotide
polymorphism analysis. Graduate and undergraduate students in biological
sciences and computer science will be trained in cross-listed courses among
several departments. Several existing programs at Purdue for recruiting minority
students and undergraduate students will contribute to broad participation in
the project. Overall the proposed project leverages Purdue University's efforts
in interdisciplinary computational life science and engineering. For further
information about this project visit the PI's lab website at
http://kiharalab.org.