* 1262814
* CI-ADDO-EN: Smart Home in a Box: Creating a Large Scale, Long Term Repository for Smart Environment Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

There is considerable current interest in developing smart environment
technologies. Such efforts present research challenges in, and integration of
research outcomes from, diverse disciplines including artificial intelligence,
pervasive computing, robotics, interfaces, middleware, and sensor networks. The
lack of availability of large-scale sharable data sets from smart environments
is a major stumbling block for rapid advances in this area. Against this
background, this project aims to develop and deploy a data and tool repository
needed by the smart environment research community.

The anticipated results of this infrastructure project include 1) a streamlined,
do-it-yourself smart home kit, 2) a web interface to upload, access, and
annotate smart environment data, 3) meta data including functional assessment
scores and energy usage, and 4) software tools to recognize, visualize, and
analyze home-based behaviors. The investigators aim to assess the impact of the
resulting repository (CASAS) using measures such as number and diversity of
researchers utilizing the repository, number of datasets and tools contributed
to the repository, research, education, and commercial advances related to the
repository, and publication citations to the repository.

Broader impacts of the project include (i) the do-it-yourself smart home
toolkit, data sets and software tools that enable research and educational
efforts by a large community of researchers in artificial intelligence,
pervasive computing, robotics, interfaces, middleware, and sensor networks; (ii)
enhanced opportunities for researchers in cognitive psychology, gerontology, and
sociology to contribute to interdisciplinary research in smart environments; and
(iii) enhanced research-based training opportunities for students from
underrepresented groups. The datasets, software tools and educational materials
that result from this work will be made available as part of the CASAS
repository at http://ailab.wsu.edu/casas/.