* 1262145
* Strengthening Forensic Science Through Connections with the Analytical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Robert Cooks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2015
* USD 76,500.00

This workshop, sponsored by the Chemistry Division, will address questions
related to basic science and education posed in a 2009 National Research Council
report entitled "Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States."
Specifically, the workshop will focus on aspects relating to the design,
methodology, instrumentation, data processing, and data interpretation, for
chemical measurements, and to the educational and research infrastructure that
prepares people to be effective in this endeavor. A fundamental question that
will be raised is whether analytical measurements, especially chemical
measurements as applied to societally mandated measurement tasks including
forensic science, have failed to keep up with demand. Questions to be addressed
include whether (i) current analytical chemistry methods are intrinsically too
slow; (ii) developed and promulgated methods are inappropriately rigid; (iii)
the data being recorded is wasted by going un-interpreted; (iv) rugged and
automated methodologies can replace current methods without sacrificing
analytical performance; and (v) appropriate data handling and advanced
computational methods can minimize data acquisition time and decrease analysis
costs. These important general issues are basic to the fabric of modern
technology and sometimes underpinning continued scientific progress. These
questions will be examined at this workshop with particular attention to
examples taken from trace chemical analysis as represented in forensic science.
The workshop will also seek to help catalyze the emerging analytical science of
in-situ, high density measurements, especially those which provide rapid, direct
measurement on complex samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing both the
practice of, and education in, forensic science, the proposed workshop will be
both timely and sufficiently focused to have impact in those areas of forensic
science most closely allied to analytical chemistry - instrumental analysis and
chemometrics. It is anticipated that a strengthened relationship between
forensic and analytical science should be mutually rewarding - closer ties
between forensic practice and academic research will strengthen both fields. The
enthusiasm of students for forensic science can provide a vehicle to increasing
enthusiasm for and interest in science as a whole. The workshop will seek to
develop specific suggestions for programs that align education in forensics with
modern rapid analytical chemistry. Methods for measuring outcomes will be
elicited from workshop attendees and included in the formal workshop report, its
most significant product.