* 1262593
* ABI Innovation:   Co-evolution of domains, genes and species:  models, algorithms, and software
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Marie Dannie Durand, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2017
* USD 717,566.00

An award is made to Carnegie Mellon University to develop evolutionary models,
algorithms, and software for multidomain protein families. These families evolve
through the insertion, duplication, and deletion of domains, sequences that
encode discrete structural units that are the building blocks of protein
function. The emergence of novel domain combinations drives the evolution of
functional variation and interaction specificity in protein families that
perform core molecular functions. Multidomain families are of central importance
throughout life. In bacteria, multidomain families encode the two-component
kinase signaling systems that are the back-bone of cellular communication. In
eukaryotes, multidomain families are implicated in tissue repair, cell death,
inflammation response, antigen recognition, and innate immunity. This project
will develop a computational framework for reconstructing the evolutionary
history of a multidomain family, including the domain events that gave rise to
present-day proteins, the ancestral domain architectures from which they
evolved, and a tree describing the history of the family as a whole. This new
framework will comprise a formal, event-based model of multidomain family
evolution; algorithms for inferring domain events and the ancestral domain
content of a given family; and an implementation of these algorithms in
prototype software for inference and visualization of multidomain protein
histories. Because this approach considers domain sequence, as well as domain
content, and incorporates an explicit model of events, it promises a dramatic
increase in accuracy and detail. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this
project will enable evolutionary biologists to investigate the processes of
protein evolution, bench biologists to identify appropriate experimental
targets, and cell biologists to complement experimental results with
evolutionary analyses. This project will contribute to educational resources
through the development of teaching materials on multidomain evolution for an
undergraduate course, a graduate course, and a workshop on "Developing
Bioinformatics Programs at Minority Schools." This one week workshop is part of
a Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center initiative to develop new bioinformatics
programs at minority-serving institutions. This project will also provide
research training for undergraduate and graduate students at the interface
between biology and computer science.