* 1262852
* REU Site: Valparaiso Experience in Research by Undergraduate Mathematicians
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Lara Pudwell, Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 279,586.00

The Department of Mathematics &amp; Computer Science at Valparaiso University
will host the summer REU site, Valparaiso Experience in Research by
Undergraduate Mathematicians (VERUM). VERUM will recruit nine undergraduate
students each year. These students will work in teams of three for nine weeks on
solving open problems in combinatorics, biomathematics, or statistics. Each
group will work with a different project director who will provide guidance and
feedback to the students on a daily basis. In each project, the participants
will investigate open questions of interest to the larger mathematical
community, and therefore yield potentially publishable results. Most of the
participants will be students from primarily undergraduate institutions who have
not yet decided on a graduate school career path. Therefore we will target
undergraduates for a first research experience in mathematics. Additional
attention will be given to recruiting participants from groups under-represented
in STEM, including first-generation college students since they also will have
had less exposure to academic values and processes than their
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By modeling the research experience of a
mathematician, the program will produce students engaged with, and prepared to
join, the mathematical community. The program will emphasize the professional
development of the students while encouraging them to pursue mathematics related
careers and graduate studies thus increasing the participation of traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. Students will become part of a
small professional group that will provide support during their undergraduate
careers and beyond. As part of the program a graduate student will also act as a
mentor for the participants and the students will visit graduate schools to
learn about the lives of graduate students in different types of institutions.
The students will also be exposed to different areas of mathematics by following
the progress of each research group and by listening to and interacting with
weekly visitors to the program. VERUM participants will increase their
communication and presentation skills through weekly group presentations,
presentations at local and national conferences and through writing a final
project report.