* 1262795
* REU Site:   Models in Evolution, Ecology and Systematics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Jennifer Gleason, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 325,616.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to The
University of Kansas (KU) that will provide research training for 10 students,
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. This REU program is supported by
the NSF's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO REU program). Located within the
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, the program focuses on the use
of models in evolution, ecology and systematics. Students will participate in
independent research projects with a faculty mentor. Projects vary greatly
across the discipline and will be tailored to the student's strengths and
interests in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. Students will conduct full-time
lab research as well as participate in seminars and various workshops, such as
ethics training and responsible conduct in research, professional communication
skills, career opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school
application process. In addition, students will participate in field trips to KU
and Kansas State Research facilities. REU students will have access to a rich
array of individual mentor?s facilities as well as field sites, museum
collections and core facilities such as the electron microscopy lab, DNA core
laboratory, bioinformatics center and a genomics facility. Biology and
mathematics students are encouraged to apply particularly students
underrepresented in STEM fields and from undergraduate institutions or community
colleges. Students are selected based on academic record, research performance,
and potential for outstanding research in evolution, ecology and systematics.
Students will be tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic
field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various means,
including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by
visiting http://eebreu.ku.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jennifer Gleason) or
the co-PI (Dr. Mark Mort) at eebreu@ku.edu.