* 1262346
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy:  Innovation by Users in Emerging Economies and Impacts on Innovation Policy:  Evidence from Mobile Bank
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Serguey Braguinsky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,309.00

Traditionally innovation has been reserved for firms in industrialized nations,
because these firms had access to the resources needed for innovation. However,
in the age of globalization, communication is cheap, information is a commodity,
and global trade increases technological diffusion. As a result, firms and users
in emerging markets get early exposure to the latest technologies and
information that, in combination with access to tools such as mobile phones,
enables them to customize products to solve local needs. Large latent demand in
emerging markets, which results from high need and a sparse offering of products
and services, is a reason to expect increasing invention originating from less
developed countries in the global South.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
studies emerging markets as new sources of innovation and discusses implications
of the diffusion of these innovations for policy. In particular, it looks at
characteristics of emerging markets that enable specific forms of innovation,
such as user innovation and frugal innovation, and also analyzes how this
encourages technology flows from emerging markets to industrialized nations.
This research is structured around three research objectives. First, it explores
whether users in emerging markets innovate. A unique hand-collected dataset on
innovations in the mobile banking industry is used to understand whether users
(as opposed to firms) play a role in service innovation in emerging markets, and
whether those innovations are globally meaningful. Second, the project analyzes
how new types of innovation such as user innovation and frugal innovation are
leading to flows of technology in a reverse direction. In particular it focuses
on South-North diffusion of emerging market innovations as well as different
typologies of the diffusion of user innovations. Despite evidence that a growing
number of new products and services originate in emerging markets, there is a
dearth of innovation research on this topic. Third, a model is proposed ? based
on empirical patterns? that explains how increased access to technology in
combination with latent demand can drive innovation and entry in the South and
how, subsequently, South-North technology diffusion can occur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project will provide insight on the
mechanisms that govern discovery, adoption and diffusion of technology in
emerging markets, a largely understudied area. Because the locus of innovation
is no longer unique to firms in Western countries and is shifting to users and
firms in emerging markets, this is an important topic for both the academic
community and policy makers. This study will contribute significantly because,
while there has been significant research on user innovation in products, there
exists virtually no research on user innovation in services or their diffusion,
yet services often constitute the vast majority of economic activity.
Furthermore, this project develops a data-collection and analysis methodology
that can be applied to follow-on research, especially empirical studies looking
at sources of innovation in services.