* 1262603
* ABI Development: Continued Development of RaptorX Server for Protein Structure and Functional Prediction
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jinbo Xu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2017
* USD 551,238.00

High-throughput sequencing has been producing millions of protein sequences
without solved structures and functional annotations, which raise demand for
computational tools especially user-friendly web servers for protein structure
and functional elucidation. This project will transform RaptorX, a popular
protein structure modeling web server, to one that can also annotate functions
of a protein sequence and the quality of a theoretical protein model in the
absence of the corresponding native structure. The resultant new server will
greatly facilitate the interpretation and proper usage of a theoretical protein
model, just like what E-value does for homology search. The server will also
predict functions of a protein sequence with coverage beyond what can be reached
by native-structure-based methods and accuracy much higher than sequence-based
methods. Ultimately, the project will deliver a long-term sustainable cyber-
infrastructure for protein sequence, structure and functional analysis that
enables transformative biological and biomedical research. This project will
also advance protein structure and functional prediction by developing several
sophisticated computational methods for model quality assessment and functional
prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins play fundamental roles in all
biological processes. Complete description of protein structures and functions
is a fundamental step towards understanding biological life. This project will
benefit a broad range of biological/biomedical applications, such as the study
of plant metabolic pathways, drug design, and bio-energy development. The
research results will be communicated to the broader community through a variety
of venues (wiki, talks, papers and posters). The software will be freely
available to the public. Since its first release in August 2011, RaptorX has
processed dozens of thousands of protein modeling and analysis jobs for more
than 3500 users around the world. After the new RaptorX is implemented, it will
contribute much more to the broader community. This project will also contribute
to computer science by studying machine learning problems inspired from protein
bioinformatics. This project shall enrich and disseminate knowledge on protein
bioinformatics, machine learning and web programming. It will also train
minority students, future K-12 science teachers and nationwide students in the
Illinois online bioinformatics program. All involved students will receive
training in the intersection of computer science, molecular biology, biophysics,
and biochemistry. The research results will be integrated into course materials,
which will be used in the classes and also freely available to the public.