* 1262329
* NeTS: Small: Control of Partially Observable Wireless Networks: Fundamental Limits, Optimal Algorithms and Practical Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/16/2012,07/31/2017
* Lei Ying, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

State dependent resource allocation is critical for improving the network
efficiency. Over the past two decades, remarkable progress has been made on the
design of wireless networks with maximum throughput and low latency by using
state dependent resource allocation algorithms. However, most of these works
assume the network is fully observable and the network state information is
perfectly known. This assumption is becoming increasingly questionable because
of the multi-carrier technology, which makes it extremely expensive to obtain
the complete network state information, and transmission delays and measurement
errors, which make it impossible to know the exact network state. With wireless
networks become pervasive in our daily life, new theories and algorithms are
needed for partially observable wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI models a partially observable wireless network as a partially
observable Markov process, and then applies the framework of Markov decision
processes (MDP). While important structure properties may be discovered using
the MDP framework, finding optimal solutions in general is an NP-hard problem.
To overcome this difficulty, this project uses drift-based competitive analysis
and drift-based large-deviations analysis for quantifying fundamental limits and
deriving optimal or near optimal algorithms. The project is expected to lead to
breakthroughs in managing partially observable wireless networks. Fundamental
limits of partially observable wireless networks, novel resource allocation
algorithms with provable throughput and latency guarantees, and implementations
on a real-world test bed will have a significant impact on the design and
implementation of future wireless networks.