* 1262637
* ABI Innovation:   An approach to construct a systems-scale predictive model of a gene regulatory network complete with mechanisms at single nucleotide resolution
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,047,098.00

The Institute of Systems Biology is awarded a grant to apply principles of
systems biology and the power of parallel computing to the advancement of
computational and experimental methods that can very rapidly delineate the gene
networks in any organism. By integrating genome sequence analysis with the
analysis of large amounts of genome-wide ("high-throughput") experimental data,
the computational methods being developed as part of this project will reverse
engineer the network models. These models will be predictive and will have
extraordinary detail (down to the level of biomolecular mechanisms) that could
drive rational improvements in the gene networks, with predictable outcomes. It
will also uncover fundamental principles underlying the ability of even the
simplest microbes to deal with complex environmental changes. While the work
will be performed on two organisms - E. coli, a well-known, widely studied
bacterium, and Halobacterium salinarum, an extremophile that thrives in high
salt environments, it is readily applicable to all sequenced bacteria, algae,
and other organisms that are of huge industrial, agricultural, and medical
importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training a postdoctoral fellow
and a graduate student in the methodology of systems modeling, this project will
develop inquiry-driven, standards-based, high school (HS) educational materials.
These education materials will incorporate concepts and methods for inferring
and mathematically representing (modeling) a system as a network of interacting
parts, which will help students understand and critically assess complex and
important phenomena, e.g. how climate change can reach a tipping point to have
cascading effects throughout an ecosystem. The education materials will
incorporate a systems approach, and will be developed together with local
science educators. While the goal of the module will be to educate students in
various methods for statistical modeling and model inference, it will also
attempt to reinforce the notion that computers do not always have the right
answer, that models are only as good as the data they are based upon, and that
statistical confidence of predictions must be rigorously assessed to avoid wrong
conclusions. The scientists funded by this project will participate in
development of educational materials through direct interactions with HS
students and educators. For further information about this project and its
products visit the Institute?s website at https://www.systemsbiology.org.