* 1262744
* REU Site in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Sanford Research and Augustana College
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* David Pearce, Sanford Research/USD
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2017
* USD 352,535.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Sanford Research/USD in collaboration with Augustana College to provide research
training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. The
Augustana College REU Site in Cell and Molecular Biology focuses on cell and
molecular biology, with hypothesis-driven projects that include investigation of
cell signaling events via characterization of macromolecular interactions and
proteomic, genomic, and metabolomic changes across a variety of model organisms.
REU students will directly contribute to the understanding of these areas of
research. Sanford Research and Augustana College have 19 research mentors with
exciting, hands-on projects that range from neuroscience to yeast biology. Each
project allows students to learn modern molecular methods. Students will also
gain valuable experience by attending career development workshops that cover
professional integrity in research, the graduate school application process,
careers in science, GRE-preparation, the importance of increasing diversity in
research, and how to balance family and career. Students will give an oral
presentation of their project at the beginning of the summer, a poster
presentation at the end of the summer, and are encouraged to present at and
attend national meetings. REU students will be exposed to the cutting-edge
facilities and equipment that are housed amongst the various departments and
cores at Sanford Research and Augustana College. Recruitment is carried out
directly via faculty mentor visits to the students' institutions and attendance
at undergraduate conferences, along with email and social media, with an aim to
reach out to students who would not usually be exposed to such an opportunity.
Students are selected based upon academic record, work ethic, scientific
potential, and evidence of enthusiasm for participating in cell and molecular
biology research. Upon completion of the program, alumni are surveyed to measure
the influence that participation in the program had on their academic
performance, scientific interests, and long-term career path. The REU common
assessment tool at www.bioreu.org will be used to evaluate program impacts. More
information is available by visiting
http://www.sanfordresearch.org/education/undergraduates/spur/, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. David Pearce at David.Pearce@sanfordhealth.org) or co-PI (Dr.
Seasson Vitiello at Seasson.Vitiello@augie.edu).