* 1262786
* REU Site:   Summer Neuroscience Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program at UVM
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Eugene Delay, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 283,408.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Vermont (UVM) that will provide research training for 8 students,
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The program focuses on
Neuroscience -- the investigation of the molecular, cellular and physiological
processes important for nervous system function that ultimately regulate animal
and human behavior. The university-wide Neuroscience Program at UVM has about 50
faculty who will serve as mentors. There is a wide range of exciting projects
for the students. Projects include the investigation into the function of nerve
cell specific genes, the development and plasticity of neural circuits, the
physiological function of select nerve cells, and studies of animal and human
behavior. Students are expected to do full-time lab research as well as
participate in seminars and various workshops, such as the responsible conduct
in research, professional communication skills, career opportunities in industry
and academia, and the graduate school application process. Students are also
interacting with the leaders of local neuroscience related companies, such as
MBF Bioscience and Med-Associates. REU students have access to a rich array of
individual mentor?s facilities as well as many interdepartmental core facilities
such an imaging core with multiple advanced microscopes, and a molecular core
dedicated to the quantitative analysis of DNA, RNA and proteins. The program?s
multi-phase recruitment effort consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats
as well as digital-based advertising. Students are selected based on academic
record, research performance, and potential for outstanding neuroscience
research. Students are tracked to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the
research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various
means, including use of an REU common assessment tool available to BIO-funded
REU PIs. More information is available by visiting Neuroscience REU at UVM, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Felix Eckenstein at Felix.Eckenstein@uvm.edu) or the
co-PI (Dr. Eugene Delay at Eugene.Delay@uvm.edu).