* 1262664
* ABI Innovation: Next-Gen Clustering: Fast and Accurate Ways to Cluster Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Shira Broschat, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 666,969.00

DNA sequencing technology has decreased the cost and increased the speed of
genome sequencing, and this has led to an exponential growth in the availability
of sequenced genomes. In order to take full advantage of the situation,
researchers must have easy-to-use but powerful software tools. Unfortunately, it
has been a struggle for providers of open-source software to keep pace with the
immense volumes of biological data generated on a daily basis. As a result, many
researchers are using tools for tasks the software was not meant to perform
resulting in less than optimal results. Suitable open-source software tools are
needed to process the quantities of genome data and obtain the knowledge needed
for scientific breakthroughs. The intellectual merit of the proposed project is
that it will fill one significant void, the need for a software program that can
be used to cluster millions of protein sequences from sequenced genomes quickly
and accurately using cloud computing. From these protein clusters, a
phylogenomics approach can be used to predict the function of uncharacterized
proteins. Several versions of the software tool pClust have already been
developed, and results obtained are far superior to those generated by any other
means. For this work a version of pClust will be developed for use in the cloud
and with support for incremental clustering. In addition pClust will be used to
cluster proteins from all available whole genome sequences for the entire
bacterial phylum Proteobacteria (approximately 1770 species presently). This
will be the most comprehensive study of the Proteobacteria phylum ever and will
represent a scale that has never as yet been achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project will occur in several different areas. When made
available via cloud computing and a user-friendly graphical user interface, the
parallel configuration of the pClust program will allow scientists worldwide to
analyze thousands of genomes at once, quickly and accurately clustering all the
proteins within the genomes. Deployment of this software tool will have a
significant impact on discoveries in science and medicine. In terms of
education, both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained. Emphasis
will be placed on recruiting and engaging female students into this
interdisciplinary project, and the project team will participate in annual
outreach programs to middle and high school students. Key research findings
originating from this project will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
conferences. Also, the software tools developed as part of this project will be
published as open source at Google Code, and the results of the clustering,
including the protein clusters themselves, phylogenetic trees, phylogenetic
profiles, and percentage agreement among the phylogenetic profiles will be made
freely available on the WSU School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science's Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Web site.