* 1262713
* REU Site: Field Research in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 722,423.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) that will provide research training
for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013- 2017. Projects are
focused on ecological and evolutionary questions requiring significant
fieldwork. Depending upon the mentors, projects may be interdisciplinary in
nature (e.g. integrating field geology or molecular techniques with field
biology. Students conduct independent research under one of RMBL's approximately
25 scientists, with access to a diversity of field sites, ranging from desert
habitat to mountaintops. Students also participate in a range of activities
designed to help them become active scientists, such as attending RMBL seminar
series, participating in a journal club, and sessions involving the responsible
conduct of research and career development. Participants attend sessions on how
to conduct a research project, including sessions on experimental design and
statistics, preparing proposals, giving oral presentations, and writing
scientific papers. RMBL recruits students digitally, through its website and the
NSF website, as well as through active recruitment by faculty and alumni at
colleges and universities throughout the US. Students are selected based upon
financial need, potential impact of the program on the student, scientific
promise and demonstrated interest in doing a field project. RMBL actively works
to expand representation in the sciences by prioritizing selection of students
of ethnicities that are underrepresented in the sciences. Students are tracked
to determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. The program
is assessed through the REU common assessment tool, as well as data from the
longitudinal tracking. More information is available by visiting
rmbl.org/education , or by contacting RMBL?s Science Director, Dr. Jennifer
Reithel, sd@rmbl.org.