* 1262447
* Building Community and a New Data Infrastructure for Science Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Margaret Levenstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2017
* USD 572,414.00

This project creates and maintains infrastructure and community to support
policy relevant social science research. It uses newly available STAR METRICS
data on how universities spend federal research grants to examine the
scientific, social and economic impact of federally funded academic research.
Infrastructure includes shared research tools and datasets. The community spans
researchers in multiple disciplines, academic administrators, and state and
federal policy makers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Employing STAR METRICS data and
utilizing infrastructure for its access and use the research community can
provide systematic answers to questions such as: What scientific collaborations
are directly supported by research funding? What indirect effects do federal
grants exert on regional economies and labor markets? The first question can be
answered with systematic study of the structure and productivity of scientific
collaboration networks using fine-grained information on who is paid to work on
the same scientific grants. In doing so, this project is the first to
characterize the productivity of campus-wide, federally funded science on 11
large university campuses. The second question can be answered using the same
data source to analyze payments to vendors for scientific equipment, supplies,
etc. By analyzing the distribution, geographic location, and industry of vendors
that supply federally funded research, this project offers the first
comprehensive picture of the effects of federal R&amp;D spending on economic
resilience and job creation via companies that support university research.
These and other community research endeavors provide compelling cases for large
scale, sustained research to assess the US science ecosystem and the full public
value of federal support for scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The community and infrastructure developed by this project support a
range of ongoing research projects; the results are of immediate interest to
policy makers and academic administrators. Insights derived from this research
can inform the allocation of resources on campus, decisions about how to pursue
cutting edge scientific research and even the design and allocation of space in
research facilities. At the national and state level, this project contributes
to the development of a rigorous science of science policy that can inform
decisions about how to allocate public resources for R&amp;D by providing
systematic evidence about the productivity of different approaches to organizing
research and the larger social and economic results of discovery and learning on
research university campuses.