* 1262634
* REU Site:  University of Michigan Biological Station:  Biosphere-Atmosphere-Hydrosphere Interactions in a Changing Global Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* David Karowe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 10/31/2017
* USD 376,510.00

This REU Site at University of Michigan Biological Station will engage students
in research that examines how virtually all ecological systems are now being
influenced by global change drivers such as rising temperatures, altered
precipitation, altered soil moisture, increasing levels of atmospheric CO2 and
ozone, deposition of reactive nitrogen, invasive species, and habitat loss.
Multiple global change drivers typically interact with one another; for
instance, rising temperatures may interact synergistically with increasing ozone
levels to impede terrestrial carbon storage, and with reduced soil moisture and
increased atmospheric nitrogen deposition to facilitate the spread of invasive
plant and animal species. Such biosphere-atmosphere-hydrosphere interactions are
poorly understood, but are crucial components of global change science. It is
therefore very important to train promising young researchers to identify and
quantify these interactions in order that they may ultimately help solve the
increasingly complex environmental problems of the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this interdisciplinary REU program at
University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) is to nurture young scientists
to enter research careers addressing atmospheric, hydrological, and ecological
causes and consequences of global change. The program provides comprehensive
training via intensively mentored individual research projects, workshops in
biogeochemistry, atmospheric chemistry, global change, ecology, experimental
design and statistics, professional ethics, and communication, a weekly
biosphere-atmosphere-hydrosphere reading group, and attendance at UMBS research
seminars. The program emphasizes active participation by REU students in all
phases of high quality research, from hypothesis formation through presentation
of results in oral and written formats. Recruitment efforts will be expanded to
include more partnerships with Underrepresented Minority Serving Institutions
and institutions with limited opportunities for STEM research (including an on-
site presence of faculty), a Recruiting Event at UMBS, and support for prior REU
students to act as student ambassadors for the program.