* 1262897
* The Sam Houston State Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Scott Chapman, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 388,001.00

This award helps establish and support a Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience in Mathematics Program based at the Mathematics and Statistics
Department at Sam Houston State University. The goals for this program are as
follows: 1) to provide 12 student participants with an understanding of, an
appreciation for, and an experience in the nature of mathematical research and
the life of a mathematical researcher, to a degree that encourages them to
pursue the study of the mathematical sciences on the graduate level; 2) to offer
these experiences with a special eye toward students who do not typically have
these opportunities - of particular interest are students who are either female
or a member of an under-represented group; 3) to develop in each participant
superior skills in mathematical writing, oral mathematical presentation and
poster design; 4) to produce quality mathematical work appropriate for
publication on our web site or in undergraduate research journals and, when
possible, in higher-level research journals; 5) to extend the research
experience beyond the 9 weeks at Sam Houston State by motivating the students to
present their REU research at either their home institution or at a
regional/national meeting; 6) to gain experience in the use of computers and
their interaction in mathematical research; and 7) to immerse the participants
in the culture of mathematics and instill in each member a lifetime value of the
importance of collegiality and group interaction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Twelve
students will be involved in the program, which will run for a 9-week period. We
will offer students a broad base of possible projects including Abstract
Algebra, Algebraic Topology, Combinatorics, Graph Theory, Mathematical Biology,
and Statistics. While the recruiting effort for students will be nationwide, we
will emphasize the recruitment of students from under-represented groups. Of
particular interest to us are Hispanic and African-American students enrolled at
the many colleges and universities in South Texas. We propose augmenting our
program by the inclusion of two Graduate Assistant Mentors and a weekly
Colloquium Series featuring talks given by a weekly "Visiting Graduate Mentor"
who is an alumni of a successful REU Program. Point of Contact for all questions
regarding the program is Professor Scott Chapman (scott.chapman@shsu.edu).