* 1262392
* Circling the Triangle: Understanding Dynamic Regional Economies
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Nichola Lowe, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2017
* USD 483,272.00

This project will increase understanding of the processes and institutional
supports that promote and sustain regional economic development. Regions are
important platforms for promoting entrepreneurial activity; however, there have
been few attempts to capture the dynamic processes that affect how innovative
organizations work together, adapt and improvise to define a functioning
entrepreneurial economy. Through an empirical investigation of North Carolina's
Research Triangle Region, the project investigate multiple pathways of
entrepreneurial development and consider how combinations of public and private
investments affect the survival and growth of firms and industries. A better
understanding of the multiple pathways and interventions that support regional
entrepreneurship will, in turn, enhance development of policy for innovation and
entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the entrepreneurial
regional economy of the Research Triangle through a comprehensive analysis of
both entrepreneurial and established firms, supporting institutions and the
myriad transactions that unite them. To support our analysis, the project team
has created a unique relational database, which contains longitudinal data on
technology-intensive ventures in the region. This database currently contains
information on the attributes of over 4,200 companies in the Triangle region,
events related to the company's growth and survival and biographic information
on the company's founders. For each firm, the database also traces the level and
sequence of institutional support from key Federal, state and local
entrepreneurial and economic development agencies. These data uniquely capture
the universe of regional technology start-ups, including information on
companies known to have gone out of business, merged or been acquired, a subset
of firms that is frequently unavailable but essential to entrepreneurial
dynamics. The database has been designed as a resource for state and Federal
policy development, with the goal of further enhancing regional innovative
capacity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. Around the world, policy makers
search for appropriate economic development policies and investments. Many look
to North Carolina's Research Triangle as an example of successful policy-led
economic development yet the precise mechanisms and policy levers are not well
known. As a result, there is a tendency to downplay the influence of policy
interventions and interactions on firm strategy and development. This project
offers a data-driven solution by providing an essential resource for tracing the
sequence of interventions and facilitating events that contribute to and help
sustain entrepreneurial development. It also helps to reveal the existence of
multiple entrepreneurial pathways that support new firm formation. For example,
the data already collected reveal that entrepreneurial firms are just as likely
to emerge from university-based technology transfer systems as they are from
large multinational corporations that incubate entrepreneurial talent and skill.
The project's objective is to create a transferable framework for analyzing
regional dynamics elsewhere. This study of the Research Triangle provides a test
case for compiling and collecting data at both the firm and institutional levels
that would be transferable to other regions.