* 1262832
* REU Site:  Research by Undergraduates using Molocular Biology Applications (RUMBA)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Miri VanHoven, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 465,177.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to San
José State University to provide research training for 10 weeks for 10 students,
for the summers of 2013-2016. Our proposed REU program at San José State
University called Research by Undergraduates using Molecular Biology
Applications (RUMBA) will focus its efforts in increasing the number of
underrepresented minority doing biological research in the Silicon Valley. Our
REU Program will focus on the theme of molecular biology applications in
biological research. Ten faculty members with expertise in the areas of
genetics, molecular evolution, molecular environmental microbiology, cell &amp;
molecular biology, and forensics will mentor students. Regardless of the
research laboratory placement, RUMBA students will comprise a cohort with shared
thematic training experiences. The cohort experiences will consist of the
following: (1) molecular biology techniques training, (2) a bi-weekly formal
group research meeting, (3) an ethics seminar, and (4) a culminating research
symposium. Students will be recruited from San José State University and other
undergraduate institutions with high enrollment of female and underrepresented
minority students. Priority will be given to students of underrepresented groups
as defined by NSF (African American, Latino, Native American, and Pacific
Islander). We will utilize the following selection criteria for RUMBA
participants: a GPA of at least 3.0, completion of the first year university
biology and chemistry core course sequence, two letters of recommendation, and
the quality of a personal statement. Student applicants will be interviewed by
RUMBA faculty before a decision is made. A common web-based assessment
instrument available to BIO-funded REU PIs will be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of our program. Student participants will also be tracked to
determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. San José
State University (SJSU), the oldest public university in the state of
California, is located in downtown San José and in the heart of Silicon Valley.
It is a metropolitan university with an enrollment of approximately 27,000
students. Students interested in participating in the RUMBA should contact Dr.
Julio G. Soto, Professor, Biological Sciences Department, julio.soto@sjsu.edu.
Application forms and deadlines can be found on our web site:
http://www.sjsu.edu/depts/Biology/RUMBA/RUMBA.html.