* 1262863
* New REU Site: Sensory Ecology: An Integrative Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* George Uetz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 291,730.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Cincinnati that will provide research training for 10 students,
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2014- 2016. The program focuses on sensory
ecology -- the study of how animals acquire and respond to information about
their environment-- which integrates the experimental and mechanistic study of
sensory processes with the conceptual approaches of ecology, evolution and
behavior. The Department of Biological Sciences has 11 faculty in a new research
focus area - Sensory Biology, Behavior and Evolution (SBBE) - who serve as
mentors in a tiered multi- level mentoring program along with graduate students
and post-docs in a team environment. There is a wide range of very interesting
and exciting projects for the students, ranging from neurobiology to behavioral
ecology. Students are expected to do full-time lab research as well as
participate in seminars and various workshops, such as the responsible conduct
in research, professional communication skills, career opportunities in industry
and academia, and the graduate school application process. REU students have
access to a rich array of individual mentor's research facilities as well as
many interdepartmental labs and centers such as the UC Chemistry department, and
collaborating institutions such as Cincinnati Zoo Center for Research on
Endangered Wildlife, UC / Cincinnati Children's Hospital Biomedical Research
Center and the UC Center for Field Studies field station. The program's multi-
phase recruitment effort consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as
well as digital-based advertising, and visits to regional college campuses.
Students are selected based on academic record, research performance, and
potential for outstanding research. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs. More information is available by visiting
http://www.artsci.uc.edu/departments/biology/undergrad/REU.html, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. George Uetz at george.uetz@uc.edu).