* 1262887
* REU Site:  Integrative Cellular and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* David Hyde, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 416,940.00

A REU site award has been made to the University of Notre Dame, Department of
Biological Sciences to provide research training for 10 weeks for 12 students
during summers 2013-2016. The program, "Integrative Cell and Molecular Biology",
will provide students with independent research projects within an
interdisciplinary research community. Participants will formulate their research
project and proposal with their mentor, speak about their work at the beginning
of the summer and present their results at the end of the summer at the Regional
Summer Symposium. A weekly seminar program will be included to develop students'
intellectual and professional skills, as well as to educate them about various
career paths in biological sciences. In addition, students will attend
interactive workshops on integrative research, ethics and responsible conduct of
research, the publication process, scientific writing, and graduate school
applications. The underlying aim of the program is to give students strong
incentives for pursuing careers in research. Students will be recruited through
general and targeted approaches with partner institutions. Underrepresented
minority students and students who do not have access to research at their home
institutions are encouraged to apply. Students will be selected based on
academic record, the quality of the personal statement/cover letter,
recommendation letters, a sincere desire to pursue a research career, and
potential for outstanding research in cell/molecular biology. Participant
tracking data will be obtained using a background, pre-program, post-program,
and alumni survey. In addition, the BIO REU common assessment tool will be used.
Continued contact with each participant will take place through planning for
conference presentations, encouraging students to pursue additional research,
and preparation for graduate school. More information and application materials
are available at http://nd.edu/~biosreu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michelle
Whaley, (574) 631-9343 , Michelle.A.Whaley.3@nd.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David
Hyde, (574) 631-8054, David.R.Hyde.1@nd.edu).