* 1262908
* IREU Site: Building Networks for U.S. and International Materials Science Undergraduates in Singapore, Scotland, and Italy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bradley Miller, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 302,907.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award from the National Science Foundation
Division of Materials Research (NSF DMR) supports a new international Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (IREU) program organized and managed by the
American Chemical Society (ACS) for the summers of 2014-2016. This IREU takes a
non-traditional approach by connecting U.S. students with undergraduate research
experiences throughout Europe and Asia while reciprocally, at no cost to US
National funding agencies, international students will be placed into summer
U.S. Materials Research REU sites. For 2014-2016, partner institutions include
the National University of Singapore (NUS), the Universita degli Studi di
Perugia (Italy), and the University of Strathclyde (Scotland, UK) all offering
substantial research projects with a high potential for resulting publications.
Nine U.S. students from diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds, and from
institutions with limited access to research (three to each international site)
will be recruited nationally to participate in this ten-week IREU program.
Conversely, international students from the three international sites are placed
throughout existing NSF DMR sponsored REU programs in the U.S., nurturing the
global networks of these domestic programs. Participants are matched with
research mentors and projects with a focus on materials science for sustainable
energy. All IREU participants present their research at the Spring American
Chemical Society National Meeting; prepare an official abstract; create and
present a research poster; consider ethical issues of research; gain respect for
scientific professionalism, other cultures, and collaboration; and communicate
scientific findings. The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The globalization of science requires students to graduate
with practical laboratory experiences, multicultural understanding, and an
international perspective in order to compete in the global marketplace. All
three are abilities that U.S. employers feel are lacking in the current crop of
recent graduates (2008 Association of American Colleges and Universities
employer survey). Clearly, a need exists to improve these skills but the
rigorous course load for students in materials science-related degrees makes it
difficult to study abroad during the academic year. Summer research allows
students to gain international experience without disrupting their studies;
increases national competiveness, innovation, and knowledge base; and assists in
solving challenges of a global scope (e.g., energy, health, food/water). The ACS
international research experiences for undergraduates (IREU) program funded by
the National Science Foundation Division of Materials Research (DMR) yearly
connects nine U.S. materials science students, recruited nationally from diverse
backgrounds and institutions, with research experiences at recognized producers
of scientific knowledge in Singapore; Glasgow, Scotland; and Perugia, Italy.
While fostering intellectual growth and maturity, the IREU experience is
intended to catalyze student's desire to enroll in advanced degree programs,
instill a respect for other cultures and science professionalism, and provide an
appreciation for the global scientific enterprise. Reciprocally, at no cost to
U.S. institutions or funders, international students are matched to and placed
at domestic DMR sponsored REU sites to nurture international dimensions and
establish additional networks at these host universities.