* 1262514
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Approach to Sustainable Biobased Products and Energy Development
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Vijaya Kakani, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 09/30/2017
* USD 296,842.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Oklahoma State University that will provide research training for 10 students,
for nine weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. The program will focus on the
interdisciplinary science in developing bioenergy and other biobased products.
Students will be associated with the Biobased Products and Energy Center which
consists of over 20 scientists and engineers representing a wide range of
disciplines including microbiology and molecular genetics, plant and soil
sciences, biochemistry and molecular biology, and biosystems and agricultural
engineering. Students will be conducting full-time lab research as well as
participating in seminars and workshops on various topics, such as the collegial
work environment, responsible conduct in research, professional communication
skills, career opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school
application process. Students will also be provided tours of other research
institutions and local industries, such as the Weatherford Wind Energy Center.
Students will gain experience in a wide range of facilities including the
DNA/Protein Core Facility, Array and Bioinformatics Core Facility, and Advanced
Technology Research Center. Core equipment available includes instrumentation to
perform automated DNA sequencing and marking, electrospray mass spectrometers,
surface analyzer, scanning electron microscope, and other state-of-the-art
analytical machines. Students will be recruited from a variety of institutions,
especially those having limited STEM-research opportunities and large
populations of underrepresented minorities. Recruitment efforts will be
multifaceted, including traditional formats plus videos highlighting students'
experiences through the Center's YouTube channel. Students will be selected
based on academic achievement, previous research experiences, interest to pursue
a career in a STEM-based field, and desire to pursue graduate studies. Students
will be tracked to determine their continued interest in their STEM-based field
of study, their career path, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various means,
including use of an REU common assessment tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs.
More information is available by visiting http://bioenergycenter.okstate.edu/reu
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Sarah Lancaster at sarah.lancaster@okstate.edu).