* 1262479
* SusChEM: RUI: Organohypervalent Iodine Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Viktor Zhdankin, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 415,336.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Viktor V. Zhdankin of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at University of Minnesota Duluth will explore the chemistry of
trivalent and pentavalent iodine compounds, which are efficient and
environmentally benign oxidizing reagents with numerous applications in organic
synthesis. While organohypervalent iodine compounds are well-established
stoichiometric reagents, little progress has been made in the development of new
catalytic reactions promoted by hypervalent iodine. Studies of new, metal-free
catalytic reactions based on hypervalent iodine chemistry and an exploratory
search for new and potentially useful organohypervalent iodine compounds are
proposed. Synthetically useful methodologies based on the new, iodoarene-
catalyzed oxidative transformations, such as the Hofmann rearrangement of amides
to amines and the oxidative heterocyclization reactions leading to isoxazole
derivatives and N-substituted indoles, will be investigated. Organoiodine-
catalyzed enantioselective aziridination reactions on the basis of a recently
discovered metal-free catalytic procedure for the aziridination of alkenes using
organic iodide as catalyst will also be studied. An exploratory study on the
preparation, structural characterization, and chemical properties of new,
potentially useful hypervalent iodine amides, imides, and ylides will be also
performed.

New synthetic methodology based on organohypervalent iodine chemistry will
contribute to environmentally benign methods for chemical synthesis as it
utilizes non-toxic compounds of iodine as catalysts or recyclable reagents in
aqueous solutions. Successful development of this methodology will have an
impact on any area of activity in which the synthesis of molecules is needed,
such as the pharmaceutical, chemical, agricultural industry, and the biological
and chemical research activities. In addition, this project will provide
excellent training of students, from pre-undergraduate to post-doctoral,
including those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.