* 1262267
* RAPID: Nicoya Earthquake After-event Response (NEAR)
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2013
* USD 41,686.00

On September 5th, 2012, a moment magnitude (MW) 7.6 earthquake occurred along
the locked segment of the Nicoya Peninsula in Costa Rica. This event ruptured
in, or immediately below a region that previously ruptured in similarly sized
earthquakes in 1853, 1900, and 1950. Because of the known repeat risk, and the
near-ideal local geometry, Nicoya has been the site of numerous studies to
evaluate the subduction megathrust interface. Most recently, two projects were
funded which allowed for the deployment of seismometers and continuous GPS
instruments, and a more extensive GPS campaign to image the interseismic
coupling and associated microseismicity.

Given the recent event, this RAPID grant is designed to expand the scope of this
research from detailed imaging of a mature and mostly locked subduction
megathrust, to characterizing earthquake rupture and early afterslip processes,
including aftershocks. Because land is directly over the rupture zone, unlike
most every other subduction environment, this new data will give unprecedented
images of the extent and magnitude of seismic and postseismic failure. This data
will be compared with published models of locking to evaluate whether geodetic
methods can adequately forecast regions that will fail in large earthquakes. It
will require detailed on-theground efforts to image the true extent of failure,
and to determine whether the upper locked patch is still present, and primed for
failure. The project will allow for the capture of critical and time-sensitive
ground deformation and early aftershock seismicity that will be necessary to
characterize the spatial extent and magnitude of earthquake rupture along the
shallow subduction interface. The data, along with pre-event data recorded by
our networks there will become a first-of-its-kind dataset for evaluating the
transition from a mature and locked subduction interface, to a large earthquake,
and early recovery as the seismic cycle begins anew.

Using RAPID funds, the researchers will capture coseismic and early post-
earthquake ground deformation and aftershock occurrence. Because these data are
highly ephemeral, rapid action is necessary. The large displacements that occur
during the earthquake, up to ~1 meter in this case, can change dramatically in
the days/weeks/months that follow as poroelastic rocks relax, and momentum-
driven mantle continues to drive more slip along the fault. Across the Nicoya
Peninsula, we plan to: perform field repairs and collect data from about 20
continuous GPS and seismometers that may have been damaged in the earthquake;
perform a GPS campaign of an approximate 30-site survey network; and deploy a
semi-continuous network of GPS stations to capture post-seismic deformation
across the rupture area.

The research will fund fieldwork for five student and postdoctoral researchers.
The experience will improve their scientific understanding of field-based
geophysical research, and give first-hand experience of the impact a large
earthquake can have on people and the land. The scientific results from this
project will be directly beneficial to society, as it will give some of the
first detailed images of coseismic rupture in comparison to previously imaged
locked zones. This information is invaluable for assessing the potential to map
faults that are likely to fail in future earthquakes.