* 1262296
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Program in Multi-scale Biological Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 05/31/2017
* USD 317,253.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to Rice
University that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2013-2015. The program focuses on biological networks,
complex interactions among biomolecules that give rise to the diverse biological
phenotypes observed in nature. Students will work on research projects under
faculty mentors that draw from a range of approaches (classical biochemical and
genetic to non-trivial theoretical models that require computation) to study
naturally-occurring genetic networks, artificial genetic and metabolic networks,
and biomolecular structure, function, and evolution. Faculty with biological
interests in diverse departments will serve as mentors, including professors
within the Departments of Biochemistry & Cell Biology, Bioengineering, Chemical
& Biomolecular Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science, and Ecology &
Evolutionary Biology. Students are expected to do full-time lab research as well
as participate in seminars and workshops that focus on responsible conduct in
research, professional communication skills, career opportunities, and the
graduate school application process. Students are also provided a creative
opportunity to develop innovative biotechnological ideas and a capstone research
poster symposium. Students will be recruited nationwide, with particular
emphasis on students enrolled at proximal minority-serving two- and four-year
institutions. Selection of students will be done based on the faculty steering
committee?s evaluation of each applicant?s transcript and recommendation
letters. Rice?s Institute of Biosciences and Bioengineering (IBB) administers
this NSF REU Program and maintains a database of all the alumni for this program
with tracking information on their career progression. Assessment of this
program is done via pre- and post-questionnaires as well by using the common
assessment tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs. Each year, IBB publishes a
?Class Notes? newsletter of the NSF REU alumni and features news on their
current academic or professional status and accomplishments. More information is
available by visiting the IBB website (http://ibb.rice.edu/Content.aspx?id=563)
or by contacting the PI (Dr. George Bennett at gbennett@rice.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Joff Silberg at joff@rice.edu).