* 1262803
* Collaborative Research:   Sustainability of critical areas for eiders and subsistence hunters in an industrializing nearshore zone
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Henry Huntington, Huntington Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 78,693.00

Throughout the Arctic, indigenous people are faced with difficult choices
between the cash benefits of industrialization versus potential degradation of
subsistence hunting. Subsistence hunting often provides a large fraction of
foods, and may be more reliable in the long term than a cash economy based on
nonrenewable resources. Subsistence hunting for certain species may also have
cultural significance that far exceeds their dietary contribution. On the
Chukchi Sea coast, pipelines connecting offshore oil wells to onshore terminals
must be built across a nearshore corridor used by most marine birds and mammals
that migrate to the western North American Arctic. These animals are hunted for
subsistence by local Natives. During spring, these animals travel through a zone
of open water that forms between landfast ice and moving pack ice. If an oil
pipeline were ruptured by spring ice scour in this shallow zone, oil could
probably not be removed from open water within broken ice during migration. Such
an event could not only restrict the extent of viable habitat, but also
eliminate local hunting areas. Thus, key habitats that are usually accessible to
hunting should be avoided in pipeline placement. In this research, we will model
habitat requirements and map viable prey densities for a formerly hunted but now
threatened species (Spectacled Eider, SPEI) and a commonly hunted species (King
Eider, KIEI) in the Chukchi nearshore zone, and determine long-term variability
in the eiders? access to those areas through the ice. We will refine these maps
with traditional ecological knowledge on conditions and areas where hunting for
KIEI typically occurs. We will then estimate probabilities that different eider
feeding areas that are accessible through the ice and conducive to hunting would
be eliminated during migration by oil spills from pipelines built along four
alternative routes. We will use this information to inform structured decision-
making workshops we will hold in the Native community. These workshops will help
create a local vision for sustainability, in terms of potential risks of
different pipeline routes to subsistence and cultural values of eiders, relative
to cash benefits of local construction projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local
villagers will be involved in creating and shaping the data set, and will be the
main participants in structured decision-making workshops. We will integrate our
work with outreach and education programs conducted in these villages by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Our project will yield important information for
future evaluations and decision-making by Endangered Species and Migratory Bird
Management Offices. Our modern scientific and traditional ecological data, and
facilitation of community consensus-building, will expedite later impact
assessments by BOEM and other agencies as oilfield development proceeds. On a
hemispheric scale, the approach we develop will serve as a prototype applicable
to the many such situations developing across the Arctic.