* 1262945
* REU Site: Analysis of Glacial Sediments, Minnesota and Brazil: Evidence of Paleo-ice Stream Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* James F Cotter, University of Minnesota Morris
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2017
* USD 257,636.00

The goal of the UMM REU program is to develop time-constrained models for two
very different proposed paleo-ice streams. REU participants will study glacial
deposits of the Late Paleozoic Paran√° lobe of Brazil and Late Pleistocene age
Des Moines lobe of Minnesota. Detailed mapping of landforms, sediment analysis
and the analysis of subglacial bedforms will provide a greater understanding of
the movement and the causes of rapid ice stream flow. The role of ice streams in
the mass balance of ice sheets is of critical importance (approximately 90% of
all discharge of the Antarctic ice sheet is by ice streams), yet a great deal is
unknown. This research will focus on: the influence of climate on ice stream
movement, the significance of marine interaction and ice sheet grounding, and
the nature of ice stream flow (sliding vs. deformation). Uniquely, participants
have an opportunity to research ice streams in two very different geologic
contexts: in Minnesota they will study surficial geology and unconsolidated
sands and gravels while in Brazil they will study stratigraphy and sedimentary
rocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMM REU program will also nurture the
development of 16 Native American women geology majors over two summers in both
an international setting and in an environment where women and Native Americans
are in the majority. Native American women are extremely underrepresented in the
Geosciences. The UMM REU program has components designed specifically to remedy
this situation by providing peer support, developing participant confidence and
introducing participants to supportive role models. UMM REU students will
participate in a seminar component of the program where they will examine
pathways to "thinking like a geologist," issues in scientific ethics, meet
professional women geoscientists, and begin planning future academic and
scientific careers. Participants will give a professional talk and lead a field
trip. This program will build confidence and aid in the maturation of these
Native American women as scientists and individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
REU site is co-funded by the Office of International and Integrated Activities
and the Division of Earth Sciences.