* 1262062
* CAREER:  Exploring exotic matter through the quantum manipulation of dipolar atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2014
* Benjamin Lev, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 01/31/2014
* USD 202,111.00

This CAREER award supports an experimental program to create and study exotic
forms of matter by developing the enabling technology for the quantum
manipulation of dipolar atoms. Ultracold gases of highly magnetic atoms, such as
dysprosium, offer opportunities to explore strongly correlated matter in the
presence of long-range interactions in a manner difficult to achieve in other
experimental settings. Techniques will be developed to perform the first laser
cooling and trapping---and subsequent confinement in optical lattices---of
dysprosium. This achievement will lead to the investigation of exotic states of
matter that, in several cases, underlie proposed descriptions of poorly
understood, though technologically relevant, condensed matter materials that do
not obey standard Fermi liquid theory. Specifically, investigation of the ground
states of quantum liquid crystals using fermionic Dy, as well as explorations of
the inhomogeneous phases predicted by the extended Bose-Hubbard (EBH) model,
will be possible through the cooling of Dy to degeneracy. Looking beyond quantum
liquid crystal and EBH physics, developing ultracold Dy technology will lead to
the exploitation of both Dy's telecom qubit transition and Dy's colossal
magnetic moment for the realization of telecom-band quantum information
processing and the development of ultra-high sensitivity, high-resolution atom
chip microscopy of exotic condensed matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the research program is a
plan to teach physics through everyday technology: Combining the theme of GPS
technology with the technical expertise drawn from this research program, core
physics principles will be taught to undergraduate physics majors and high
school "teacher leaders" through the development of a laboratory module on
atomic clocks. This module will serve three educational missions: contributing
to the improvement of K-12 student achievement in science by training high
school teacher leaders via the EnLiST NSF Math and Science Partnership (MSP)
program at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; augmenting the PHYS
403 Modern Experimental Physics lab that introduces upper-level undergraduate
physics majors to skills and topics required for cutting-edge careers in science
and technology; and providing hands-on laboratory experience for participants in
a Master's Science Teaching Program, an upcoming accreditation program for
Illinois teachers provided by the Department of Physics.