* 1262438
* Research Development Workshop - Atlanta Competitive Advantage Conference 2013- 2015
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* William Bogner, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 126,166.00

The Atlanta Competitive Advantage Conference (ACAC) is focused on developing a
better understanding of the sources of sustained competitive advantage in market
economies. The ACAC Research Development Workshop (RDW) improves the
capabilities of emerging researchers working on questions in innovation,
strategy, processes of new knowledge search, absorption and diffusion, and the
measurement of the impact of innovation on firms and society. Open to late-stage
PhD students, the RDW focuses on improving research projects that these students
are currently undertaking in their home institutions. This is done by bringing
together twenty-four PhD students with a range of scholarly foci and placing
them with scholars from outside of their home institution and with whom they
that would not otherwise work. By including program modules that address
building networks among innovation researchers, the RDW helps the PhD students
integrate more broadly into a global community of innovation research scholars
across institutions. At the 9th ACAC RDW in 2012 twenty different US PhD
programs, two Canadian PhD programs and four European PhD programs sent students
to the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Within the US the impact
of an improvement in our knowledge base with respect to the management and
evaluation of innovation processes is significant. This impact will be felt
across a wide range of organizations. In 2012 private, for-profit business in
the US spent an estimated $280 billion on R&amp;D. Government, academia and
other non-profits combined for about another $130 billion. These numbers are
expected to increase in 2013. With over $400 billion, being spent annually on
innovation and new knowledge search in the US alone, any improvement in
innovation outcomes through better managerial decision-making will have a
significant, long-term impact on both economic competitiveness and on social
welfare. Managers need to better understand the "how" and "why" aspects of the
relationship between the firm's internal innovation and knowledge management
activates and the firm's sustained competitive advantage that outputs can give
in open markets. These same perspectives apply to not-for-profit and government
organizations seeking innovation and change. Improvements in understanding will
come only from organization-level decisions based on solid science. Thus, the
better the science is behind the prescriptions given to managers for effective
and efficient research and innovation processes, the greater the gains will be
from those processes. It is in that light that this RDW focuses on impacting the
quality of that science in the emerging researchers in the field.