* 1262767
* REU Site: Advanced Materials for Energy and Sensing Applications at the University of Tennessee
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Michael Best, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site led by Professors
Michael D. Best and Shawn R. Campagna both of the University of Tennessee-
Knoxville. The Site will host an REU program that offers comprehensive
preparation for careers in chemistry. Central to this endeavor is a 10-week
research experience that will provide intensive introductory research training.
In addition, numerous mentored professional development activities will yield a
solid and well-rounded foundation for participating students. Students will
participate in a multipart ethics course developed by the faculty and also
receive mentored training in the preparation of professional documents and
presentations through a collaboration with the UTK Science Writing Program.
Additionally, a science journalism student who will prepare articles for the
general public that highlight the experiences of participants, will be embedded
in the REU Program. Students will also benefit from site visits to research
institutions including nearby Oak Ridge National Laboratory, as well as panel
discussions on career options including participants from different research
sectors. Finally, rigorous assessment of the program will be conducted by the
UTK Institute for Assessment and Evaluation.

The intellectual merit of this program is driven by the cutting-edge research
that will be performed by REU students. While a range of research will be
offered spanning the field of chemistry, these projects are generally centered
on the common theme of advanced materials for energy and sensing applications.
These topics represent critical areas of current research, and involve projects
at UTK that are funded by federal agencies, thus invigorating and validating the
work to be performed by participating students. The broader impacts of this
proposal entail the comprehensive initial training experiences that will provide
students with a range of critical skills to enhance their careers. In addition,
broad dissemination will be achieved through the publication of point-of-view
articles prepared by an embedded science writer, and students will leave the
program with polished poster and oral presentations for use at future
conferences. The impact of this program will additionally be enhanced by
actively recruiting and selecting outstanding students who lack access to
undergraduate research at their home institutions. Furthermore, to achieve the
goal of broadening participation in research, students from demographic groups
underrepresented in the sciences will be aggressively recruited. This effort
will be aided by ongoing partnerships with faculty at institutions that
primarily serve underrepresented groups and the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (TLSAMP).