* 1262263
* Collaborative Research: Technology, Collaboration, and Learning: Modeling Complex International Innovation Partnerships
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Daniel Roos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 196,318.00

This project studies Complex International Innovation Partnerships (CIIPs) as an
instrument for national technological development through cross-border learning.
CIIPs are one approach through which countries seek to improve their
technological and innovation capability in specific sectors by partnering with
global experts. CIIPs are typically initiated by a learning country that is
building capacity in a particular area of science, technology or innovation.
When the learning country determines that the requisite expertise is not
available in their country, they seek out a foreign expert partner. The two
partners engage in a long term relationship during which individuals from both
partners spend significant time together, working jointly in collaborative
research, engineering or education activities. Typically, the expert partner
provides education, mentoring or training services to representatives of the
learning partner. Through this sustained interaction, each partner is impacted
by the social and cultural context of the other. Many CIIPs occur in public
service sectors and are led by government organizations. The project team
investigates CIIPS by producing two sets of case studies via international field
work. The case studies examine CIIPs that are executed as part of programs to
develop space satellite capabilities and international university partnerships
that seek to enhance an innovation ecosystem. Using a systems architecture
framework, the project analyzes the technological, social, organizational and
policy dimensions of these partnerships. The systems architecture approach
synthesizes findings that build on four bodies of literature: Innovation Policy,
Technology Transfer, Technological Learning, and Science and Technology Studies.
The research develops a multi-stage analytic model that describes the evolution
and dynamics of CIIPs; explains differences in the implementation of CIIPs;
identifies insightful patterns across CIIPs; and provides initial tools to
assess the extent to which CIIPs meet stakeholder objectives. The results of the
study will advance scientific understanding of how science, technology and
innovation can contribute to economic growth and societal progress under
conditions that are globalized and necessitate continuous learning. The project
is a first step in formulating a theory of CIIPs that combines their
international and systemic nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The concept of Collaborative International Innovation
Partnerships (CIIPs) describes a diverse set of Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy initiatives occurring around the world. CIIPs are largely
driven by the public sector and frequently relate to public goods such as
education, environmental management, basic research and innovation spillovers.
However, CIIPs are currently practitioner-driven and under-theorized. Policy-
makers, program managers and industrial partners can benefit immediately from a
sound theoretical grounding and analytic framework to inform the design and
evaluation of current CIIPs. The results will also inform how CIIPs may be
strategically deployed to address national priorities. The project will promote
understanding across cultures and sectors by elucidating the dynamics that occur
when partners from distinct cultures come together to execute a complex,
sociotechnical endeavor. The project brings together two independent streams of
research ? on emerging satellite programs and on international university
partnerships. The combined effort will provide valuable insights into
commonalities across sectors. In the long term, the investigators seek to extend
the models and assessment tools developed here to a broad range of countries and
technology sectors. This project lays a foundation for a network of researchers
studying CIIPs in different contexts.