* 1262737
* REU Site: Mathematics Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Joel Foisy, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 314,604.00

This project is the continuation of a successful eight-week Summer Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in mathematics at SUNY Potsdam, with the
cooperation of Clarkson University, in Potsdam, NY. Students will work daily in
groups of 3 or 4 with an advisor on an original research problem in mathematics,
specifically in the areas of algebraic graph theory, topological graph theory,
analysis and algebra. More specifically, in the first year of the program, we
propose that one group will study the impact of additive and multiplicative
noise on the stability of systems of differential equations with an emphasis on
systems that arise from biological applications. Another group will examine
graphs that have a flat spatial embedding (an embedding for which every cycle
bounds a disk that intersects the graph only along its boundary). Another group
will study dynamic equations on time scales (a time scale is a nonempty, closed
subset of the real numbers). In particular, students will calculate Taylor
monomials when the time scale is the Cantor set. Finally, another group will
examine quantum walks on graphs, which has implications for quantum computations
and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will nationally recruit math majors who
have completed 2 or preferably 3 years of undergraduate course-work. Women,
minorities, students with disabilities, and students from schools with limited
research opportunities will be especially encouraged to apply. We have ambitious
goals for our students. We would like to help them build their confidence in
their ability to do research independently, and to help them build their
appreciation and understanding of the vast field of mathematics. We also want to
help them to improve their oral and written communication skills. Each group
will present their results to the other students, at least twice during the
eight weeks. Students will be encouraged to present their results at a national
meeting. Each group will also use LaTex to prepare a paper on their work. We
will further introduce our students to the mathematics profession through
hosting a weekly guest speaker, and by presenting a panel on graduate school.
Most math majors are not exposed to the process of mathematical research as
undergraduates. We believe that our program provides a valuable added dimension
to any serious math major's education. We believe they will go back to their
home institutions with a much broader understanding of the process of
mathematical discovery and dissemination. We will also mentor our students as
they go through revising their work, and presenting at conferences. We believe
that many of our students will want to go on to further study of mathematics in
graduate school as a result of participating in our program. A few will choose
not to, but they will enter society with a greater understanding and
appreciation of mathematics.