* 1262812
* Multiscale Modeling and Control of Thin Film Solar Cell Manufacturing for Improved Light Trapping and  Solar Power Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 09/30/2018
* USD 332,500.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Christofides, Panagiotis Institutions: UCLA Proposal Number: 1262812 Title:
Multiscale Modeling and Control of Thin Film Solar Cell Manufacturing for
Improved Light Trapping and Solar Power Conversion

Photovoltaic (solar) cells are an important source of sustainable energy.
Currently, their limited conversion efficiency limits their wide applicability.
Thin-film silicon solar cells are the most developed and widely used solar
cells. Research on optical and electrical modeling of thin-film silicon solar
cells indicates that the scattering properties of the thin film
surfaces/interfaces are directly related to their light trapping processes and
thus their conversion efficiency. The scattering properties of the interfaces
are influenced by the surface morphology, in particular, the root-mean-square
(RMS) roughness and RMS slope. The aim here is to improve the efficiency of
thin-film solar cells by controlling the manufacturing process via simultaneous
regulation of the thin film surface RMS slope and roughness at spatial length
scales corresponding to the visible light wavelength range. Computational
multiscale modeling and real-time model-based control of the thin film solar
cell manufacturing process to optimize light trapping and overall conversion has
the potential to lead to transformative advances in solar cell technology.

Intellectual Merit

The objective of the proposed research is to develop a systematic and
computationally tractable multiscale modeling and control framework for real-
time control of thin film solar cell manufacturing which leads to thin film
surface morphology that optimizes light trapping and overall conversion of solar
power. This project will devise methods for the construction of reduced-order
stochastic modeling approximations of the multiscale models of such systems,
which are suitable for controller design and real-time implementation. These
should predict the effect of controllable process variables on key film surface
morphology parameters. On the basis of these reduced-order stochastic models,
nonlinear and predictive control theory will be developed and used to produce
practically-implementable feedback control systems that lead to the desired
stability, performance (i.e., surface RMS slope and roughness values that lead
to optimal light trapping thin film properties) and robustness properties in the
closed-loop system. In addition, the design of monitoring systems for assessing
actuator/sensor/controller abnormal behavior and controller reconfiguration
strategies for dealing with abnormal events, as well as applications to thin
film growth processes using multiscale models and realistic thin film light
trapping specifications, will be pursued.

Broader Impact

Such real-time control of the thin film solar cell manufacturing process has the
potential to lead to transformative advances in producing thin film solar cells
with optimal solar power conversion efficiencies. The development of user-
friendly software, short courses and workshops, the incorporation of research
results into the curriculum and the writing of a new book on "Dynamics and
Control of Thin Film Morphology: Surface Roughness, Slope and Porosity," are
also within the project objectives. The education of high-quality doctoral
students who take on leading positions in industry and the on-going interaction
of the PIs with industry will be the means for transferring the results of this
research into the industrial sector. The involvement of a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students in the research through participation in the
Center for Engineering Education and Diversity (CEED) at UCLA and outreach to
the California State Polytechnic University in Pomona by offering summer
internships to highly-qualified students will also be pursued.