* 1262628
* ABI:  Development:  Bringing Supercomputing to the Desktop: New Capabilities for Phylogenetic Inference in the Era of Data-Driven Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Wayne Pfeiffer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,594,002.00

The University of California, San Diego (La Jolla, CA) has received an ABI
development award to create the CIPRES REST API (CRA), a set of enabling public
web services for the biology community. The CRA will make it possible for any
biologist with modest programming skills to access and run powerful phylogenetic
tools on NSF XSEDE supercomputers from within their preferred work environment.
The project will embed the CRA into eight distinct software environments that
are widely used in the biology community, providing direct access to
supercomputing resources from within these familiar working environments. The
CRA will make it possible for scientists to analyze much larger data sets than
is currently possible without changing their normal work environment or learning
to use new software. Community developers will be able to incorporate the CRA
tools into their software environments in new and creative ways. The tools
created by this project are an extension of the prototype CIPRES Science
Gateway, a web application that allows researchers to run large phylogenetic
analyses on NSF XSEDE computing resources through a standard browser interface.
In its first 30 months of operation, the CIPRES Science Gateway has run analyses
for more than 5,000 users, enabled 400+ scholarly publications in biological
disciplines ranging from Ecology to Virology, and was used by at least 68
instructors for curriculum delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of CIPRES
Science Gateway prototype has been profound because understanding the
evolutionary history of living organisms is central to all fields of biological
research, and evolutionary relationships are explored primarily by comparing DNA
and protein sequences using computationally intensive algorithms. The rate of
DNA and protein sequence acquisition is currently increasing more rapidly than
Moore's law. While this represents an unprecedented opportunity to clarify
evolutionary relationships, it also means routine analyses can no longer be
conducted with laptop/desktop computers. Researchers must have easy access to
high performance computing (HPC) resources to participate in the discovery
process. The CRA will improve the efficiency of access to computational
resources by shifting from the rigid browser paradigm of the CIPRES Science
Gateway to a pervasive access model, where the phylogenetic tools required for
modern biological research are available from within the researcher's preferred
environment. The software and techniques created will be completely generic and
easily adapted to any area of science where progress is limited by access to
computational resources. More information about this project can be obtained
from http://www.phylo.org/index.php/portal/ or mmiller@sdsc.edu.