* 1262176
* The Development of Microelectrode Arrays as Bioanalytical Tools
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,000.00

1262176 Moeller

Microelectrode arrays are potentially powerful tools for monitoring interactions
between small molecule libraries and biological receptors. They hold two main
advantages over current state-of-the-art methods. First, they can be used to
detect binding events as they occur without the need for a labeled receptor or
immunological assay. The result is a cost effective, rapid method for analysis
that enables the use of biological data to interactively guide the design and
synthesis of new receptor ligands. Second, the microelectrodes in an array can
be used to reclaim molecules from the surface of the electrodes. Hence,
molecules in a library that give rise to a biological signal can be isolated and
characterized. This allows for quality control of the library. With these
advances in mind, new chemistry for the site-selective placement, manipulation,
and monitoring of molecules on the surface of a microelectrode array have been
developed. In this project we will further build up the repertoire of tools by
developing chemistry for direct synthesis of molecular libraries, porous
membranes that will cover electrodes to minimize nonspecific binding and will
demonstrate proof of concept use of novel electrode arrays for screening small
molecules.

General public statement: This project will develop technologies based on
electrode arrays to enable creation and testing of drug candidate molecules.
This technology is interesting in that it can be used at all stages from
biomolecule synthesis to its release to screening of biomolecule-target
interactions.

This project is being funded by the Nano-Biosensing Program in the CBET Division
of the ENG directorate, with co-funding from both the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging (CMI) Program and the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
CHE Division of the MPS directorate.