* 1262213
* Coastal Geomorphology and Restoration: 44th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium; October 2013; Newark, New Jersey
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Karl Nordstrom, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2014
* USD 31,900.00

For more than four decades, the Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium has been an
annual conference designed to bring together geomorphologists from across the
disciplines of geology, geography, and environmental engineering in order to
enable them to exchange research results, become aware of new techniques,
explore special themes, identify future opportunities, and enhance collaborative
networks. The 44rd Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will be held in October
2013 on the campus of New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark, New Jersey.
The goal of this symposium will be to assess the state of knowledge of coastal
landforms and habitats and identify opportunities for integrated research. Key
themes to be addressed are the response of coastal landforms and habitats to
future increased magnitude and frequency of episodic events and changes in sea
level; the effect of these changes on the resilience of these environments; and
ways to restore or maintain landforms and habitats and their geomorphic and
biologic linkages. Activities undertaken at the conference will be three
sessions of invited oral presentations; a poster session to enable other
professionals and graduate students to present their research in geomorphology;
and a field trip to nearby coastal areas, including many that were damaged by
Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, that will provide perspective on key issues and
facilitate scholarly dialog during the meeting. The conference proceedings will
be published in a special volume of a leading journal. NSF funding will provide
support to facilitate the involvement of students and invited presenters.

The 2013 Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will provide a forum to help
integrate research among coastal geomorphologists who are housed in a range of
different academic departments, including geography, geology, civil engineering,
marine sciences, oceanography, and environmental sciences. Given the tight
coupling among abiotic and biotic systems in the coastal zone, the symposium
will increase interactions among geomorphologists and other physical sciences as
well as biologists and ecologists working in intertidal, dune, and wetland
environments. The symposium also will facilitate interaction with practitioners
changed with responsibility for maintaining coastal landforms and habitats in
the face of natural and human-induced stressors.