* 1262947
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Green-Engineered New Transportation Technologies (URGENTT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Valentin Soloiu, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 359,916.00

The projects will make immediate and significant contributions to research on
the performance of fatty acid methyl esters in automobile engine combustion and
emissions. The topic is well suited to undergraduate exploration and focuses on
urgent energy problems ranging from energy depletion to global climate change to
national security. The program will promote development and application of
reformulated biofuels technology with strong potential to advance the current
state of research. REU students will work hands-on projects on formulating new
biofuels and developing hybrid combustion technologies and they will report
their results in scientific papers. The overall REU project will achieve the
following transformative objectives: (1) increase fundamental and experimental
knowledge of the physical and chemical structure of the pure fatty acids and
their methyl esters C16:0-C18:3 as surrogates for biodiesel to optimize fuel
formulations; (2) elucidate the chemical influence of pure methyl esters
C16:0-C18:3 and their blends on mixture formation, ignition delay, heat release,
combustion phasing, and combustion chamber heat transfer; and (3) establish
their impact on gas, particulate emissions, and efficiency in diesel
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia Southern University's Allen E. Paulson
Research Laboratory for Renewable Energy and Engines will offer
interdisciplinary research experiences for 10 engineering undergraduate students
for 10 weeks each summer from 2013 to 2015. The program aims to increase
students' interest in conducting research; understanding of interdisciplinary
concepts through hands-on-learning; STEM problem-solving skills and ability to
apply them to research; independence as well as ability to collaborate
effectively as part of a highly diverse team; and communication competence at
both the interpersonal and presentational level. They will attend lectures,
seminars, workshops, labs, and field trips to develop their knowledge of, and
skills in, renewable energy, research methods, and technical writing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will include significantly increasing
participation of female, minority, and other students underrepresented in
engineering research careers. The program will (a) establish novel
collaborations between Georgia Southern University, Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCUs), and non-PhD institutions in Georgia and across USA;
(b) promote undergraduate research; (c) prepare a new generation of scientific
leaders from diverse populations; (d) advance cooperation with, and develop the
workforce for, the biofuels and automotive industries; and e) develop research-
based educational materials. The results of student projects will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed scientific journals, such as Elsevier Energy,
Applied Tribology, and Journal of Technical Writing and Communication, and at
the professional conferences of the SAE, ASME, DEER, ASEE, and EPA.