* 1262687
* Collaborative Research:   Spruce Beetle and Wildfire Interactions Under Varying Climate in the Rockies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2017
* USD 177,191.00

This research project will examine relationships between outbreaks of spruce
bark beetles and wildfire activity in coniferous forests of the Rocky Mountains.
Coincident with warmer temperatures, since the early 1990s synchronous outbreaks
of native bark beetles have been occurring throughout coniferous forests of
western North America from Alaska to the U.S. Southwest. Extensive tree
mortality caused by bark beetle outbreaks is triggering major changes in forest
landscapes and their associated ecosystem services. This collaborative research
project will address the following questions about interactions between wildfire
and spruce beetle outbreaks under varying climate and their consequences for
ecosystem services: (1) How does climatic variation affect the initiation and
spread of spruce beetle outbreaks across complex landscapes? (2) How does prior
disturbance by windstorm, logging, and fire affect the subsequent occurrence and
severity of spruce beetle outbreak? (3) In the context of a recently warmed
climate, how do spruce beetle outbreaks affect forest structure and composition?
(4) How do spruce beetle outbreaks affect fuels and potential wildfire activity
under varying climatic conditions? (5) How will climate change and the climate-
sensitive disturbances of wildfire and spruce beetle activity affect future
ecosystem services in the subalpine zone of the southern Rocky Mountains under
varying scenarios of adaptive forest management? The first four questions will
be addressed through empirical research, including extensive tree-ring
reconstructions of past disturbances, re-measurement of permanent forest plots,
field measurements of effects of spruce beetle outbreaks on fuels, fire behavior
modeling, and spatiotemporal analyses of the spread of recent spruce beetle
outbreaks. The fifth question will be examined through simulation modeling of
future forest conditions and their consequences for key selected ecosystem
services, including biodiversity, wildlife habitat, and resilience to
environmental change.

The project will contribute to understanding of fire-beetle interactions under
varying climate conditions and their consequences for ecosystem services. The
project will provide new information and insights about climate impacts on bark
beetle outbreaks, feedbacks to and from wildfire and other disturbances, and
sustaining ecosystem services. The project will provide current science
information in support of forest management and decision making needs through
evaluation of different adaptive management strategies to maintain biodiversity,
wildlife habitat, and ecosystem resilience in the face of climate change. The
project will develop pre-collegiate and collegiate-level curriculum material on
wildfire and bark beetle interactions. It will create field and laboratory
educational and training experiences for graduate and undergraduate students as
well as an early-career postdoctoral researcher. To further enhance public
education on fire-beetle topics, the project will produce a documentary video as
well as a website of frequently asked questions about bark beetles and wildfire
in the face of climate change.