* 1262907
* REU Site: Ecosystem Studies in the Maquenque National Wildlife Refuge (MNWLR) of Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Daniela Shebitz, Kean University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2016
* USD 290,185.00

A Research Experience For Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to Kean
University, providing international experience and training for 8 students per
year for 10 weeks (5 weeks in Costa Rica and 5 weeks in New Jersey) during the
summer of 2013-2015. This REU project will have students conduct research as
part of an international team of scientists from Kean University, the Centro
Cientifico Tropical and Instituto Biologica Nacional to study the vegetation,
invertebrate, primate, soil microbial community structures, biogeochemical,
and/or ecological characteristics within a variety of undamaged, damaged, or at-
risk habitats in Maquenque National Wildlife Refuge (MNWLR), a new conservation
area, in the Northern Zone of Costa Rica. Students will assess if
patterns/indicators of change in ecosystem conditions can be observed by
habitat, management strategy, and/or atmospheric condition, adding to Costa
Rica's natural resource database as students study the differences across
different trophic communities within a continuum of habitats in the MNWLR, where
little research has been conducted. Students will develop an understanding of
the connections between land use, biodiversity and ecosystem function; present
their work at a regional ESA conference and submit manuscripts to journals; and
have a value-added cultural experience working with the local community in the
village of Boca Tapada in their elementary school. Students will receive
enhancement activities concerning research methods, data analysis, communicating
science, publishing their work in journals, the ethics in scientific
investigations and responsible conduct of research, and other support mechanisms
to enhance the students' pursuit of graduate programs in
ecological/environmental sciences. The PIs will use the NSF REU common
assessment tool to assess students' scientific and intellectual gains, and will
also track student progress and activities for 3 years post-REU experience.
Students will be chosen based on a more holistic perspective that includes
transcripts, GPA, an essay on why they want to work in the program, their goals
as future scientists, how they think they will benefit from this program, what
other research opportunities may exist at their home institution, and 2 letters
of recommendation. For more information, please contact Dr. Bill Eaton
(weaton@kean.edu) or Dr. Daniela Shebitz (dshebitz@kean.edu).