* 1262491
* ABI Innovation: Mining Metabolic and Enzyme Databases for the Composition of Non-Canonical Pathways
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 694,873.00

This project will develop and implement a set of algorithms for the discovery of
complex metabolic pathways using information on metabolic pathways from
different species available in databases such as KEGG and MetaCyc, and enzyme
information available in databases such as BRENDA. The increasing availability
of experimentally elucidated metabolic pathways together with the availability
of enzyme functional data have ignited research in metabolic engineering and
metabolomics. Recently, metabolic engineering has facilitated the production of
complex pharmaceutical molecules by combining and manipulating metabolic
pathways from multiple organisms. Metabolomic studies have revealed underlying
causes of complex diseases and have helped diagnostic, prognostic, and treatment
regimens as these evolve toward more individualized protocols. These spectacular
advances have mostly relied upon laborious manual processes that are infeasible
as more and more metabolic data are generated. The ability of the algorithms
that will developed herein to discover known pathways will be investigated
thoroughly and will include wetlab experimentation with two model studies. The
studies involve niacin and shikonin, two therapeutic agents. Computational and
wetlab experimentation will be conducted in parallel, with the computation
feeding the experiment and the experiment providing valuable feedback for the
tuning of the parameters of the corresponding algorithms. A web server will be
built to facilitate the use of our tools and to widely disseminate our work in
the scientific community.

The research is timely and directed toward an important area of broad scientific
interest with implications extending to fields such as health and energy. The
project will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Participation in this type of research will provide graduate students
with interdisciplinary training in metabolic engineering, metabolomics, systems
biology, biochemistry, and molecular biology, as well as in mathematical
modeling, algorithms, and computer science. The project will provide training
opportunities and mentoring for women and minority graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students. For more information, please visit:
http://www.kavrakilab.org/projects/nsf_abi_1262491