* 1262521
* Collaborative Research: A Spatial Analysis of the Determinants of Setback Distance Variation Between Shale Gas Wells and Residences
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Matthew Fry, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 11/30/2015
* USD 56,765.00

This project will investigate the spatial variability of municipal setback
policies in major shale gas areas in Texas. In this case setback distance can be
conceptualized as an absolute space between gas wells and homes, as well as the
product of negotiations and knowledge transfers among key policy actors. By
examining the processes underlying the way in which setback distances are set,
this research will fill a knowledge gap in the understanding of the placement of
shale gas wells, contribute to emergent geographical theories on the mobility of
policies across institutional landscapes, and provide critical information for
analyzing present and future debates surrounding shale gas drilling in populated
areas. The study will use a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods and will
collect data in several municipalities. First, a geographic Information System
(GIS) database will be developed to identify and stratify cities based on
setback distances and gas well density. Second, interviews will be conducted
with multiple policy stakeholders to determine their ideas about, understanding
of, and role in establishing setback policies. Interview data will be analyzed
to determine how setback ordinances diffuse, mutate, and/or evolve among
municipalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to on-going
policy discussions about shale gas drilling and its impact on residential areas
throughout the United States. Undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups at the University of North Texas and Texas A&amp;M University will be
recruited to participate in the research. These students will be trained through
hands-on field research and data preparation, workshops, mentoring, and will be
given opportunities to publicly present their research findings. In addition,
the research will become a component of an undergraduate Geography of Energy
course that will include a research component. A third component incorporates
the GIS products generated from this study into a module for high school
students. The module will allow students to determine how GIS tools can be used
to understand human dimensions of hydrocarbon extraction; it will also become a
tangible educational product to foster additional outreach programs at other
high schools. Finally, this study will inform local, regional, national, and
international policies on shale gas drilling in populated areas. A clear
understanding of the motives behind gas well ordinances and the goals of setback
distances and how policies formulated in one place are applied elsewhere will be
relevant for communities around the world.