* 1262797
* CAREER:  Using Haptically  Augmented Tactile Communication Methods to Foster the Inclusion of the Visually Impaired in STEM Professions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Christian Schwartz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,569.00

1151147 Christian, Swartz

The American Community Survey reports that there are more than 3.5 million non-
institutionalized individuals in the U.S. of working age that are blind or
visually impaired (BVI). Within this population are technically talented
individuals who have the potential to contribute very substantially to our
economy, but face obstacles because of their disability. There is a substantial
opportunity cost of their inability to fully participate. A large percentage of
BVI individuals are able to effectively enter many areas of the workforce due to
the prevalence of Braille; however, many talented people in the BVI community
are not able to enter STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
related fields because of the substantial hurdles is using Braille in STEM
education and professional practice. Scientific graphics (e.g., chemical or
biological cycles, flowcharts), mathematical formulas, and common data plots can
be extremely cumbersome, if not impossible, to express using existing Braille
methods. These tools are essential in any STEM field. A critical need exists to
enhance the usefulness of Braille in communicating STEM-related information both
in education and in professional practice to allow BVI individuals to
participate more fully. This work will investigate the use of 'secondary'
tactile cues (haptics) integrated within Braille text, to transform Braille into
a more usable communication method for STEM information. The fundamental
hypothesis of the work is that haptic attributes (e.g., topological elements,
temperature, prickle/fuzziness, slip/stick) can be incorporated within Braille
text to dramatically improve information content within the same page space. The
three project objectives are to investigate: 1. Integration of
topological/textural elements (TE) within standard Braille text to understand
psychophysical relationships involving TE enhancement, and to determine its
contribution to overall Braille information density, 2. Integration of non-
topological haptic elements (prickle/fuzziness, slip/stick, temperature) within
Braille to understand perceptibility of these enhancements and determine their
contribution to overall Braille information density, and 3. How the design of
haptic-based assistive technology can be used within a project-based learning
environment to educate engineers to effectively address the needs of the BVI
community, and attract BVI students to consider college careers in STEM fields.
This work will involve an extensive experimental approach including human
sensory assessment of the tactile response of various Braille enhancements in
order to determine their effectiveness. Novel platforms for investigation of
topological and non-topological haptic sensitivity will be developed as well, as
a means of determining psychophysical relationships and the extent that they
increase useful information density. All research tasks will be integrated into
an educational plan targeting undergraduates, graduate students, and pre-college
BVI students. Intellectual Merit. The PI, with expertise in skin tribology and
engineering education, is uniquely suited to successfully complete this work
which will contribute to existing research fields as well as foster new fields.
The anticipated results have the potential to enhance and transform, rather than
replace, the Braille system. Results will be of immediate use to others in the
field of tactile communication, including those who design other types of
assistive technology for the BVI community. The quantitative psychophysical
models that relate surface topology to tactile sensitivity will also be useful
to designers of user interfaces whether they be consumer, medical, or military
applications. Broader Impacts. These results will have far-reaching impact on
the understanding of how to enhance Braille to foster inclusion of BVI
individuals in STEM-intensive activities. The work will also serve as an
instructional platform to expose students to design experiences that incorporate
the unique needs of the BVI community. Results will be integrated into the PI's
graduate tribology course, while a problem-based pedagogical approach,
enVISIBLE, will include pre-college BVI students on engineering design teams in
the undergraduate capstone design course at Texas A&M University.