* 1262086
* Testing multiple hypotheses of community assembly using a tropical insect: Twig-nesting ants in a coffee agroecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Stacy Philpott, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2014
* USD 135,171.00

The study of assembly of ecological communities provides information about where
organisms are located, when, and why. This knowledge is critical for
understanding maintenance of biodiversity and how the distribution of organisms
will respond to environmental change. Most studies of drivers of community
assembly of tropical organisms are limited to observation of static assemblages
because manipulations are impractical or impossible. Further, community assembly
studies are generally undertaken in natural ecosystems despite that agricultural
areas cover large fractions of land area. This project takes advantage of an
easily manipulated arboreal twig-nesting ant community in a coffee agroecosystem
to experimentally explore multiple factors influencing community assembly. The
main objectives are to examine twig-nesting ant life history traits (e.g. colony
size, reproductive and dispersal capabilities, and competitive ability),
responses of ant communities to agricultural disturbance, and impacts of
environmental change and competition with other ants on nest colonization and
colony survival. The work will be conducted in a coffee farm in southern Mexico
and will involve surveys and manipulative studies. Specifically, surveys will
take place in a field that recently experienced drastic agricultural disturbance
(forest canopy cutting), and in an uncut control field. Two large-scale
experiments with nest additions and reciprocal transplants will directly compare
the influence of multiple factors on colony recruitment and survival.

Understanding the factors driving community assembly of ants in coffee
agroecosystems will contribute to coffee management and educational goals.
Coffee agroecosystems are extremely important from conservation and economic
standpoints. Shaded coffee farms provide habitat to threatened tropical
diversity and coffee crops provide livelihood to millions. Ants are abundant,
important predators that influence resources in tropical agroecosystems. Twig-
nesting ants are biological control agents of coffee pests, thus elucidating
factors contributing to ant assembly will inform farmer management decisions and
contribute to sustainable agricultural production. The project will advance
education in independent research for undergraduate and graduate students, and
will focus on increasing diversity and representation of women ecologists. The
ants collected will enhance museum collections, train students in insect
taxonomy and identification, and to contribute to field and online guides for
the ants of Mexico.