* 1262410
* ABI Innovation: Stochastic Transcription Regulatory Mechanisms - Model building, simulation, and visualization
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Robin Dowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2017
* USD 689,764.00

The goal of the project is to construct an integrated transcriptional regulation
modeling toolbox composed of a model builder, visualization tools, and a
teaching interface. Transcriptional regulation is the complex system behavior
that arises from the interaction of numerous regulator molecules with the DNA.
There is growing evidence that response of the transcriptional process emerges
not solely from the changes in individual components, but rather by the
collective behavior between the components. The model builder will combine the
abundant experimental data on individual molecule interactions and the current
models of transcriptional regulation mechanisms into a single model that can
simulate all the molecular interactions along the DNA. The visualization tool
will utilize assorted graphical methods (including animations, charts, and
graphs) to facilitate the understanding of the random nature of the different
mechanisms used by the cell to regulate transcription. And finally, the teaching
interface will merge the simulation and visualization components to provide
students, educators, and scientists with the ability to experiment, explore, and
discover how different regulation mechanisms combine to achieve specific
cellular responses. These tools will aid students and researchers in
understanding the stochastic and dynamic nature of transcriptional regulation
and allow exploration of the effects of perturbation on different regulation
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes interdisciplinary
research and training among faculty and students in computer science, molecular
biology, and mathematical modeling. The work integrates into existing simulation
based educational initiatives and educational outreach activities on the
University of Colorado campus. This project allows for the training of a
postdoc, a graduate student, several undergraduates, and a few talented local
high school students in an interdisciplinary topic. Students will be recruited
from under-represented populations through the Summer Multicultural Access to
Research Training (SMART) and Colorado Diversity Initiative (CDI). Undergraduate
student training will be directly integrated into the project. All software
tools and educational materials will be publically available as open source.