* 1262743
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates at  Georgia State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Dabney Dixon, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 287,935.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation and
the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate of Biological
Sciences support a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site led by
Professors Suri Iyer and Dabney W. Dixon, both at the Georgia State University
(GSU). The REU Site entitled "Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Georgia
State University" will fund 10 undergraduate students for a 10 week summer
research experiences. Faculty at GSU has a history of working closely with
undergraduate and high school students. While the program will be open to
students from all states, students will be recruited from local four year and
two year community colleges. The REU site in Atlanta, the ninth largest city in
the United States with a high concentration of minorities and economically
disadvantaged students, would afford these students an opportunity to work under
the direct supervision of research active faculty and would provide them with
increased career prospects in the sciences. The intellectual merit of the
proposed activities are expected to advance knowledge in specific projects, and
will allow undergraduates to understand scientific concepts by combining theory
and experiment in a research setting. In addition, lectures on diverse topics
that include scientific writing and improving presentation skills will prepare
the students for scientific careers. The Site leaders are well qualified to
successfully conduct the project because Professor Iyer has served as the
coordinator of the ACS Project SEED program for the past eight years and
professor Dixon has extensive experience in managing the STEM program at GSU for
the past four years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, all research mentors
mentioned in this proposal have worked with undergraduates (&gt;100) resulting
in a number of local, regional and national presentations and publications with
undergraduates as coauthors over the past five years. The broader impacts of the
proposal are that individual projects are expected to advance scientific
discovery and understanding and will promote independent thinking and working in
a group environment. The proposed activities are expected to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups as well as economically disadvantaged
students. Students' research findings will be disseminated in the form of
presentations at ACS regional and national meetings and through publications in
refereed journals. Overall, the proposed activities are beneficial to society
because the proposed research activities will not only enhance fundamental
knowledge in specific areas, but it is also expected that students participating
in this REU program will attend graduate programs and join the scientific
workforce.