* 1262439
* ABI Innovation:  Engineering molecular scissors by computational design with experimental validation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Ivan Dotu, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 12/31/2018
* USD 700,000.00

Riboswitches are portions of bacterial messenger RNA molecules, which control
gene regulation by allostery, i.e., whether a gene is OFF or ON depends on the
molecular structure of the riboswitch, which is determined by a binding event or
'trigger'. Riboswitches are also known to control alternative splicing in some
higher organisms (eukaryotes), by determining which variant (isoform) of protein
is produced by alternative splicing, rather than controlling whether a protein
is produced or not. In contrast, ribozymes are RNA molecules that catalyze a
reaction, often catalyzing their own cleavage (cis) or the cleavage of another
target molecule (trans). In this project, novel computational methods are
developed to design artificial RNA sequences, predicted to form a chimeric
riboswitch/ribozyme structure, that cleaves itself (cis) upon hybridization to
another small RNA molecule, known as a 'trigger'. The algorithms to be developed
uses constraint programming, dynamic programming and the fast Fourier transform
(FFT). Sequences returned by the algorithms to be developed are subsequently
selected/prioritized for experimental validation by additional computational
methods. Finally, the most likely candidates are subsequently experimentally
tested for activity, using a cleavage assay and inline-probing. Successfully
designed artificial riboswitch/ribozyme RNA molecules constitute 'molecular
scissors', which are quiescent (cleavage OFF) until triggered by a binding
event, after which the molecule is active (cleavage ON).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research in this grant is both
scientific and educational. The resulting research contributes directly to
synthetic biology -- the 'wet' analogue of nanotechnology, both research areas
likely to transform society in the 21st century. More broadly, the research from
this grant contributes to the areas of molecular biology, physical chemistry and
condensed matter physics. Long-term consequences of this research could include
a novel approach to combat HIV. The computational design of artificial RNAs will
contribute to our understanding of molecular evolution, and will benefit the
molecular biology community by providing a novel approach for finding certain
noncoding RNAs such as internal ribosomal entry site elements. Findings from
this research will be made publicly accessible through a web server and
distribution of source code, by conference and journal publications, and
presentations in meetings. Educational impact at the undergraduate and graduate
level will be ensured by integrating new research findings into existent
graduate and undergraduate courses in computational biology, as well as by
developing a new course in synthetic biology at Boston College, which undertakes
special efforts to recruit students from underrepresented groups. To ensure a
broad educational impact of the research proposed, an annual week-long RNA
summer school will be held at Boston College, building on an existing successful
RNA summer school.