* 1262476
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Quantifying and Exploiting the Structure of Phylogenetic Tree Space Through Network Analyses
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Kyle Gallivan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 256,012.00

This project will develop a rich and flexible mathematical framework for
quantifying the phylogenetic signal (i.e., the information about genealogical
relationships among organisms) contained within big data sets of genome
sequences. To quantify this signal, the relationships among different
phylogenetic trees, or the branches in those trees, will be conceptualized as
networks. The structure of these networks provides biologically meaningful
information about the degree and causes of phylogenetic uncertainty and
conflict. The newly developed framework will be implemented in publicly
available software useable as a standalone application and as a webservice. In
addition, the core functionality of the developed software will be closely
integrated with other ongoing NSF-funded efforts to reconstruct and explore the
Tree of Life (iPlant and the Open Tree of Life).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will draw from expertise in evolutionary biology, computer science, and applied
mathematics. Research activities will involve the direct contributions of both
graduate and undergraduate researchers and software developers. Undergraduates
will learn to code from graduate students in mentor-apprentice relationships. An
undergraduate science communications student will develop a website illustrating
phylogenetic principles and applied phylogenetic research, highlighting novel
insights provided by the methods developed. Additionally, several in-person and
remote training workshops will be held to introduce and familiarize researchers
with newly developed tools. An ongoing computational biology seminar series
targeted towards undergraduates will be held at Louisiana State University. The
methods developed as part of this project will improve our ability to understand
phylogenetic information, which is integral to a variety of applications in
conservation, forensics, agriculture, and epidemiology. Updates on project
progress and links to developed tools will be available at
http://www.phyleauxgenetics.org/.