* 1262654
* ABI Development:software and data management for an automated animal tracking system
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Virginia Boucher, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 745,391.00

The University of California Davis is awarded a grant to build a
software/hardware interface for an automated animal tracking system that can
provide both locations and physiological data for up to 30 small to medium-sized
animals. No other current system has the ability to track multiple small animals
simultaneously, both day and night, providing fine-scale spatial data. These
capacities will allow researchers to examine interactions among individuals and
collective behavior within a species, enabling them to use social network
analysis to understand behavior enabling them to use social network analysis to
gain a new understanding of animal behavior. It will also allow the examination
of interactions among species across trophic levels - for example predator-prey
interactions. The added feature of the system to monitor physiological signals
such as heart rate and temperature will provide the ability to quantify the
effects of predators, weather, geography and vegetation on both movement
patterns and physiological responses such as respiration rate. The potential for
experimental manipulation of hormones levels to test the effects on movement and
physiology will provide an additional novel application. Traditionally, the
hardware and software for animal tracking are developed for individual projects.
The products of this grant will make it possible for field facilities to offer
much of this infrastructure as a service to researchers, making it possible to
accommodate a larger and more diverse set of research activities.

The technology has the potential, once perfected, to be transferred at a
reasonable cost to other field sites. The software interface will provide a
dashboard control panel that will be easily navigable by biologists and will not
require a programmer?s knowledge to use. Different modules will be developed for
use with different physical site characteristics, as well as a suite of
different physiological outputs. Future users will have the ability to replace
individual modules to suit their own project needs. The system has wonderful
potential for public outreach and interactive learning through websites,
partnerships with local science museums, and as a cornerstone of a developing
virtual museum of the environment for the installation site. Movement data will
be available in near ?real time?, allowing school children and the general
public to ?watch? animals on the computer. When the system is fully operational,
students from New Mexico State University, a minority-serving institution, will
spend a week at the Quail Ridge site each year with collaborator Dr. Karen Mabry
fitting animals with small transmitters. The students will use and learn about
the tracking system during their visit, and then continue to gather data
remotely once they return to New Mexico. For further information on the project
and its products see http://nrs.ucdavis.edu/quail.html.