* 1262960
* REU Site: Cognitive and Autonomous Test (CAT) Vehicle
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Tamal Bose, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2017
* USD 398,940.00

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. The motivation for this project is to engage students with the wide
range of research topics and applications related to autonomous ground vehicles.
The REU Site provides research experience for 10 students for 10 weeks in the
summer for 3 years. The participants are engaged in collaborative work with
graduate students doing research in the fields of autonomous systems and
cognitive radio. The project approach utilizes a spiral development process for
participant projects, which enables participants to see how a research problem
can be decomposed, and also enables each year of the project to build upon
previous projects. The process focuses on requirements verification and testing,
and thus enables a safe interaction with the Cognitive and Autonomous Test
Vehicle (CAT Vehicle). The CAT Vehicle is a full-sized Ford Escape robotic car
that employs various sensors that can be used to make the car drive
autonomously, or that can be used when the car is under human control to test
new techniques or sensing algorithms. Participants are expected to gain
experience and produce research results and publications in areas related to
cognitive radio, wireless communications, autonomous control systems, and model-
based design, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will have a
significant impact on the participating students who will gain experience in
writing academic publications, preparing and giving presentation, and in
articulating the story of their compelling research problem and its solution.
The project is expected to produce artifacts that will increase visibility of
the performed work, including a video describing their project journey that
lends itself to broad dissemination of a participant's contribution once they
return to their home institution. Participants gain expertise in what it means
to design components of a system as pervasive as an automobile. Such experience
and motivation is needed for participants to later go on to explore problems in
the smart grid, next-generation wireless networks, alternative energy, and other
issues that have impact on a societal-scale. The REU Site project web site
(http://reu.ece.arizona.edu/) provides additional information.