* 1262991
* REU Site:  Solid-State Devices for Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetics Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Pingshan Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 337,425.00

Micro and nanofabrication of solid-state devices are rapidly becoming the key
drivers of interdisciplinary research in emerging fields such as
nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, nanomechanics, nanophysics, and biotechnology.
Such technology is a critical component of modern economic development, and
leadership in research on devices for electronics, photonics, and magnetics is a
key to sustained US economic competitiveness. One of the greatest challenges in
maintaining that leadership is the limited number of undergraduates from US
engineering programs who pursue graduate studies in solid-state devices,
especially those from underrepresented groups. This REU site the Summer
Undergraduate Research Experience in Solid-State Devices for Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetics Technology ("the SURE program")is established to
address this need. The SURE program will provide an average of ten students per
summer the opportunity to pursue ten weeks of faculty-directed research. The
primary goal is to provide each participant with a scientifically rigorous,
intellectually demanding research experience within a highly collegial
environment of collaboration with faculty and other students, expert guidance in
non-technical aspects of professional development, and frequent opportunities
for social interaction. Utilization of current and new partnering relationships
will be used to increase participation by students from underrepresented groups.
This program is supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers
of the National Science Foundation.