* 1262297
* Function of Auditory Feedback Processing During Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Srikantan Nagarajan, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 530,000.00

The goal of speaking is to produce the right sounds that convey an intended
message. Accordingly, speakers monitor their sound output and use this auditory
feedback to further adjust their speech production. Drs. Nagarajan and Houde
hypothesized that the brain not only generates the motor signals that control
the speech production but also generates a prediction of what this speech should
sound like and performs an on-going comparison during speaking in order to
dynamically adjust speech production. Whole-brain magnetoencephalographic
imaging (MEG-I) experiments will be performed to monitor subjects' auditory
neural activity as they hear themselves speak. The first tests task and feature
specificity of the feedback prediction. If the prediction encodes only task-
relevant acoustic features (i.e., pitch for a singing task), then auditory
cortical activity will depend only on the acoustic goal for that task. The
second tests the importance of categorical identity in the process of comparing
feedback with the prediction. If feedback is altered enough to change the
meaning of a word (e.g., when /bad/ is altered to /dad/), this is expected to
have a much larger impact on auditory cortical activity than non-categorical
alterations. These experiments are expected to improve our understanding of how
the brain uses auditory feedback to maintain accuracy in speech production.

The proposed research activity also has broader impact. First, these expected
findings may further contribute to a better understanding of and effective
treatments for speech dysfunctions. For example, accurate models of brain
networks used to control speaking form the basis for testable hypotheses about
neural origins of speech disorders such as stuttering or spasmodic dysphonia.
Second, the research project will provide a special opportunity to train and
educate graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the use of real-time
speech alteration and MEG-I techniques which are only available at very few US
institutions. Outreach with collaborators at San Francisco State University, and
to the San Francisco Unified School district through the NSF funded Science
Education Partnership (SEP) program will provide research experience to their
students, specifically students from socioeconomically disadvantaged minorities
who are under-represented in the sciences. The research team will also
participate in the big data sharing effort by making the data and analysis tools
available to support efforts to make use of real data in the teaching of STEM-
related courses and to enable participation in discovery science by those who
would otherwise have no access to such data.