* 1262186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Environmental Reconstruction of Mesoamerica's Northern Frontier through Stable Isotope Analysis of Leporid Bones
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Margaret Schoeninger, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2015
* USD 24,571.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Margaret Schoeninger, Andrew Somerville will
reconstruct past environmental conditions across a transect of four North
American archaeological sites in the United States and Mexico. This will be
accomplished through the application of stable isotope analysis to rabbit and
hare (leporid) bones (n=347). The selected archaeological site locations
geographically span the arid regions between Central Mexico and the Southwest
United States, and temporally cover the period of AD 200-1200. Isotopic ratios
of carbon nitrogen and oxygen in mammalian bone are influenced by environmental
factors such as local botanical composition, average precipitation, and relative
humidity, and thus analysis of ancient specimens enables the reconstruction of
past landscapes. In addition to archaeological samples, Mr. Somerville will
analyze a large collection of modern leporid bones selected from museum
collections in order to provide baseline data to aid in the interpretation of
isotopic values of pre-Hispanic leporids. Environmental data from each
archaeological location will permit investigations of the dynamic relationship
between environment and society over long stretches of time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on marginal arid landscape of north
of the Meosoamerican core as cultural historical models for the rise and decline
of socio-political complexity in the region have frequently implicated climatic
change as a driving factor. During the 6th century AD, complex Mesoamerican
societies expanded into the desert regions north of Central Mexico, particularly
the modern states of Zacatecas and Durango. Despite four centuries of
occupation, most complex polities of the arid north, such as La Quemada and Alta
Vista, were abandoned at about AD 900. These broad patterns of development and
decline led scholars to argue that favorable environmental conditions permitted
the expansion of Mesoamerican civilization and that severe and prolonged
droughts brought about its eventual retraction. Isotopic data generated from
this project will either provide the first empirical support for prominent role
of environmental factors of the expansion and contraction of Mesoamerica, or
will provide evidence contrary this long-standing assumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More generally, this dissertation research will increase
our understanding of the role of the environment during the development and
decline of complex societies during the Late Holocene. Reconstructing the
environmental conditions present during the initial years of selected sites will
address models concerning the relationship between ecological factors and
incipient socioeconomic development, particularly the notion that agriculturally
productive zones provided powerful advantages to newly developing economies.
Knowing the environmental conditions leading up to political collapse or
abandonment at each site will provide opportunities to study social-
environmental patterns present during periods of rapid social transformation and
to identify social strategies which led to systemic vulnerability or resiliency.
Ultimately, this dissertation seeks patterns, trends, and lessons from past
social-environmental interactions that may better contextualize our modern
environmental concerns.