* 1262332
* Network of Indigenous Knowledge
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Jonathan Waterhouse, Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2013
* USD 44,131.00

This award funds a workshop to bring together indigenous cultural
representatives from the great river basins of the Yukon and the Amazon with
environmental scientists to share information and formulate plans for research
on themes that highlight the long-term sustainability of rivers and the health
and well-being of the people who live along them. Although the Amazon is a long
way from the Arctic, their is a good argument for the need to connect the
communities of river systems around the globe in order to better understand the
effects of resource development, urbanization, and environmental change on these
important fresh water systems. Although the global environmental change signal
is strongest in the Arctic it is having an effect on other global river systems.
And while urbanization and resource development may have a larger signal in the
Amazon in all but the Russian arctic, these processes are spreading across the
Circumpolar North. The PI and his collaborators view this workshop as a starting
point a larger network of Indigenous Peoples and scientists working together to
increase our understanding of these fresh water systems and ensure their long
term sustainability and sustainable use. It is the vision of the research team
that future workshops will include the Lena, Nile, Ganges, Yangtze, Gironde,
Mississippi and the McKenzie Rivers and ultimately the Ocean Peoples of
Polynesia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five-day workshop will be held in Timpia,
Peru, fall 2013 with the specific goals to: gather and compare observations and
experiences from workshop participants around issues of water and rivers, and
how they have been impacted by landscape and environmental change; seek
consensus among the participants about specific kinds of capacity development
and action around water issues that may be needed to address community needs;
introduce and train participants in methods of community-based water monitoring;
introduce and train participants in methods of digital media and storytelling;
identify methods for developing and maintaining community and information
exchange among workshop participants, including the possible establishment of a
global network centered around indigenous communities and rivers. Additional
subjects explored during the workshop will be indigenous narratives of how
rivers may have changed due to landscape and environmental change, both
contemporary and traditional, in order to gain more insights into how
communities have responded to these challenges and their dynamic effects on
local social and cultural systems. Also discussed by workshop participants will
be how modern science contributes tools and additional perspectives to
understanding changes in the riverine environment. And, how science and
traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) can work together for the benefit of
indigenous communities. The workshop will include strong participation from both
indigenous communities and the scientific community and thus will increase the
participation of highly underrepresented groups in science.