* 1263145
* REU Site:  A Passionate on Parallel-A Summer Research Program
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Craig Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/29/2016
* USD 342,100.00

This funding renews a highly successful CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign that
is focused on parallel computing. The transition to "parallelism as the default"
will be a change in the computing landscape of the magnitude of the introduction
of the Internet. A central challenge in this transition is a shortage of people
with expertise in parallelism. This site will train students in the basics of
parallel programming, provide them with application-centric research experiences
that demonstrate to them the qualitative impact that parallelism can have on
computing applications, and help them develop the confidence that they need to
be successful in graduate school. The host institution (UIUC) is well known as a
center of parallel computing research and will provide an excellent environment
for the REU students to learn about the application of parallelism to a range of
scientific and computational problems.

This site will provide the opportunity for 30 undergraduate students (over three
years) to develop essential skills in parallel programming in an application-
focused research context and to develop a network of mentors, role models, and
peers to inform and advise them about performing research, careers in research,
and graduate school. A major motivation for the site is improving the retention
of women in the sciences, and the PIs have various strategies for addressing
this goal. The PIs will disseminate what they learn about engaging women in
computer science research, and will also encourage and facilitate publication by
the participating students and their mentors.