* 1263930
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: How Authoritarian Politics Shapes China's Outward Direct Investments
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Weiyi Shi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2016
* USD 17,577.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has implications for US
economic interests because it helps form a more nuanced expectation about
China's global involvement in the world economy. The project addresses several
questions about international investment, especially from authoritarian
societies. Specifically, the project asks: How does domestic politics shape
investments abroad? Are international investors from authoritarian regimes
inherently different from those from democratic countries? Investments from
countries like China and Russia are playing an increasingly important role, but
most of the knowledge about foreign direct investments (FDI) comes from studying
investors from mature democracies. This project explicates how the fundamental
features of an autocratic political system impact firms' outward investments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project postulates that investment risks and returns
are often mismatched in an autocracy: companies in patronage circles can count
on being bailed out by the political elite when investments go badly, allowing
them to socialize risks associated with outward FDI. As a result, politically
connected companies in an autocracy are more likely to invest abroad in riskier
destinations, but may in fact be less motivated to seek protection for their
investments, whether that entails participating in global governance, bribing
the host government to prevent expropriation of assets, or lobbying for military
activism. The freewheeling investment styles of Chinese corporations may well
corner Chinese leaders into a reactive position while the companies themselves
have no great incentives to participate in global governance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is especially associated
with its theoretical advancements in the study of political economy and FDI. It
stands to make a significant theoretical and empirical contributions to
scholarship in international political economy (IPE). The project includes an
innovative theory modeling the strategic interaction between the political elite
and companies in different political regimes and deriving their optimal
investment portfolios. All existing models for FDI are based on studying
investments from mature democracies and assume that firms maximize profits
independently from political elites. The proposed theory will be one of the
first to allow strategic interaction between companies and political elites and
incorporate home country politics as a determinant of FDI. The theory is tested
empirically using interviews, statistical analyses based on original firm-level
surveys in China and Vietnam, as well as critical case studies conducted in
China and Zambia. The empirical portion of the project creates two original
survey datasets at the firm level. These survey data will add to a scarce pool
of firm-level data on FDI and benefit the wider scholarly
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the research focuses on China, the
mechanism through which authoritarian politics mediates the choices of its
multinational corporations is not specific to Chinese companies. More broadly,
existing scholarship on FDI has focused almost exclusively on how host
(recipient) country politics affects aggregate investment flow or the choices of
a given multilateral corporation. This research agenda is proving increasingly
limiting as more investors hailing from diverse political backgrounds join the
global investment landscape. The project, by focusing on the impact of
variations in home country politics, extends the current research agenda.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its intellectual merit, this project has
wide-ranging implications for policy-making. The theory suggests that China's
global economic spread has the tendency to exceed its willingness and readiness
to govern. Further, companies may have more motivation to grow their
bureaucratic capacity and extract rents from their home country than to build
truly competitive global businesses. After one decade of implementing the Go Out
policy, evidence is mounting that Chinese overseas investments have encountered
serious problems in profitability and sustainability. Contrary to the common
arguments for mere inexperience and international hostility, the research
suggests that unless China can bring forth substantive reform to its patronage-
based economy, problems may persist or worsen. Once the research is concluded,
the findings will provide a more nuanced understanding of China's approach to
FDI, a critical issue for US economic interests.