* 1263736
* Nanoscale Mapping and Manipulation of Activity on Single Catalytic Nanocrystals/Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Peng Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 318,755.00

1263736 Chen, Peng

Metal nanoparticles, including shaped metal nanocrystals and plasmonic
nanoparticles, are a new generation of nanocatalysts, and they exhibit various
types of surface facets and sites. Determining where the reactions occur on
these nanoparticles and which facets and sites are more active, including under
plasmonic excitations, is essential for the understanding and development of
superior nanocatalysts. The long-term goal of the research project awarded by
the Catalysis & Biocatalysis Program of the National Science Foundation to
Professor Peng Chen of Cornell University, Ithaca, NY is to understand the
catalyt-ic activity of metal nanocrystal catalysts and related nanostructures at
the sub-particle, nanometer spatial resolution level. Single-reaction time
resolution is correlated with catalyst particle morphology, surface structure,
and plasmonic properties. The main approach is to use single-molecule super-
resolution catalysis imaging in combination with physical, chemical, and
plasmonic manipulations at the nanometer scale.

A number of expected outcomes will increase the impact of this experimental
program. First, the re-sults will serve to establish the super-resolution
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy as a powerful and novel way to
interrogate the catalytic activity of nanoparticles and nanostructures at the
single-turnover temporal resolution and nanometer spatial resolution under
ambient reaction conditions. Second, the complex reactivity patterns and their
structural basis on metal nanorods will be identified. And third, the dominant
mechanisms of surface-plasmon-enhanced catalysis on plasmonic nanostructures and
their correlation with catalytic enhancement will be explored. These expected
outcomes have potential in trans-forming the understanding of nanocatalyst
activity in both spatial and temporal dimensions, leading to new and better
nanocatalysts.

The broader technical impact of the proposal research is ultimately that it will
offer fundamental in-sights that will help guide the application and development
of shaped-controlled nanocrystal catalysts for chemical synthesis and energy
applications, as well as of plasmonic nanostructures for better harvesting of
solar energy for conversion to chemical energy. The broader impact will be
further enhanced on the educational front by the planned outreach, education and
training activities, encompassing graduate and undergraduate students and K-12
levels.