* 1263089
* REU Site:   Summer Program in Chihuahuan Desert Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Jerry Johnson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2017
* USD 296,842.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to The
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) that will provide research training for
eight students for 10 weeks during summers of 2013 - 2015. The program focuses
on Chihuahuan Desert Biodiversity (CEB), with emphasis on studies linked to
interests of about 10 Department of Biological Sciences faculty members who will
serve as mentors. Available research projects for students will include aspects
of: genetics, ecology, and ecogeography of reptile populations; ecogeography of
birds; symbiotic relationships of parasites and their animal hosts and vectors;
systematic entomology; aquatic ecology of plants and invertebrate animals in
permanent and temporary water sources; neurobiology of vertebrate structures and
behavior, and ecology and distribution of native and invasive exotic plants.
Field research will be performed at UTEP's 40,000 acre Indio Mountains Research
Station (IMRS), or adjacent sites, and data processed and analyzed within two
well-equipped bioscience research buildings and included core facilities on UTEP
campus. Students are expected to do full-time field and lab research and
participate in seminars and various workshops, such as ethics training and
responsible conduct in research, professional communication skills, career
opportunities in academia and industry, and graduate school application
processes. REU students have access to well-equipped labs of mentors and
interdepartmental research facilities, such as IMRS field laboratory, UTEP
Biodiversity Collection, and departmental core venues supporting biomolecule
analysis, cell culture and screening, analytical cytology, DNA analysis, and
statistical consultation. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort consists
of traditional -hard copy - formats, digital-based advertising, and personal
recruiting trips to institutions and scientific meetings. Students are selected
based on academic record, research potential, will normally be at junior or
senior level, and by faculty recommendations. Students will be tracked to
determine continued interests in their academic field, career paths, and lasting
influence of the research experience. REU program will be assessed by various
means, including use of the BIO REU common assessment tool. More information is
available by visiting http://science.utep.edu/cdb-reu, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Jerry D. Johnson at jjohnson@utep.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Michael L. Moody at
mlmoody@utep.edu).