* 1263335
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences for Undergraduates on Bioenergy
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Heike Bucking, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2017
* USD 326,364.00

This interdisciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at
South Dakota State University will allow ten undergraduate students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2013 to 2015 to learn research skills and to participate
in unique research experiences related to biofuels and bioenergy crops.
Bioenergy is not only an emergent area in science and engineering with profound
implications for the U.S. economy, but it is also an excellent training ground
in multidisciplinary research. The industry is still developing, and it can be
expected that the demands for scientists in this area and a trained work force
will increase in the near future. Field trips to industry partners will allow
students to learn about potential careers in the bioenergy industry. This
project links together faculty mentors from 6 different departments (biology and
microbiology, agricultural and biosystems engineering, plant science, chemistry,
economics, geospatial sciences) with active research programs on bioenergy, and
this will provide a multidisciplinary research environment for the participants
of the program. Students in chemistry, biology, engineering, and economics will
get actively involved in projects representing the whole spectrum of state of
the art bioenergy research from feedstock genomics, to new technologies in
bioprocessing and the conversion of bioenergy crops into biofuels, to ecological
and environmental sustainability of agricultural crop production, but will also
consider the societal and economic impacts of global bioenergy production.
Students will also participate in seminars and various workshops, such as ethics
training and responsible conduct in research. The students are selected based on
their academic record, letters of recommendation, and their motivation to work
in a multidisciplinary research environment. A common assessment tool will be
used to evaluate the gains of the students in different research relevant areas
after the program. The students are tracked to determine their continued
interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting
influences of the research experience. More information is available by visiting
the web page of the program (http://www.sdstate.edu/biomicro/REU/index.cfm), or
by contacting sdsu.reu.bioenergy@sdstate.edu, the PI (Dr. Heike Bücking at
heike.bucking@sdstate.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jose Gonzalez at
jose.gonzalez@sdstate.edu) of the program. The site is co-funded by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.