* 1263778
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Sciences: Enforcement Politics and Social Policy in Urban Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Jorge Dominguez, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 02/28/2014
* USD 20,201.00

Why do governments tolerate the violation of the law and when do they enforce
the law? The conventional wisdom is that weak enforcement reflects a weak state
unable to implement its laws due to budget and capacity constraints. But,
enforcement also has distributive and political consequences. Particularly in
cases where the poor violate property laws, tolerance of legal violations can
distribute substantial resources and win votes. Yet rarely are enforcement
decisions incorporated into analyses of social policy or electoral politics. In
contrast, this project examines how electoral incentives shape administrative
law enforcement decisions.

This project develops original data on legal violations and enforcement
operations to test how the structure and competitiveness of local elections
impacts law enforcement in three Latin American cities. It focuses on
enforcement against a pair of legal violations, land invasions and unlicensed
street vending, due to their consequences for the lives of the urban poor. By
examining how enforcement varies across space, time, and sector, this
dissertation shows that the design of electoral districts and social programs
helps explain why some governments tolerate violations of the poor and others do
not. The project involves the collection of two complementary pieces of data: 1)
individual-level data on attitudes toward enforcement and social policy, to test
the mechanisms behind the observed urban enforcement patterns, and 2)
subnational data on enforcement against street vending and land invasions within
Colombia, to see whether the theory developed accurately predicts the geographic
and temporal distribution of enforcement outside of the cases on which the
theory was developed.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in its ability to advance
understanding of an alternative and consequential form of distribution in low
and middle-income countries. Latin America is considered the most unequal region
in the world, yet the region's governments spend less effectively than advanced
democracies. This dissertation proposes that tolerance of property law
violations can act as a substitute form of redistribution and a way for
politicians to win the poor's vote. Understanding the politics of law
enforcement is critical because it helps to explain both why certain laws go
unenforced and why formal government programs to aid the poor lag. This project
also makes an empirical contribution through the collection and dissemination of
novel survey and experimental data on class attitudes toward enforcement and
social policy.

The broader impact comes in understanding the weak rule of law. Policymakers
often seek to improve the implementation of legal regulations. The deforestation
of the tropics, the proliferation of precarious shantytowns, and artisanal
mining with mercury are just a few examples where domestic and international
actors hope to improve regulatory implementation. In explaining variation in
enforcement, this research provides insight into the conditions that encourage
subnational politicians to apply state norms, even when they conflict with
distributive claims. Pinpointing the obstacles to enforcement may provide
policymakers the tools and information to craft more effective social programs
that substitute for informal transfers and to consider administrative
reorganizations that align enforcement incentives.