* 1263337
* REU Site:  Sustainable Management and Beneficial Reuse of Residual Wastes and Byproducts
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* James Hanson, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2017
* USD 375,235.00

Support from the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers will
establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site focused on the
sustainable management and beneficial reuse of residual wastes and byproducts.
Faculty at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo will manage the REU
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program at Cal Poly will engage
undergraduates on research leading to the discovery of new knowledge, provide
mentoring for a diverse research team, promote graduate study as a future
professional goal, and provide instructive and appealing learning components.
The program will support ten undergraduates per year for a period of three
years. Extensive time will be provided for research and discovery. In addition,
specific periods will be set aside for structured learning and professional
development activities designed to provide the participants with skills, tools,
and training essential for success in research. These activities include
workshops and seminars on interpersonal communication, research best-practices,
ethics, data analysis, project reporting, graduate school expectations, and
contemporary issues. As part of the research experience, the participants will
formulate a hypothesis, develop a research plan, carry out a research
investigation, prepare progress reports using a variety of technology-enriched
approaches, present findings to a group of peers and research mentors through a
variety of presentation modes, and reflect on achievements. Assessment of
participant knowledge, skills, and abilities will take place before, during, and
after the research appointments to evaluate the level of achievement of program
objectives and student learning outcomes. The REU program will engage students
on research supported by the Global Waste Research Institute (GWRI), an
interdisciplinary organization at Cal Poly focused on promoting collaborative
and cutting-edge research and educational activities. Institute goals are to
advance current practices in resource management and to conduct research on and
provide anticipatory solutions to the entire lifecycle of large quantities and
wide varieties of wastes and byproducts. The GWRI fosters collaboration between
the colleges of Engineering, Science, Agriculture, and Business, where experts
from complementary disciplines work together to develop innovative and
sustainable solutions to existing and emerging challenges in waste and byproduct
management. Fundamental research to be undertaken as part of the REU program
involves waste management, pollution prevention, waste to energy conversion, and
beneficial reuse of wastes and byproducts. Focused GWRI research topics,
conscientious recruiting, targeted mentoring, open communication, and emphasis
on generating publications will ensure state-of-the art research by the
undergraduates, leading to rapid dissemination of research findings into the
scientific literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All members of society are affected
by wastes and byproducts due to the ubiquitous nature of these materials. The
REU program at Cal Poly will engage undergraduate students, graduate students,
faculty members, and collaborating engineering practitioners on
interdisciplinary research related to the sustainable management and beneficial
reuse of wastes. Advancements in the management of existing, new, and emerging
waste and byproduct streams will contribute significantly to the protection of
the environment as well as human health and safety. Opportunities for
entrepreneurship will be encouraged through various ongoing programs and
projects. The well-developed dissemination strategy will affect stakeholders at
the home institutions of the undergraduate participants as well as the
engineering research and education communities at large. A primary objective of
the REU program is to have faculty and graduate students mentor a diverse team
of undergraduates, thereby broadening research opportunities for women and
minorities. A focused and well-targeted recruitment goal calls for at least
sixty percent of the program participants to be members of underrepresented
groups. Graduate students will be trained as program mentors using current best-
practices. Each graduate student will receive regular feedback on his or her
mentor performance to motivate interest in research careers and/or further
graduate study and to help ensure successful research experiences for the
undergraduates.