* 1263165
* EAGER: Towards Multiscale Modeling, Optimization, and Uncertainty in Materials Design for CO2 Capture
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and design of novel
materials (e.g., zeolites and metal organic frameworks, MOFs) for high impact
energy application domains represents the major scientific challenge for the
next decade. The primary objective of the research proposed here is to develop
novel theoretical, algorithmic and computational techniques for the discovery
and analysis of novel materials for carbon dioxide capture and storage. We
propose to investigate: (i) novel optimization framework in simultaneous
materials design and process design through modeling at multiple scales; (ii)
approaches for the discovery of new materials via multiscale modeling,
simulation and optimization; and (iii) optimization approaches for uncertainty
characterization and quantification in materials design.&lt;br/&gt;We expect
that new and transformative theoretical, algorithmic, and computational results,
and novel methodologies will be developed and applied to the discovery and
design of novel materials (e.g., zeolites, metal organic frameworks) for CO2
capture.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity: The
proposed approach has the potential to significantly advance and transform the
approaches for discovery of new materials for CO2 capture that will address
desired properties and process performance in tandem. The development of novel
materials has the potential to contribute significantly to the CO2 capture and
sequestration challenge which affects directly the US energy security and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration
of Research and Education: The proposed effort will integrate participation of
undergraduate and graduate students and will include underrepresented minorities
and visiting students. At the undergraduate level, the PI has used and will
introduce CO2 capture and sequestration approaches as part of a senior design
project, while at the graduate level, the PI intends to incorporate the findings
in a graduate course on Optimization in Process Systems Engineering. The
students will receive training in process design, simulation, synthesis,
optimization, energy, zeolites, metal organic frameworks, life cycle analysis,
uncertainty analysis, and scientific computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broaden
Representation of Underrepresented Groups: The proposed research will broaden
the participation of under-represented groups since it will aim at attracting
female and minority students at the graduate level and the undergraduate junior
independent and senior theses level. The PI has a proven record of promoting
diversity in chemical engineering. His trainees have had diverse socioeconomic,
racial and ethnical backgrounds, and have included (18) female students and
postdoctoral fellows many of whom are now distinguished researchers and
Professors in the US or abroad. Currently, the PI supervises 1 Hispanic doctoral
student, 2 female doctoral students and 1 female high school student. The PI
will continue recruiting efforts of under-represented groups for this project
via meeting during his seminar visits and conferences, and attracting juniors
and seniors for independent research work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination:
The results of the proposed work will be broadly disseminated to researchers in
academia and industry through presentations at domestic and international
meetings, scholarly refereed journal publications and through a dedicated web
site which will describe the approaches, implementations and
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact on Society: The proposed research has
potential to accelerate the discovery of transformative new materials for carbon
capture which will lead into meeting sustainability targets of the United
States.