* 1263639
* I-Corps:  Insect enzymes for high value compunds for pheromone and scent industries
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Claus Tittiger, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Monoterpenoid alcohols are synthesized and used in forest insect pest management
strategies as pheromone components in traps and lures. In addition, they are
important components of consumer products as scents, flavorants, or therapeutic
agents. Current production methods rely on organic syntheses or isolation from
plant essential oils, with associated costs and limitations. For example, many
syntheses require multiple steps, hazardous solvents and/or protocols, and
reduced yields. In contrast, enzyme-catalyzed hydroxylations and other
modifications occur in single steps, safely in aqueous buffer and often with
comparatively high fidelity. Researchers have cloned and characterized pine bark
beetle enzymes that modify monoterpenes, including cytochromes P450 and
oxidoreductases. In many cases they catalyze specific reactions for different
substrates, resulting in single products, sometimes with extreme enantiomeric
excess.

This project seeks to expand the results of prior research on enzymatic
monoterpene modification into useful applications and produce monoterpenoid
alcohols in a faster, safer and less costly method than current methods. If
successfully completed, researchers will be able to show enzymatic conversion of
monoterpenes to monoterpenoid alcohols including a specific type suitable for
use in bark beetle lures or traps, in amounts approaching 1 gram per run.
Additionally, researchers plan to incorporate methods used during this project
into undergraduate studies.