* 1263939
* 2014 Institute on Collaborative Language Research (CoLang/InField)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Philip Cohen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2020
* USD 179,177.00

The 2014 Institute on Collaborative Language Research (CoLang/InField) will be
held at The University of Texas at Arlington in June and July 2014. The
Institute provides critical training to generate more and better fieldwork as a
response to the global crisis of language endangerment. As a result, a wide
variety of audiences become trained in a multi-faceted set of skills in
community-centered language documentation. Instructors come from the
international community of indigenous and academic experts to provide state-of-
the-art, intensive training. Participants include undergraduate and graduate
students, practicing linguists, and members of indigenous communities. With
prior Institutes held in 2008 (University of California, Santa Barbara), 2010
(University of Oregon), and 2012 (University of Kansas), the Institute has a
developed a significant track record of national and international success,
drawing an audience from the United States, Canada, and at least twenty other
countries. Previous participants have parlayed their Institute experiences into
successful fieldwork ventures and community documentation projects
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute consists of two parts, lasting six
weeks total. First, two weeks of intensive workshops focus on the practice and
principles of documentary linguistics, ranging from new technology to
interdisciplinary methods to best practices in ethical community collaborations.
Following that, the Institute offers an optional four weeks of intensive field
methods courses focused on several different endangered languages. These
integrate the technology and documentation skills acquired during the preceding
workshops. The entire six-week Institute thus offers those new to fieldwork the
opportunity to put into practice the newly-acquired methods, technical skills,
and collaborative approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the rapid changes in
technological tools and methodologies, even since the first Institute in 2008,
the 2014 Institute offers the opportunity for participants and instructors to
acquire and share cutting-edge knowledge in language documentation, to network
with experts and possible collaborators, and to document endangered languages
onsite in the field methods classes.