* 1263707
* Collaborative Research: Zeolite Thin Films as Efficient and Robust Ion Exchange Membranes in Redox Flow Batteries for Renewable Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

1263860 / 1263707 Dong, Junhang / Murad, Sohail&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
economical and efficient energy storage devices is one of the major hurdles to
the widespread utilization of renewable solar and wind energy. The redox flow
battery (RFB) is an attractive option because of its excellent safety, high
capacity, high efficiency, modularity, and small environmental footprint;
however, in its current development state it is not commercially viable largely
because of inefficiencies in the ion exchange membrane (IEM), which is a key
factor determining its cost effectiveness, energy efficiency, and battery
lifetime. Research and development efforts on IEMs for RFBs have largely focused
on polymer-based materials. These materials have fundamental deficiencies,
associated with their polymeric nature, related to ion crossover and chemical
instability in high concentration electrolyte solutions of RFBs; therefore,
alternative IEMs fabricated from new materials are required. The goal of this
project is to explore nanoporous zeolite thin films as a new class of highly
efficient and durable IEMs for RFBs. A key objective is to understand the
mechanisms of proton conduction and field-driven ion transport in the zeolite
membranes. The research will primarily focus on the siliceous MFI-type zeolite
membranes for two model RFB systems including the Fe/Cr RFB and the all-vanadium
RFB. The specific objectives include: (i) synthesizing MFI zeolite membranes
with different thickness, orientation, and framework composition and
investigating the effects of these structural and chemical properties on the
membrane performance in RFBs; (ii) experimentally studying the transport
properties for proton and relevant metal ions with and without applied electric
fields; and (iii) performing molecular simulations of the electrical-field-
driven and chemical-potential-gradient-driven ion transport processes. Zeolite
membrane transport is governed by the field-driven diffusion of ?hydrated
protons? in essentially non-ionic subnanometer zeolitic channels and is
fundamentally different from the proton hopping process in the hydrated ionic
polymers. This research will employ nanoporous inorganic membranes, particularly
the crystalline zeolite membranes, as a new generation of highly efficient and
robust IEMs for RFBs. The project will advance fundamental knowledge on ion
transport in the zeolite membranes through synergistic efforts involving
experimental studies and molecular dynamics simulations. Simulations will guide
efforts to determine the most promising membrane structural and chemical
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful, this research
may guide the design of storage devices for intermittent energy from renewable
sources. The membranes developed will also have potential applications energy
production and environmental protection. A more complete fundamental
understanding of the electrical field-driven ion transport mechanism in zeolitic
nanopores will be a significant contribution to membrane science. The project
involves experimental and theoretical studies that will provide opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students. Plans have been made to incorporate the
research findings into existing courses and to include undergraduate
participation from diverse academic and ethnic backgrounds. Both PIs have
outreach activities involving high school students and undergraduate students
through research projects and presentations at seminars. &lt;br/&gt;