* 1263320
* REU Site: Engineers for Exploration
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Albert Lin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

This funding establishes a new CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates site
at the University of California-San Diego (UCSD). The focus of the
multidisciplinary site is on cyber-physical systems research motivated by real
world challenges in exploration and scientific discovery. The site expands the
successful UCSD Engineers for Exploration program to include students from other
universities. The program's aim is to give a unique experience for motivated
students by providing an intimate mentored lab environment at UCSD, and a
structured collaboration with scientists, explorers, and engineers at the UCSD
partner organizations. These partner organizations include the National
Geographic Society, Hubbs SeaWorld Research Institute, the research arm of the
San Diego Zoo, NOAA, the Organization of Latin American Subacuatica (OLAS), the
Waitt Institute, and the Canadian Department of Environment and Conservation.
The program provides undergraduates with a unique opportunity to develop
technology that will be deployed across the world; the projects involve
scientific research that literally spans across every continent and into the far
corners of the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The REU
participants will be exposed to exciting research projects centered on
exploration and scientific discovery while utilizing a vast array of engineering
disciplines across a wide range of research topics. They will work with
accomplished faculty and scientific mentors using state-of-the-art facilities to
perform cutting-edge cyber-physical systems research. In addition, they will be
exposed to extensive professional development activities through weekly research
skills workshops, an undergraduate research conference, and a REU journal club.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The site will seek a range of
participants from diverse backgrounds who may not otherwise have the opportunity
to participate in research. The projects are aimed at creating technology for
conservation, cultural heritage, and exploration, and ultimately deployed in the
field by scientists and explorers around the world. The REU participants will
work closely faculty, scientists, postdoctoral scholars and graduate students.
Together with the planned community building activities, this will make the REU
site a positive and memorable experience, encouraging REU participants to pursue
further training. Finally, the program provides leadership training to the
graduate student and postdoctoral mentors. This will benefit the countless
others whom they will train throughout their careers.