* 1263817
* Documentation and Comparative Lexicon and Morphosyntax of Nivacle and Pilaga, of northern Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Doris Payne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2019
* USD 205,883.00

This project documents two endangered and little-studied languages of Gran
Chaco, South America: Pilagá (Guaycuruan) and Nivacle (Mataco-Mataguayan). It
undertakes grammatical and lexical analyses of Nivacle, and comparative analyses
of Pilagá and Nivacle grammatical structures and lexicon, also with an eye to
what is known about other Chaco languages. Joint work on these languages is
motivated by the fact that the traditional Nivacle territory extended from the
mid-Pilcomayo River to the Bermejo River, partially overlapping Pilagá and Wichí
(Mataco-Mataguayan) territories in northern Argentina. In this region there is
evidence of potentially non-genetic diffusion of features. Pilagá is spoken by
about 5,000 people; Nivacleì is spoken by fewer than 1,000 people in Argentina.
There are more Nivacleì speakers in Paraguay, but language shift to Spanish is
rapid, especially among the younger generations and especially among women
married to criollo men. Field research is mostly in Argentina, with visits to
Nivacleì communities in Paraguay to develop a better understanding of linguistic
history and dialect variation. Analyses are undertaken in the field, and at
universities in Argentina and Oregon.

Documentation under this project includes recording and videotaping of verbal
performances to create a representative sample of genres. Some documentary
materials were previously collected for Pilagaì, but some were suboptimal for
archiving, have not been fully analyzed or prepared for archiving, and extant
materials are incomplete as far as genres; the current project addresses these
issues. There has been little prior modern linguistic work on, or documentation
of Nivacle.

Outcomes will include an archived corpus of 20 hours of video and audio
recordings, databases with from five to ten hours per language of translated and
analyzed elicited and text materials, and tri- or quadri-lingual lexical
databases (Pilagaì, Nivacleì, Spanish, English). It will enable open access to
materials for speakers and the linguistic community, ethical considerations
permitting. Focused analyses investigate the grammatical constructions of
Nivacle and compare Pilagaì-Nivacleì grammatical and lexical issues. The results
increase understanding of diffusion of structural features and lexica, as
opposed to inheritance of features from proto-languages in the Chaco region. The
project investígates internal divisions and influences among Chaco languages. It
amplifies knowledge of world-wide patterns in expressing possession, ways of
classifying in-view/out-of-view objects, the development of tense/aspect from
determiners, grammatical relations and stative/active systems, and other
linguistic features.

The documentary cultural and linguistic materials are of interest and use to the
language communities for their education and language revitalization goals, and
will be explained and promoted in community workshops. They are useful to other
linguists, educators, anthropologists, and historians. The project provides
training for at least three students (two graduate), and for native speakers.
Indeed, the project is a joint effort between researchers and the language
communities. It further strengthens research partnerships and between the
University of Oregon and the Instituto de Investigaciones Lingüísticas of the
National University of Formosa, with the potential to create new research
opportunities for students of both countries.