* 1263848
* WALRUS - Walrus Adaptability and Long-term Responses; Using multi-proxy data to project Sustainability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2022
* Anne Jensen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,891,151.00

The Pacific walrus (Odobenus rosmarus divergens) is one of many species affected
by recent environmental change in the Arctic. Much attention has focused on the
loss of sea ice recorded from 2007-2012, the concomitant appearance of thousands
of walruses on Alaska's and Russia's beaches, and the unfortunate consequence of
large numbers of trampling mortalities. In addition, an unusual number of
walruses in poor body condition were reported on Wrangel Island in 2007, many of
which subsequently died. While walrus haul-out and mortality events are not
historically isolated occurrences, these past haul-outs on Alaska's coasts,
associated with reduced sea ice abundance, signify a change to this population.
These occurrences are disquieting taken together with a decrease in estimated
walrus based on surveys from 2006 versus 1990, (129,000 in 2006 compared to
200,000 in 1990), and current data on reduced fertility. The Pacific walrus is
of critical importance to subsistence consumers in Alaska (and other areas of
the Arctic). Despite impressive data from in-depth studies of Pacific walruses
over the last 40-50 years, it is difficult to implement proposed co-management
and conservation plans based on data from such a relatively short time span,
much less project the impact of additional changes to the Arctic ecosystem on
both walruses and humans subsisting on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to integrate several disciplines including archaeology, ethnology, biology,
and ecology using diverse sources of data including DNA, stable isotope,
steroid, and trace element analysis as well as to ascertain long-term trends of
walrus feeding ecology, foraging location, and stock genetics over the last two
millenia. This time frame includes large climatic anomalies such as the Medieval
Warm and the Little Ice Age, thereby presenting scientists with the possibility
of understanding how walruses adapt during times of stress and change. Present-
day samples will be obtained from Alaskan subsistence hunters, historic samples
will be acquired from museums, and prehistoric samples from archaeological
collections. Each type of data will act as a building block to better understand
walruses and how they adapt to change in Arctic ecosystems. DNA analysis will
provide insights into population bottlenecks and potentially adaptive
differentiation between stocks. Stable isotope analysis of bone collagen and
growth ring layers of teeth will define overall feeding ecologies of individuals
through time. Trace element analysis will reveal foraging locations, potential
population structure, and changes of essential and non-essential elements over
time. Bone steroid hormones (i.e., stress hormones) can delineate population
structure and health over time, and translation of historic taped interviews and
use of previously archived studies will reveal traditional knowledge of walrus
habitats and feeding habits over the last 100 years.