* 1263248
* REU Site: Polymeric Nanostructures for Delivering Drugs and Imaging Agents
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Molecular biology has yielded a wealth of
therapeutic molecules with potential to treat diseases and correct genetic
defects, provided delivery and release issues can be resolved. Moreover,
complexes of polymers with imaging agents have potential for unraveling
structure-image relationships that may enable sufficient contrast to non-
invasively monitor biodistribution of co-encapsulated drugs. This REU will focus
on SYNTHESIS of well-defined polymers for delivering drugs and imaging agents,
the ENGINEERING that characterizes assembly, structure and properties of
polymer-drug-imaging agents, and the PHYSICAL SCIENCE that defines relationships
among structure, release rates and mechanisms, and image sensitivity and
contrast. This REU, funded by the Division of Materials Research of the NSF,
will provide opportunities for 8 undergraduates to conduct 11 weeks of research
on macromolecular drug and imaging agent complexes. The program is designed to
instill in students a life-long motivation to create new materials and discover
physical phenomena through the joys of research. Focus will be on science and
engineering with added emphasis on building leadership, interdisciplinary
teamwork and communications skills, and experiencing the gratification derived
from integrating their science into the community. Particular focus will be on
technical writing. The program includes a leadership workshop for the graduate
student mentors, a community-building retreat with an ethics workshop, a short
course on Principles of Polymeric Materials in Medicine and Biology,
communications seminars and development of REU leadership skills through
mentoring K-12 students in our Youth Experiencing Science (YES) program. At
least 50% of our REUs will be women or minorities to ensure that they learn to
work with a diverse group to prepare them for professional careers. The students
will have opportunities to present their findings at a conference during the
follow-up year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past about two decades, biologists and chemists have discovered a myriad of
drugs that include small molecules and also larger therapeutic proteins and
nucleic acids (i.e., DNA/RNA). Polymeric materials are needed to form complexes
with many of these new drugs to improve their delivery to the necessary sites in
the body. Such complexes can potentially offer sustained controlled release over
long times, lower toxicities due to lower doses required, and protection against
degradation through attack by physiological components such as enzymes or the
immune system. Thus, this REU will focus on preparing well-defined polymers for
delivering drugs and imaging agents, methods to assemble them into the required
complexes with the drugs, and investigations of the physical principles that
define relationships among their structure, release rates, and image sensitivity
in the cases of delivering new bioimaging agents. The program, funded by the
Division of Materials Research of the NSF, will provide opportunities for 8
undergraduates to conduct 11 weeks of research on drug and imaging agent
complexes. The program is designed to instill in students a life-long motivation
to create new materials and discover physical phenomena through the joys of
research. Focus will also emphasize leadership principles, building
interdisciplinary teamwork and communications skills that include technical
writing, and learning to integrate their science into the community through
mentoring K-12 students in our Youth Experiencing Science (YES) program. At
least 50% of our REUs will be women or minorities to ensure that they learn to
work with a diverse group to prepare them for professional careers.