* 1263213
* REU Site: Space Science and Engineering Research
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Scott Bailey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 04/30/2016
* USD 330,718.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) summer program at Virginia
Tech is focused on space science and engineering research. NSF funding supports
a three-year program that begins with support for 6 REU student participants
during the first year, 8 during the second year, and 10 during the third year as
we gain experience and build up the program. Our goal is to provide upper
division undergraduate REU students with an engaging, high-quality learning and
interdisciplinary research experience in space weather science and engineering,
a discipline of increasing importance to our technology based society. At least
half of the participants each summer will be underrepresented students and at
least half will be from institutions with limited research programs. Students
will select research projects and will work individually or in small teams
guided and mentored by faculty and senior graduate students or post-doctoral
scholars. Through this REU program, the participants will: (1) acquire
intellectual creativity and independence; (2) reason and think critically about
the knowledge domain using Socratic cognitive strategies; (3) clearly articulate
research problems, methods and results to diverse audiences (scientists,
engineers, and communities); (4) contribute significantly and actively to real-
world space research using high-quality methodological and analytical
approaches; (5) understand space weather phenomena and their potential impacts
on technology, as well as their beauty and mystery; and (6) develop skills to be
space science messengers to enhance the accessibility and meaningfulness of
space science to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
our scientific understanding of the space environment is an important national
enterprise and the space science and engineering research at Virginia Tech
contribute to the understanding of the complex interactions of solar radiation
with the Earth's environment. This is accomplished through research programs
that utilize ground-based measurements of space phenomena, in-situ satellite-
based measurements and the development of new technology for small satellite
payloads, as well as theoretical investigations and computer simulations of
space plasmas. The expected impact of this program is to attract talented
undergraduate students to graduate study in STEM areas thereby developing a
scientific and technical workforce that can contribute to industry, academic and
government needs.