* 1263030
* REU site: Integrative approaches to studying recognition systems in cells, organisms, and populations.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2018
* Philip Starks, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,999.00

An award was made to the Biology Department at Tufts University to provide
research training for 10 weeks for 10 students per year, for the summers of
2013-2015. The summer program is entitled, " Integrative approaches to studying
recognition systems in cells, organisms, and populations" and will provide
students the opportunity to work closely on collaborative, interdisciplinary
projects combining faculty expertise in biochemistry, genetics, development,
endocrinology, neurobiology, animal behavior, plant ecology, and conservation
biology. Students will work with two mentors, one serving as the primary mentor,
to combine research techniques from different fields to design and conduct an
independent project. In addition to research involvement, the program includes
weekly discussions, seminars, field trips, and a student symposium. The goals of
this summer program are to increase students' proficiency in biological research
and collaborative skills, to educate and inspire students toward future research
careers, and to develop students' ability to effectively communicate scientific
results. Accordingly, seminars are focused on proficiency in
science/communication of scientific results, scientific ethics/responsible
conduct of research, and career development. We select our participants from a
broad undergraduate applicant pool, and the program is committed to providing
research opportunities for students traditionally underrepresented in science
and those who might not have such opportunities at their home institutions (with
an emphasis on community college students). The Tufts University Department of
Biology has a long-standing commitment to mentoring undergraduates in research,
and a strong track record of highly productive interdisciplinary research
collaborations. Student-mentor relationships typically extend long beyond the
research experience and are facilitated via electronic networking tools. The
participants provide frequent feedback on the program, and thus take an active
role in refining the approach. Information about the program will be assessed by
various means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. For more
information, contact Phil Starks at REU@tufts.edu and visit our webpage
http://ase.tufts.edu/biology/undergraduate/research/reu.htm.