* 1263182
* REU Site: Nanoscale Materials Science and Engineering at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Clare McCabe, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 04/30/2017
* USD 359,132.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials Research
and the Engineering Directorate at the National Science Foundation as well as
the Department of Defense ASSURE program, the Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscale
Science and Engineering (VINSE) summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program will offer STEM undergraduate students the opportunity to work
closely with faculty on forefront research projects in the field of nanoscale
science and engineering. VINSE faculty will provide REU students with a true
interdisciplinary research experience in an environment where physicists,
chemists, biologists, and all engineers collaboratively solve problems and
create new scientific understanding. The overarching theme of the research is
nano-materials innovation and fabrication. Each student will have access to the
VINSE laboratories, which are shared facilities, in addition to working in the
affiliated research lab of the VINSE faculty mentor. The REU site will formally
educate involved graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and faculty on how
to mentor the REU students, to design an appropriate research project, and to
form a mutually supportive group identity. The program is designed to build a
sense of community among the students and the participating faculty, as well as
expose the students broadly to research at the leading edge of nanoscale science
and engineering. The program will put strong emphasis on recruiting students
from under-represented minority groups and schools with limited STEM research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscience
and nanotechnology are based on the ability to synthesize, organize,
characterize, and manipulate matter systematically at the nanoscale, creating
uniquely functional materials which can be inorganic, organic or biological, or
a hybrid of any two or more of these. The interdisciplinary nature of nanoscale
science and engineering means it inherently involves all of the sciences and
engineering, resulting in the need to train students at all levels in an
interdisciplinary manner, and this Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU)
site will provide a solid training by combining Vanderbilt University's unique
interdisciplinary research opportunities at the nanoscale, with participation in
research in a discipline-based experimental laboratory or computational setting.
Consequently, students trained through this interdisciplinary summer program
will leave with an appreciation of the skills needed to successfully contribute
to the emerging disciplines of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The REU students
will also be offered the opportunity for training in the integration of research
with education and outreach through participation in the Vanderbilt Summer
Academy for gifted high school students who have expressed an interest in
nanoscience and nanotechnology. The site is supported by both the Division of
Materials Research and the Engineering Directorate at the National Science
Foundation as well as the Department of Defense ASSURE program.