* 1263907
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Role of Political Attitudes in Social Interaction Dyads
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Thomas Carsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 02/28/2014
* USD 21,280.00

After 60 years of studying human behavior, political scientists have concluded
that Americans are not well-informed about politics, interested in political
affairs, engaged in political behavior, or constrained ideologically. Yet,
scholarship on interpersonal dyads shows that these same Americans seem to use
explicitly political criteria when selecting social networks and picking
discussion partners. Why do Americans, who appear to be politically ignorant and
disinterested when answering survey questions, use their political attitudes
when pursuing social interactions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
designed to answer this question. The researchers expect to show and explain
that political phenomena influence the social interactions humans pursue.
Uncovering an important role for politics in these interpersonal processes will
show that politics is much more fundamental to human behavior than political
scientists currently assume, and that we would be wise to reconsider the way we
study and measure political attentiveness and
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research
offers a comprehensive theory that delineates the interaction dyad development
process, from initial formation to maintenance or dissolution. The theory
explains why we should expect interaction partners to be politically similar and
offers three testable hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H1 Social homogamy
(passive sorting on political variables)&lt;br/&gt;H2 Assortative networking
(active sorting on political variables)&lt;br/&gt;H3 Convergence (increasing
similarity on political variables over time)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these
rival hypotheses, the researchers will conduct the first longitudinal multi-wave
panel study based on actual interaction dyands on interaction formation,
maintenance, and/or dissolution, comparing political factors to other factors
known to influence these dyads. This study will be supplemented by two survey
experiments analyzing interpersonal attraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars
from both political science and psychology have noted that longitudinal measures
are the most appropriate type of data to explain social interaction development.
However, most studies looking at such development rely on cross-sectional data
because panel datasets containing measures of political attitudes and
interactions from all dyad partners are nonexistent. NSF support makes it
feasible to develop a novel, longitudinal dataset necessary to directly test the
convergence hypothesis and to test the social homogamy hypothesis against the
assortative hypothesis -- not just behavioral intentions (such as can be
explored using survey experiments).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
politically similar interaction dyads develop is important to political
scientists for several reasons. First, discovering that interactions between
politically similar dyads are more enduring (than between politically dissimilar
dyads) demands that political scientists seriously reconsider their assumptions
about the importance of politics. Second, if politically similar individuals
help socialize others, their social network influence would spread. Third,
unlike studies focusing on a specific setting (e.g., neighborhood, school,
workplace), one's political interaction partners are a key contextual source of
interpersonal influence across political
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will
produce three novel datasets, to be made publicly available: (1) a first-of-its-
kind longitudinal study of political interaction dyads, and (2) two separate
experimental studies. This dyadic panel study will serve as a research design
roadmap for other scholars seeking to collect additional longitudinal datasets
that are essential but absent from their fields. By using a multi-method
approach, this project will determine the validity of testing social interaction
hypotheses with one-shot experiments compared to panel data. Finally, these
analyses will advance scholarly knowledge by providing a theoretical and
empirical explanation of the mechanism causing political congruency within
interaction dyads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings would be of interest not only
to political scientists but also psychologists and sociologists.