* 1263259
* REU Site:  A Summer Experience for Undergraduates Integrating Research, Education, and Career Development in an Interdisciplinary Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Joseph Heppert, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2017
* USD 275,170.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by
Professors David R. Benson and Joseph A. Heppert at the University of Kansas
(KU). The research projects supported at this Site entitled "A Summer Experience
for Undergraduates Integrating Research, Education, and Career Development in an
Interdisciplinary Environment", is dedicated to providing for the students a
stimulating interdisciplinary environment with a multifaceted career enhancement
program that encourages and prepares the participants for graduate studies and
careers in the chemical sciences. Key components of the program include ethics
and safety training, panel discussions highlighting the variety of career
options available to chemists (including entrepreneurship), a short course on
green chemistry, and site visits to companies and institutions in the greater
Kansas City Area that are engaged in interdisciplinary science. The participants
will benefit from the highly collaborative environment provided by the large KU
chemical community, close interactions with faculty and graduate student (or
postdoctoral) mentors, state-of-the-art facilities, and opportunities to
communicate and disseminate their accomplishments in written and oral forms.

Additionally, the NSF funding that is requested to support 10 participants per
year will be given to students who have limited opportunities for research at
their home institutions. This includes students at primarily undergraduate
institutions, as well as students at other schools who cannot partake of
available research opportunities for personal economic reasons. Additional
participants will be supported by individual faculty research grants. The goals
are for at least 50% of the NSF-funded participants to be women, and for 20-30%
to come from traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences. This REU
Site program has provided summer research experiences for more than 450
undergraduates from across the country over the past 25 years, thereby
effectively serving as a regional hub for undergraduate research.