* 1263589
* Evaluating the Effects of Urban Spatial Transformations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Timothy Oakes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2016
* USD 230,272.00

This project examines the effects of urban redevelopment on residents and other
users of the urban built environment. The research will analyze urban government
and planning projects that seek to enhance public life, stimulate consumption,
recreation and urban tourism, and establish norms of civil behavior.
Specifically, research will focus on the actual effects and outcomes of such
projects and whether those effects and outcomes match the objectives of
government and urban planning. The project will be carried out in three interior
Chinese cities undergoing large-scale projects redeveloping both the commercial
and residential built environment. Preliminary field reconnaissance suggests
that such redevelopments are viewed by municipal officials as ways of
modernizing older socialist architecture and city plans by introducing new
market-oriented economic forms of development. But officials also tend to view
urban redevelopment projects as capable of improving resident behavior and
creating 'civilized' cities with 'harmonious' development. Critical scholars
have suggested that such projects, while often improving standards of living and
increasing consumption for many urban residents, should also be understood as
enhancing state disciplinary power over citizens. This research will test
empirically whether the actual effects and outcomes match the objectives of
urban planners and, in doing so, will address two significant questions: 1) do
these projects indeed change resident behavior in significant ways? and 2) do
these projects in fact enhance state power in the case of China specifically? By
answering these questions, this research will provide a grounded empirical study
that interrogates popular assumptions about the nature of authoritarian state
power and whether urban planning and urban built environments are effective
conveyors of that power.

Research will be collaborative between the University of Colorado at Boulder
(CU) and Guizhou Minzu University (GMU). Fieldwork will directly involve the
training of young scholars from both the United States and China in a
collaborative manner. The research will help scholars from a relatively poor and
isolated region of China develop networks and ties to a broader international,
especially US, academic community than they would otherwise not have. By
publishing in both popular media as well as academic and broader urban planning
outlets, results will have the potential to influence both the academic and
policy communities. The project will include workshops, mini-symposia, and
conferences at both CU and GMU addressing both the academic and policy
implications of research findings. Results will be featured at the annual
meetings of the Association of American Geographers and the Association for
Asian Studies.