* 1263580
* Collaborative Research: Advancing the Diagnosis and Quantification of Mitral Valve Regurgitation with Mathematical Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Stephen Little, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 344,036.00

Mitral regurgitation (MR) is a valvular disease in which the mitral valve does
not close properly, thereby allowing blood to flow backward from the left
ventricle to the left atrium of the heart. MR is among the most prevalent valve
problems in the Western world. Doppler echocardiography has recently emerged as
the method of choice for the non-invasive detection and evaluation of MR
severity. However, due to the various color Doppler limitations, the accurate
quantification of MR remains one of the major challenges in modern
echocardiography. This is particularly the case with eccentric, wall-hugging
regurgitant jets, known as the Coanda effect. This form of MR is currently very
difficult to quantify and may lead to gross under-estimation of regurgitant
volume by inexperienced cardiovascular observers. Using mathematical modeling,
bifurcation analysis, and numerical simulations, combined with the in vitro
experimental modeling of MR, and clinical experience, the investigators are
developing a state-of-the-art tool for accurate non-invasive assessment of
mitral regurgitation. The mathematical approach utilizes the most recent
advances in fluid-structure interaction, modeling the flow of an incompressible,
viscous fluid, coupled with the motion of an elastic regurgitant orifice
simulating the regurgitant valve. A bifurcation diagram providing the
information about different types of MR is being developed. The in vitro model
is based on a pulsatile flow loop incorporating a mock imaging chamber, which
contains a regurgitant orifice simulating the flow conditions encountered in
patients with MR.

This is an exciting, new study, addressing a significant problem in the
development of non-invasive diagnostic tools for the quantification of valvular
regurgitation. The interdisciplinary team of investigators is developing
sophisticated novel mathematics, high performance computing, and in vitro
experimental tools, which, when used together, provide novel information about
the severity of mitral valve regurgitation, that could not be obtained by using
each individual approach separately. Based on this collaborative endeavor,
detailed information about the blood flow conditions in patient regurgitant
valves will be obtained, that could not be obtained by using classical 2D or
even 3D echocardiography. This information will be used to quantify the severity
of MR, which is the fundamental data on which surgical interventions are
decided. The complementary mathematical tools, combined with the
echocardiographic images, and clinical experience, support the next step in the
evolution of modern 3D echocardiography for non-invasive diagnosis of
pathological complex intra-cardiac flows. The broader impacts will be achieved
through student education via interdisciplinary training and interdisciplinary
course preparation. Two of the investigators are women, and active recruitment
of women and minorities will continue. This project contributes toward building
a strong partnership between academia (University of Houston) and health/medical
industry (The Methodist Hospital).