* 1263236
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Computational Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Mayank Tyagi, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 04/30/2017
* USD 324,972.00

This award funds a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
Center for Computation and Technology (CCT) at Louisiana State University (LSU).
A multi-disciplinary team of Computational Science faculty from several LSU
departments collaborates to provide participating students with research-
learning experiences in the computational aspects of multiple scientific
disciplines, including Chemistry, Computer Science, Digital Media, Mathematics,
Physics, Astronomy, Biological Sciences, and Civil, Environmental, Petroleum,
Electrical, and Computer Engineering. The overall objectives of the REU Site are
to promote early engagement of undergraduate students in research, to expose
students to high-performance computing and other scientific cyberinfrastructure
resources, to foster active learning through hands-on experiences in a
collaborative research environment, and to inspire students to pursue advanced
STEM education and STEM research careers. The REU Site pursues these objectives
by engaging students in a set of carefully and extensively planned research
projects that pose a wide range of scientific and technological challenges. In
tandem with these projects, the program offers a variety of activities designed
to improve students' computing, reasoning, problem-solving, research, and
communication skills. The program also fosters long-term mentoring relationships
between students and faculty, through intensive collaboration and social
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Science will only fulfill its
potential if advances in hardware are accompanies by advances in education and
workforce development. The intellectual merit of this REU Site project lies in
the strong team of experienced researchers and the outstanding collaborative
research environment; the project's broader impact lies in providing students
with a research-learning experience that will bear directly on their future
career paths. We have found that the combination of individualized training and
immersion in a multidisciplinary research group has been successful in engaging
a diverse student-body to explore Computational Science. We recruit heavily from
historically black colleges and universities and other minority-serving
institutions, from community colleges, and from smaller universities without
extensive graduate programs in the STEM fields. We also recruit entering
freshmen, with the purpose of catching their interest early in their careers. As
these students return to their home institutions and present their summer
research, other students are encouraged to consider similar paths, creating a
"virtuous spiral" of rising student interest in STEM learning, in Computational
Science discovery, and in technology and innovation careers.