* 1263341
* REU Site: EURECA: Extensible Undergraduate Research Experience in Communication Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* William Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2016
* USD 323,999.00

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. The site is also co-funded by the Networking Technology and Systems
(NeTS) cluster of the NSF/CISE Division of Computer and Network
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award renews an exemplary existing Research
Experience for Undergraduates site focused on wireless networking and
communications. The project engages students in a wide range of projects in
wireless networking lead by a team of faculty mentors in the Wireless Networking
and Communications Group, including 5 labs. A key component of every research
project is its extensibility providing students with the capacity to build on
knowledge provided to them by their mentor and to generate independent results,
and to sustain this effort after returning to students' parent institutions.
Through a partnership with the Austin Technology Incubator the students will
learn about the synergies between research and commercialization. A nationwide
recruitment process is used to select cohorts of undergraduate students to
participate in a nine-week summer research program at the host institution.
Particular emphasis is placed on recruitment of students from under-represented
populations. The project includes technical seminars and workshops, student
presentations, and field trips and other professional development opportunities.
The EURECA team's objective is to generate sustained research interest among
undergraduates so that they become tomorrow's leaders in industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of
this project lies in strong research basis and the expertise of the faculty. The
projects are in current research areas that are of interest to the community at
large and that have clear practical applications. The research projects are
created as a focused plan to guide the students from a passive learning state to
the state of being active self-sustaining
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts of the
project include providing a quality research experience to undergraduate
students, particularly students from underrepresented groups. The participating
faculty members are committed to including under-represented minority students
in their research, particularly through their partnerships with Huston-Tillotson
University and professional organizations. Thus this project has the potential
to produce new computer science graduate students and faculty members and to
advance discovery and understanding while promoting learning.