* 1263200
* REU SITE: Tribal College REU Program: Authentic Collaborations for Undergraduate Training in Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jeremy Guinn, United Tribes Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 06/30/2017
* USD 480,245.00

------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site award has been made to the United Tribes Technical College (UTTC), which
will provide research training for 8 students for 10 weeks and 4 science
teachers, for each of the summers 2014-2016. Participants will conduct
environmental ecology research critical to Tribal lands in the Northern plains,
under the guidance of mentors from UTTC (Bismarck, ND), Ft. Berthold Community
College (New Town, ND), Sitting Bull College (Ft. Yates, ND), Oglala Lakota
College (Kyle, SD), Augustana College (Sioux Falls, SD), and North Dakota State
University (Fargo, ND). Participants will be involved in research focusing on
restoration ecology, insect behavior and ecological impacts, integrated bison
prairie management, effects of oil development of natural resources,
conservation biology, and geospatial applications in ecological research.
Undergraduates are recruited from across the Northern Plains, with a focus on
tribal college students, and are selected based on expressed interest,
demonstrated skills, and dedication to science careers. Participants will
conduct individual research projects as part of a larger research team and will
receive training in research ethics, project design, field and laboratory
techniques, and analysis and presentation of results. Science teachers (grades
6-12) are recruited from reservation school systems and will conduct fieldwork
alongside the REU participants. Teachers will develop curriculum modules based
on their research experiences for their own classrooms and provide the modules
to other teachers. Shared orientation week, a midpoint camping trip, and final
presentations develop teamwork among the participants. Students will be
encouraged to present at regional and national conferences and to publish their
result in scientific journals. Participants are evaluated using the common
assessment tool for biology REU programs. The program increases the recruitment,
retention, and degree completion of Native American students in science, while
providing a solid foundation for these students to be successful in graduate
programs. More information is available by visiting
https://www.uttc.edu/about/forum/reu/, or by contacting the program director,
Dr. Jeremy Guinn at jguinn@uttc.edu or 701-255-3285 x1458.