* 1263582
* Effects of Past Vegetation Change on Soil formation near the Prairie-Forest Vegetation Border with Implications for the Future
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Joseph Mason, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,869.00

This project will study the influence of forest and prairie vegetation on the
development of clay-rich subsoil horizons, often formed when clay is carried
downward by water percolating through the soil. Accumulation of clay in the
subsoil strongly influences the availability of nutrients and water for plants
and retention of contaminants. Understanding the factors that influence
development of strong contrasts in clay content between topsoil and subsoil, and
how rapidly those contrasts can develop, is a basic, long-standing problem in
research on soil formation. In the Midwestern U.S., much stronger topsoil-
subsoil contrasts in clay content are found where the natural vegetation was
forest than where it was prairie. This project will focus on that vegetation
effect, in an area of Minnesota where previous research has documented major
shifts in the forest-prairie boundary over the past 10,000 years. By analyzing
soils that have formed under the influence of forest for varying periods of
time, from more than 10,000 years to a few hundred years, this study will test
the hypothesis that most downward clay movement in soils occurs rapidly after a
change in conditions such as forest replacing prairie. Soils that are still
responding to recent shifts in the forest-prairie boundary will be used to test
a second hypothesis, that organic matter added to the soil from prairie
vegetation limits clay movement, and clay is released to move downward as forest
invades the prairie. Carbon isotope analysis will be used to detect organic
matter added to the soil in the past by prairie grasses. The project results
will be of great interest to ecologists who have intensively studied past
vegetation and climate change in the same study area. Soils can potentially
provide much more site-specific information on vegetation change than previous
work based on evidence from lake sediments. Overall, the project will produce
important new insight on how past environments influenced soil formation, which
may also help predict soil response to current or future environmental changes.

The project involves considerable field investigation, as well as highly varied
lab analyses including advanced techniques such as isotopic analysis of organic
matter fractions. Therefore, it is especially well-suited to provide rich
undergraduate research experience, a goal that is increasingly prioritized in
science education. Two undergraduate students will work on all aspects of the
project, at least one of them recruited through a University of Wisconsin-
Madison program directed toward underrepresented groups. A graduate student will
also work on the project, completing a thesis on a related topic. The project
will enhance both education and research in the broader field of physical
geography, which seeks an integrated understanding of climate, biological
processes, soils, and landforms. Relationships between soils and vegetation are
taught in many introductory to advanced courses in physical geography, including
those offered at UW-Madison. This project will provide a data-rich case study to
illustrate specific details of those relationships and also link them to
research on past vegetation change, a major research topic in physical geography
today.