* 1263719
* Collaborative Proposal: Exploiting synthetic GPCRs and mating factors as extracellular sensors for substrate-dependent assembly of complex cellulosomes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 252,000.00

1263719/1263768/1263799&lt;br/&gt;Chen/Robinson/Da Silva &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary obstacle impeding the more widespread use of biomass for
energy and chemical production is the absence of a low-cost technology for
overcoming the recalcitrance of these materials. Cellulosomes are self-assembled
multi-enzyme complexes found in many anaerobic microorganisms that are highly
efficient for biomass depolymerization. The group of investigators have
successfully developed a synthetic yeast consortium displaying a functional
cellulosome for biofuel production. However, given the complexity of the
different members involved in the consortium, engineering cell to cell
coordination is the key in maintaining the required overall functionality. Their
goal in this project is to design synthetic extracellular sensors that can be
used to regulate the secretion of enzymes and adaptor scaffoldins involved in
the assembly of the appropriate complex cellulosome structure in a substrate-
dependent manner. The proposed research is scientifically significant because it
will provide a general framework for the design of extracellular sensors that
are important for other bioprocessing or biomedical applications. Moreover,
graduate students participating in this research will gain an integrated
perspective of the important interfaces and synergies connecting biochemistry,
modern genetics, and process engineering to solve an important problem of our
society.