* 1263225
* REU Site:   Climate Science Research at the Pennsylvania State University
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 04/30/2017
* USD 359,850.00

The Climate Science Research REU Site at The Pennsylvania State University is a
ten-week program to train undergraduate students in climate science, scientific
inquiry, and science communication. The program seeks to expose students to the
full range of scientific exploration, from generating hypotheses to
communicating research findings and their implications to other scientists and
the general public. With guidance from faculty advisors, students will learn to
design experiments, collect and analyze data, and present results to scientific
and non-scientific audiences. Students will work within an area of faculty
expertise, but choose and define a project of personal interest. Research
projects will involve the spectrum of climate science from fundamental physical
processes of the atmosphere, oceans, and cryosphere andtheoretical climate
modeling, to interactions entailing the biosphere, and impacts on various
natural and human systems. Each student will have a faculty advisor to guide the
research activities related to climate science and society. Students will also
work with a communication expert on how to effectively communicate the societal
relevance of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will target students
from universities where research opportunities for undergraduates are limited,
exposing these students to career opportunities in the area of climate science.
Particular emphasis will be placed on recruiting female and minority students,
as these two groups remain largely underrepresented in geosciences. The program
will teach research methods tostudents who otherwise would have limited
opportunities for exposure to leading edge scientific research. The intent of
the program is to provide students with sufficient knowledge so that they can
contribute not only to the advancement of science itself, but also to the
improvement of scientific literacy within academia and throughout our
educational systems and society at large. Thus, a novel element of this program
is the training of students in the development and the use of audiovisuals as
means of broad communication of research results and their implications.