* 1263179
* REU Site:   Engagement in the Basic and Applied Science of Psychology:  Research Experience for Undergraduates at Baruch College, City University of New York
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Jaihyun Park, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,861.00

This project is the continuation of a previously funded NSF-REU program at
Baruch College. The previous and current REU programs have been successful at
enhancing the graduate school enrollment of individuals from underrepresented
groups. The program serves as a model for offering research experiences to
students from underrepresented groups attending urban universities and colleges.

Intellectual Merit:

The REU site at Baruch College offers advanced research training to 12
undergraduate students who attend Baruch College and other educational
institutions in the New York metropolitan area each academic year for a three-
year period. Each REU student joins an REU faculty member's research team and
conduct independent research under the supervision of that faculty member
working in an area that matches the student?s expressed interests (e.g., social
psychology, industrial/organizational psychology, developmental psychology,
sleep psychology, conservation psychology).

Each student focuses on one area of psychology, review the literature, plan and
design research projects and execute studies with the intention of presenting
papers at professional conferences and submitting manuscripts to quality peer-
reviewed journals. Students learn the value of statistical analyses and become
comfortable with the use of computer programs for describing and drawing
inferences from data. Students also gain experience in the art of research
dissemination and presentation. The results of each student's research are
presented at the Baruch REU conference and potentially at national or regional
conferences and in peer-reviewed journals. REU students complete a series of
structured learning activities aimed at preparing them for all stages of
psychological research and for the graduate school application process.

Broader Impacts:

Statistics from the NSF and the American Psychological Association indicate
continued under- representation of African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans
and Native Americans in the field of psychology. This program is designed to
increase the representation of minority, low-income and first generation college
students in scientific psychology. Specifically, the program does the following:
1) prepare students for advanced graduate training in psychology and ultimately
for careers in academic and applied settings, 2) identify early promising
minority and economically disadvantaged students throughout the New York
metropolitan area and prepare them for careers in scientific psychology, 3)
develop a pool of talented and diverse undergraduate students to become the
research scientists of the future, 4) help these young scientists develop
affiliations with other students and professionals in the field, and 5) increase
psychological scientists' awareness of cultural and minority issues in
psychological research through exposure to the backgrounds and experience of the
REU students.