* 1263352
* REU Site: The Value of Snow: Summer Research Experiences in Natural Resource Issues in the Sierra Nevada and Great Basin Region
* SBE,SMA
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2016
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 349,710.00

Intellectual Merit: The Academy for the Environment REU program enables students
to explore the intersection of socioeconomic and natural sciences in ways that
inform adaptive watershed management in the eastern Sierra Nevada region of
Nevada, specifically within the Lake Tahoe Basin and the surrounding
northwestern Great Basin high desert. This program is a continuation of a
previous NSF REU Site award that supported research in the Lake Tahoe-Truckee
River-Pyramid Lake watershed; information on that REU program can be found on
the undergraduate research website
(http://environment.unr.edu/undergraduateresearch/opportunities/reu.html). The
current REU program encompasses a wide range of interdisciplinary research which
examines various approaches to assessing, modeling, and managing water resources
in the context of climate change and diminishing snowpack in the region. The
research group has framed its overall research theme in the context of the
"value of snow", in order to promote the integration of a wide range of
socioeconomic and environmental research activities, ranging from shore zone
studies of water quality and invasive species at Lake Tahoe, to the effects of
habitat disturbance (e.g., mining, energy development, fire, vegetation change)
on critical habitat for sensitive species in the Great Basin. Students are
involved in on-going research that identifies communities and groups that are
affected by changes in snowpack, consider alternative outcomes where mitigation
strategies and policies assist in adaptation, and quantify impacts in
biophysical as well as dollar terms. The research projects are situated within a
biologically diverse region, a unique area that joins the high desert with
subalpine ecological systems. This confluence of systems provides varied and
compelling research opportunities in mountain, desert, and riparian biotic
communities.

Broader Impacts: Through this team-oriented research experience, students are
gaining exposure to diverse scientific inquiries and technologies, and learning
how the socioeconomic and natural sciences inform land use policy and adaptive
management when faced with changing economic and natural resources. More
broadly, the program exposes students to integrated research questions that
connect these ecosystems to larger questions of how snow levels influence water
availability, usage and conservation in the West. Advanced technologies used in
data collection and analysis allow students to gain experience in state-of-the-
art research software. Nationally-recruited students examine how these
technologies influence the production of knowledge as they refine their scope of
research. This program emphasizes team building, creating a positive work
environment, and the role students play in these processes. As a result, the REU
program is expanding student understanding of, and participation in, effective
research programs while also producing research that makes meaningful
contributions to the field. This REU Site project is successfully linking
students, faculty, and natural resource managers through a collective effort
aimed at enhancing our scientific understanding of regional watersheds in an
applied research context.