* 1263943
* Collaborative Research: Comparative Study of Desert and Non-desert Rodent Kidneys
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Thomas Pannabecker, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 842,680.00

The goal of this project is to combine experimental and mathematical modeling
techniques to investigate aspects of the renal transport and dynamics in the
Munich-Wistar rat and kangaroo rat kidneys. In many rodent kidneys, the renal
pelvic walls undergo peristaltic contractions, which cause bolus flow down the
papillary collecting duct. The project will use immunohistochemical and
videomicroscopy techniques to investigate the impacts of peristaltic
contractions on medullary architecture and maximal urine concentration. Pelvic
wall peristalsis generates complex fluid dynamics and likely has a substantial
impact on water and solute transport in the loops of Henle, collecting ducts and
blood vessels. Thus, mathematical models will be developed to simulate how the
interactions between the collecting duct epithelium and the traveling bolus
change tubular fluid composition in the face of peristaltic waves. The fluid-
structure interactions will be modeled as an immersed boundary problem, and an
accurate numerical method will be developed for the axissymmetric cylindrical
coordinates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use mathematical analysis
and computational techniques to answer a number of basic and important questions
in renal physiology: How do the peristaltic contractions of the renal papilla
impact the concentrating mechanism of the kidney? How do the anatomic
differences between the kangaroo rat and the laboratory rat lead to the ability
of the kangaroo rat to produce urine that is twice as concentrated? The answers
to those questions are crucial in gaining an overall understanding of kidney
functions.