* 1263415
* REU Site:   Ecology and Physiological Ecology at the University of Alaska Anchorage
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Khrystyne Duddleston, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2016
* USD 349,720.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Alaska Anchorage that will provide research training for 30
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. The program is designed
to actively engage undergraduates in faculty-mentored, independent research in
the areas of Ecology and Physiological Ecology in South-central Alaska. The
opportunities offered by Alaska as a natural laboratory for high latitude
ecological studies are unparalleled. The program is intended to positively
influence undergraduates toward postgraduate education and careers in the
sciences. It is guided by four main objectives: 1) to help students develop
critical thinking skills, 2) to increase student interest in pursuing careers in
sciences and to engage students directly in discussions surrounding graduate
school and career options, 3) to increase student independence as researchers,
and 4) to attract a diverse range of students into the program. The program is
structured to involve students in all aspects of scientific investigation and
inspire them through direct exposure to ecological and physiology phenomena in
Alaska. Students are mentored toward increased independence as the program
progresses. Weekly research seminars, a series of career development workshops
that include a focus on ethics and responsible conduct in research, and a
variety of fieldtrips and social activities facilitate student learning and
development. The program concludes with a student research symposium. Students
from underrepresented minority groups and from institutions with limited
opportunities for research are targeted during recruiting efforts. Students are
tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic field of study,
their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience.
Information about the program will be assessed by various means, including use
of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://uaa.alaska.edu/reu/ , or by contacting the PI (Dr. David Pfeiffer at
afdcp@uaa.alaska.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Khrystyne Duddleston at
afkd1@uaa.alaska.edu.)