* 1263723
* Enabling Technologies Laboratory Student Design Program
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Robert Erlandson, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 124,985.00

PI: Erlandson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1263723&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Enabling Technologies Laboratory (ETL) Student Design Program provides Wayne
State University's undergraduate engineering students with the opportunity to
design and create prototypes, custom designed devices, software and services to
aid persons with disabilities. Students conduct their design activities in an
environment that not only complements and integrates their previous academic
experiences, but also naturally integrates research, education, and community
service. The student design projects are coordinated with ETL research on the
impact and effectiveness of technologies that enhance human performance, both
physically and cognitively, with an emphasis on the needs of individuals with
disabilities. Accessible and universal design principles are key elements in
these research and design activities ETL's client base and collaborator network
has continued to grow over the past fifteen years. Veterans with disabilities
and their respective organizations have recently been added to ETL's
historically diverse community network of CARF and NISH affiliated agencies,
special education schools and training centers, small business seeking to hire
or retain workers with disabilities, and local rehabilitation clinics. ETL's
student design projects reflect the needs of this increasingly diverse
population. Loosely speaking, universal and accessible design seek to support
accessibility and competent participation by as many people as possible with as
broad a range of abilities as possible without the need for accommodations or
assistive technology. Physical accessibility remains a priority and as such
ergonomic considerations are a significant element in all design projects.
However, cognitive accessibility has taken on greater significance with our
aging population and the increase of people with one form or another of
cognitive impairments or traumatic brain injury. A fundamental design principle
of universal and accessible design is to build intelligence into the
environment, product or service so that such "ambient intelligence" or
"ubiquitous computing" can provide cognitive support if required.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: ETL student projects tend to fall into
three broad technological areas: mechatronic systems, ambient intelligence
systems, and universal design. Mechatronic systems can address ergonomic and
physical needs. Ambient intelligence enables the universal design principle of
building intelligence into environments, products and services by the
integration of embedded microprocessors, smart sensors, and wireless
communications technologies that can communicate with people providing
information, guidance and support. Such design efforts possess intellectual
merit in that they are intellectually challenging and afford ETL students the
opportunity to work with state-of-the-art technologies related to human/system
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The ETL student design
process ensures that the teams are out in the community. They meet and interact
with users of their designs as well as representatives from the participating
organizations. Based on past experience it has been clearly demonstrated that
such active engagements create the broader impacts of the project: 1)
interfacing with the local community through ETL's strong community network, 2)
using technology to help persons with disabilities, 3) educating the community
on how and where to obtain resources and services, 4) supporting persons with
disabilities in work, education, leisure and community participation, 5)
providing the participating engineering students exposure to people with
disabilities, their needs and challenges, 6) engagement with practicing
engineers and area businesses, 7) industry support of ETL equipment needs and
resources, and more recently 8) raising the entrepreneurial awareness of our
students and supporting their entrepreneurial interests with programs such as
the collaboration of ETL and Life Beyond Barriers. Life Beyond Barriers is a
program to stimulate and support student entrepreneurism. It is a partnership of
Wayne State University, the Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan and Urban
Science a company owned by a Wayne State graduate who is funding the
entrepreneurial initiatives.