* 1263235
* REU Site: Engineering Across Cell Types
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Susan Roberts, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 358,389.00

Supported by the National Science Foundation Division of Engineering Education
and Centers (EEC), this three-year REU Site program at the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst will enable 9 undergraduate students to conduct research
in cellular engineering, an exciting new frontier of engineering and applied
biology. Nature has remarkable capabilities to engineer new processes, make
products and transform materials from one form to another. Cellular organisms
display such a wide range of features that essentially any trait can be
engineered into an appropriate host. Nearly four decades ago, molecular biology
enabled a quantum leap for medicine with the production of human insulin in
bacteria. Scientists and engineers are now on the cusp of being able to engineer
organisms to pump out fuel using plant matter as a feedstock, clean up toxic
pollutants from soil, water and air, produce large quantities of anticancer
drugs, and even transform human cells into useful tissues. In the past decade,
novel tools have been developed and discoveries made across cell types (e.g.,
bacteria, yeast, mammalian, plant) to facilitate cellular engineering; however,
there has been limited crosstalk amongst the varied scientific communities,
highlighting the relevance of this REU Program: Engineering Across Cell Types
(EnACT): Exploring the Scientific and Physical Interfaces Amongst Cells.
Traditional research and curricula at the engineering/life sciences interface do
not typically include discussion of the similarities and differences amongst
cell types, and therefore students are not provided with a complete perspective
on the tools available for engineering cells. For example, most undergraduate
courses in biochemistry and bioengineering emphasize microbial systems because
of their widespread study and use. However, many recent advances are in higher
eukaryotes, which are considerably more complicated due to differences in cell
biology such as compartmentalization, organelle-specific gene expression and
redundancy of pathways. REU students will get a chance to work with researchers
using different cell systems (e.g., bacteria, yeast, animal, and plant) to
illustrate adaptation and application of both research approaches and
fundamental knowledge across cell types. Faculty research areas include protein
engineering, metabolic engineering, tissue engineering, drug delivery, and
systems biology.

Understanding cellular function across cell types and manipulating cells/tissues
to perform in a particular manner is the basis for many ventures in the
biomedical, biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries. Participants will
engage in cellular engineering research that addresses grand challenges in
pharmaceutical sciences, medical technology, bioenergy and the environment.
Specific objectives of the EnACT (Engineering Across Cell Types) REU are to: (1)
encourage and inspire students to pursue graduate studies in cellular
engineering; (2) create a diverse pool of student researchers by focusing on
recruitment of underrepresented populations, including deaf and hard-of-hearing
students, students at non-research intensive universities, and students in
earlier stages of their academic careers; (3) train students to transition from
dependent to independent researchers through collaborative research and near-
peer mentoring activities; (4) enable students to communicate effectively across
disciplines; and (5) provide students with strategies for professional success.
In addition to interdisciplinary research projects, REU participants will be
involved in Research Supergroups involving students and faculty from two
research laboratories, a Professional Seminar; a Pathways to Research Impact
Seminar, and a student poster session. Recruitment efforts will target
undergraduates at all stages majoring in chemical engineering, bioengineering,
chemistry, biology, and biochemistry. The PI will collaborate with the NSF-
sponsored, UMA-led Northeast AGEP and LSAMP alliances to enhance the recruitment
of underrepresented minority students, Springfield Technical Community College
to recruit students enrolled in associate degree programs, and the National
Technical Institute for the Deaf to recruit deaf and hearing-impaired students.
The EnACT REU will engage students in cross-disciplinary research at the
interface of engineering/physical sciences and life sciences and encourage them
to pursue advanced degrees and careers in bioengineering and related fields,
creating a technologically advanced, forward thinking, interdisciplinary minded
workforce.