* 1263266
* REU: Robotics and Intelligent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* James Bagnell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 356,000.00

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. The Robotics and Intelligent Systems REU site provides high-quality
robotics summer undergraduate research experiences, robust student-development
programming, and provides gateways to graduate studies and career opportunities
in robotics. Robotics technology is crucial to the national interest, both in
terms of economic success and national security. Robotics is making critical
contributions to advanced manufacturing, logistics, services, transportation,
homeland security, defense, medicine, healthcare, space exploration,
environmental monitoring, and agriculture. These developments place robotics at
the forefront of the nation's interests. Further, robotics plays a vital role in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education due to its
multi-disciplinary nature, enveloping many different fields from computer
science to psychology, as well as its unique ability to combine science and
engineering with creative thinking in a hands-on, research-oriented environment.
The sciences that comprise robotics provide a unique opportunity to immerse
students in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robotics and
Intelligent Systems REU site immerses a highly motivated and diverse cohort of
students in a guided research process that enables them to experience the thrill
of discovery and to adopt the role of scientist as one which is authentically
theirs. The site inspires REU students to pursue careers in robotics and related
fields and equip them with the skills and new knowledge to seize industry and
graduate school opportunities. It extends access to high-quality robotics summer
undergraduate research experiences that challenge students by the
interdisciplinary nature of robotics, and the complexity of the research. All
student projects are designed to fit into larger efforts with real impact in
critical societal challenges such as quality of life, agriculture, mining,
manufacturing, climate science, etc. Research results will be shared widely
through poster sessions, public presentations, and web based
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site web site
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~summerscholar) provides additional information.