* 1263850
* The North Slope Arctic Scenarios Project (NASP):  Envisioning Desirable Futures and Strategizing Pathways for Sustainable Healthy Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nancy Fresco, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2017
* USD 954,290.00

This ArcSEES proposal for the North Slope Arctic Scenarios Project (NASP)
involves multiple organizations and stakeholders across the North Slope and
Northwest Arctic Boroughs in partnership with UAF, NSSI, ION, and ANTHC. Faculty
members, students, and a broad range of experts drawn from stakeholder
communities will collaborate to explore options for sustainable development in
the North. NASP employs proven and advanced approaches to engage North Slope
communities in developing and analyzing scenarios visions for the future and
plausible pathways - for effective strategic planning and implementation of
policy. NASP develops products and applies new tools at the intersection of
climate model output, information products from observing networks, and
different knowledge systems to facilitate sustainable healthy communities. NASP
will identify key uncertainties and indicator variables for specific scenarios
(i) translating them into guidance for optimization of Arctic observing systems,
and (ii) synthesizing scenarios-derived findings, variables and spatially
explicit scenarios and climate model projections using the NSSI geospatial data
framework for stakeholder planning. The project explicitly fosters the emergence
of communities of practice (CoPs), engages teachers and students at the
secondary and tertiary level, and generates scientific deliverables that
contribute to improved understanding and observations of Arctic change.