* 1263888
* Expanding Potawatomi Language Description with Documentation of Natural Speech (POT)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Laura Buszard-Welcher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2018
* USD 319,716.00

The goal of this project is to add to the relatively sparse documentation on the
Algonquian language Potawatomi. This three-year project is based on a core
activity, the recording (audio and video) and processing of a target of 54 hours
of natural speech by fluent native speaker Potawatomi elders. This activity will
both lead to and be complemented by a set of related projects, including the
elaboration of our dictionary database, creation of a coordinated set of tools
for language analysis, and the expansion of a partial grammatical sketch of the
language created by co-PI Welcher in 1998.

Potawatomi (or Bod√©wadmimwen) is a critically endangered language spoken
primarily in the Midwestern United States (Wisconsin, Michigan, Kansas, and
Oklahoma). The dialect being documented here is Forest County Potawatomi, spoken
in Wisconsin. Of the total 10-15 remaining fluent elder speakers of Potawatomi,
nine live in Wisconsin, so this is the ideal place for such a project.
Documentation which exists on the language is limited in quantity and scope,
making further documentation all the more urgent.

Existing records of unscripted connected speech include a small number of
handwritten, partially translated narratives collected by Charles Hockett,
scattered pedagogical materials whose spontaneity varies widely, and scattered
recordings by community language activists. The addition of genres such as
conversations, oral histories, and other types of discourse will round out our
record of Potawatomi language use. Potawatomi narrative texts are significantly
different from everyday discourse, even in terms of grammatical structure, and
thus creation of a record of such texts will broaden the empirical basis upon
which linguistic analyses can be performed. Systematic transcription, analysis,
and archiving of collected recordings in consultation with fluent speakers will
result in a primary language resource that will be of immense benefit to
researchers, as well as to language teachers and learners.

The project is the continuation of a collaboration between native speakers,
community language activists, linguists, and a software applications expert, all
currently working on a dictionary of Potawatomi, and it will result in
additional materials useful to all of these constituencies. Because of the level
of community involvement in the entire process we have a clear focus on
producing a product that will be of immediate benefit to community-driven
language revitalization. In addition, we will be working in parallel with a new
Forest County Potawatomi community-based language documentation project inspired
by and continuing our dictionary project.