* 1263994
* Collaborative Research: Development of Preclinical X-ray Phase-Contrast Tomography for 3D Imaging of Engineered Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Eric Brey, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 283,168.00

1263988/1263994 &lt;br/&gt;Anastasio/Brey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field X-ray
imaging is being revolutionized by the development of techniques based on phase-
contrast (PC), which have shown great promise for soft tissue imaging. The
principal advantage is that X-ray PC imaging methods are sensitive to
alternative physical properties of tissues, and can differentiate tissues that
have very similar or even identical X-ray absorption properties. The
broad&lt;br/&gt;objective of this research program is to develop and
comprehensively evaluate X-ray PC imaging and tomography for use in the
evaluation and monitoring of engineered tissues. The specific research objects
of the project are to: (1) Investigate non-traditional mechanisms of X-ray
contrast produced by model-engineered tissues and determine conditions for
optimal imaging of polymer and tissue structures&lt;br/&gt;ex vivo and in
culture conditions; (2) Optimize grating-based PC imager designs and image
reconstruction algorithms for volumetric imaging of engineered tissues; and (3)
Evaluate a benchtop PC imager for 3D in vivo evaluation of engineered tissues in
small animal models. The intellectual merit of the proposed research arises from
the development and refinement of hardware designs and image formation
algorithms for a new X-ray imaging modality and their application to the
important problem of characterizing and monitoring engineered tissues. Novel
X-ray contrast mechanisms that can effectively characterize engineered tissues
will be systematically investigated. Model polymer scaffolds and engineered
tissues will be used in the evaluation and optimization of these imaging systems
in order to ensure broad relevance to many areas of tissue engineering,
regenerative medicine and biomaterials. To accomplish this research, a
combination of physics and fundamental principles of biomedical engineering and
imaging science are employed by our collaborative research team.&lt;br/&gt;There
are several broad impacts of the project that will yield important benefits to
both biomedical science and society. The successful completion of this project
will establish X-ray PC imaging as a highly effective tool for characterizing
the 3D structure of engineered tissues and will have a transformative impact on
the field of tissue engineering. The acceleration of tissue engineering research
will have a significant impact on human health by leading to new therapeutic
approaches for the treatment of defects resulting from disease, trauma or
congenital defects. The integration of this research with the proposed
educational activities will help attract students to the increasingly important
fields of biomedical engineering, biomedical imaging and tissue engineering and
enhance greatly their educational&lt;br/&gt;opportunities.