* 1263243
* REU Site: Research and education in microscale sensing, actuation and imaging
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Sriram Sundararajan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2016
* USD 359,707.00

The objective of this REU site hosted by the Mechanical Engineering Department
at Iowa State University is to engage ten undergraduate students annually in
summer research experiences in the area of Microscale Sensing, Actuation and
Imaging (MoSAIc). The students will pursue fundamental investigations in the
area of design and manufacture of sensors, actuators and smart materials as well
as "state-of-art" imaging and diagnostic systems. The research activities are
inherently interdisciplinary in nature by addressing phenomena at several length
scales ranging from the molecular to the mesoscale. Examples include flexible
linkages, high temperature MEMS pressure sensors, solar cells, electroactive
polymeric actuators, nanomechanical sensors for biological agents, atom probe
tomography and high spatiotemporal resolution 4-D imaging. A unique and
differentiating component of this REU site from its existing version (2009-2012)
will be an increased focus on recruiting community college students and an
interaction component with middle school teachers. The potential impact of the
REU site is in providing a diverse pool of undergraduate students from 4-year
colleges, community colleges and incoming freshman with a) a research experience
in topics that are of national interest; b) an appreciation for cross-
disciplinary nature of such research; c) an appreciation of the ethical
implications of engineering research and; d) a fostering environment for career
development. These efforts will encourage participants to pursue graduate school
education and careers in R&D and academia.

The need for advanced sensing and imaging technologies to enhance our nation's
health, homeland, food and energy security has never been more urgent as
outlined in the Grand Challenges of the National Academy of Engineering. This
REU Site will contribute to workforce development by providing students from
4-year colleges, minority-serving institutions, and community colleges as well
as freshman students with a 10-week summer research experience annually in
projects in the area of sensing and imaging technologies. The site will thus
encourage STEM-related educational experiences for a diverse pool of
individuals. Example projects include biosensors to detect miniscule traces of
chemical and biological toxins, high speed 3-D mapping of human faces to aid
medical diagnoses of nerve-based disorders and design of high efficiency solar
cells. The existing faculty expertise and research infrastructure in the
Mechanical Engineering Department at Iowa State University will provide the
necessary guidance, mentoring and cohort-based social and educational activities
to enhance students' hands-on experiences, science and engineering knowledge
base as well as communication and team-based skills. The student experience in
this REU site will thus enable them to walk away with life-long skills that will
impact their contributions to science and engineering and to society.

This project acknowledges support from the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers.