* 1263924
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   Demographics and Voter Participation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Zoltan Hajnal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 03/31/2015
* USD 6,479.00

This project examines the individual and structural factors that underlie a
person's decision to vote. Prior research has made it clear that demographics
affect how likely a person is to vote, and that increasing the costs associated
with voting makes a person less likely to vote. The project constructs a new
theory of voter turnout that merges these two findings, arguing that
demographics determine political resources (including political knowledge and
civic skills), which in turn determine whether a person is able to overcome the
voting costs placed on him or her.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
intellectual merit is associated with its advances in theory and empirical
research on voting. The project develops statistical models that test the
interaction between demographics and voting costs to observe how voting costs
differentially affect people based on their demographic characteristics. These
models will account for demographics, the voting costs voters face, community
characteristics, and the campaign environment. The project will provide insight
into the costs that voters face and identify which types of voters are
overburdened with voting costs and how turnout among these groups can be made
more representative. The research examines voting costs that have received
little attention in prior research, and incorporates several voting costs in the
same model to discover precisely which costs are posing the greatest threat to
turnout. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying voter turnout is of great importance
because the people who vote tend to have more influence in matters of policy and
government than those who do not vote. Voters have been shown to have different
policy concerns than non-voters. If certain people routinely abstain from voting
because the costs are too high, they may not be adequately represented in local,
state, and federal government. This could leave segments of the population
under-represented.