* 1263263
* REU Sites:  Terrestrial-aquatic linkages in urban impacted ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Mark Kershner, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 02/29/2016
* USD 345,000.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to Kent
State University (KSU; with The Holden Arboretum (HA) near Cleveland) that will
provide research training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of
2013 to 2015. The program focuses on terrestrial-aquatic linkages within urban-
impacted environments. Student research will be conducted at several field sites
around KSU and HA that are impacted to varying degrees by human activities such
as urbanization, industry, farming, mining, and recreation. Early in the
program, training and cohort activities will take place at both KSU and HA,
including field trips and workshops that use active-learning exercises. Skills
emphasized will include ethics training and responsible conduct of research,
generating testable hypotheses, communicating science to diverse audiences, and
involving non-scientists in research. Cohort activities will encourage students
to work in teams, communicate, analyze the quality of their data, and archive
data in a geospatial database. Students will then conduct research mentored by
faculty with wide ranging expertise in terrestrial and aquatic ecology. These
projects could include examining how human activities affect the flow of
nutrients within and between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, change
microbial community composition, or contribute to the evolution of antibiotic
resistance. Weekly reading/discussion groups will bring participants and mentors
together to further student-student and student-mentor interactions while
fostering the communication skills necessary for a successful science career.
Participants will be recruited from both U.S. colleges and universities and
local two-year colleges (Cuyahoga Community College, Lakeland Community College,
KSU's regional campuses) with a high proportion of students from
underrepresented groups that often do not continue their education. Participant
selection will occur based on student qualifications, statement of interest and
recommendation letters. Participants will be tracked using a web page, blog and
Facebook page and through followup surveys. Information about the program will
be assessed by an external assessor and using an REU common assessment tool. For
more information visit http://ecologyREU.kent.edu, or contact the PI (Dr.
Patrick Lorch at plorch@kent.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Kurt Smemo at
ksmemo@holdenarb.org).