* 1263970
* Self-Assembling Redox-Mediators
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Nicholas Abbott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

CBET - 1263970 Self-Assembling Redox-Mediators Abbott, Nicholas L. University of
Wisconsin-Madison

Intellectual Merit: The research seeks to broadly advance the molecular level
design of redox active surfactants that have the potential to serve as self
assembling redoxmediators in electrochemical and photoelectrochemical systems.
The first goal of the research isfocused on surfactants that incorporate.The
redox active group ferrocene and seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of
how changes in the oxidation state of the ferrocene impacts. The self assembly
of the redox active surfactants at surfaces (e.g.,electrode surfaces). To this
end,surface plasmon resonance,atomic force microscopy and potential step
chronocoulometry will be combined to test three key hypotheses regarding
oxidation state dependent self assembly of ferrocenyl amphiphiles on chemically
functionalized solid surfaces Fundamental insights into The equilibriumand
dynamic properties of surfactants at surfaces will emerge from the research A
second key goal of The research is to understand how the oxidation state
dependent self assembly of redox active surfactants at surfaces(as elucidated in
goal) impacts the forward and backward rates of oxidation of these surfactants
at electrodes Building from preliminary data indicating that incorporation of
redox probes into self assembling molecules can substantially change. The rates
of forward and backward electrochemical transformations,research conducted under
the second goal will seek to establish principles based on self assembling redox
mediators that can be used to minimize undesirable recombination or back
reactions in solar energy driven devices for photovoltaics and water splitting
Such back reactions(e.g.,reduction of an oxidized mediator at a photoanode) play
a central role in determining. The efficiency of both dye sensitized solar cells
and photolytic processes for water splitting Cyclic voltammetry,potential step
chronocoulometry and darkcurrent measurements will be combined with knowledge
emerging from the first research goal to elucidate physical processes based on
self assembly that can be exploited to regulate the rates ofoxidation/reduction
of redox surfactants



Broader Impacts: The ability to transform the amphiphilicity of molecules at
defined rates and at specified locations on surfaces has the potential to
broadly impact surfactant science by enabling new types of experiments that will
advance our understanding of the dynamic and equilibrium properties of
surfactant systems. In particular measurement of rates of oxidation and
reduction ofredox active surfactants at surfaces (electrodes)will provide
fundamental insights into the dynamics of complex surfactant systems at surfaces
technological potential of the knowledge to be generated by this research is
also substantial Specifically,identification of redox mediators that are
kinetically fast yet exhibit low rates of recombination at electrodes remains an
unresolved challenge that,if solved, would advance the efficiency of a range of
light driven technologies. These solar technologies offer the potential to
provide sustainable sources of electrical energy as well as solar fuels(e.g.as
obtained from splitting of water) both lowering reliance of carbon based energy
sources and emissions of CO2 More broadly. The ability to electrochemically
control the amphiphilicity of molecules will enable control of surfactant based
phenomena in a rangeof technological contexts including separations drug
delivery energy harvesting materials synthesis and design of biomolecular
interfaces. The research described in this project also provides exciting
opportunities for the education of graduate and undergraduate students through
projects that combine surfactant science colloid chemistry interface science and
electrochemical engineering.These students will also be presented with the
unusual opportunity of being involved in two international collaborations (with
collaborators in Israel and Japan)