* 1263222
* REU/RET Site:  Collaborative Research:  Introducing Critical Zone Observatory Science to Students and Teachers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Anthony Aufdenkampe, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2016
* USD 256,154.00

Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs) are natural laboratories for investigating
Earth surface processes mediated by fresh water in the zone extending from the
top of the vegetation canopy to the base of groundwater, i.e. the Critical Zone.
This award supports the participation of undergraduate students and teachers in
research at two Critical Zone Observatories, the Susquehanna-Shale Hills
Observatory (SSHO) in central Pennsylvania and the Christina River Basin (CRB)
CZO in southeastern Pennsylvania and northern Delaware. Pennsylvania State
University is the lead institution of the SSHO and would collaborate with the
Stroud Water Research Center (SWRC), a partner in the CRB CZO. The collaborative
project will fund a total of 12 undergraduate students and 4 teachers at these
sites per year, providing research experiences for undergraduates primarily
interested in Earth Science careers and K-12 teachers who want to increase their
content knowledge and resources for the classroom. At the CRB, participants will
be involved in research investigating aspects of the impact of three centuries
of human habitation on the carbon and water cycles. At the SSHO, participants
will be involved in research to quantitatively predict the creation, evolution
and structure of regolith as a function of the geochemical, hydrologic,
biologic, and geomorphological processes operating in the temperate, forested
landscape. After the summer experience, participants will prepare and give
presentations at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union. CZOs
offer a unique opportunity for training undergraduate students and teachers via
research experiences because of the broad array of environmental landscapes
represented by the observatories and the interdisciplinary science achieved
through the observatory framework.