* 1263923
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Electoral Competition, Income Inequality and Public Goods: A Subnational Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 09/30/2014
* USD 10,080.00

Is more electoral competition intrinsically better for development? This
dissertation furthers our understanding of how electoral competition in recent
democracies interacts with economic inequality to shape the probability that
households will have access to basic services: water, sanitation and education.
It uses novel household-level data for Mexico and original inequality measures
at the municipal level to parse the effects of competition at the state and
municipal levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding the
dynamics of the provision of basic services in new democracies is essential for
understanding and reducing poverty. However, research in this area has two
recurrent shortcomings. It has been hitherto dominated by cross-national
analysis which assumes away important country-specific and regional differences.
It also lacks a deep, direct understanding of how public officials perceive the
provision of public goods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
latter shortcomings by looking at how electoral competition at the municipal and
state levels interact with income inequality, using original subnational data.
By doing so it challenges the implicit notion that democratic party competition
is intrinsically and homogeneously better for development, providing evidence
that party competition has different effects dependent on the level of
government, poverty and inequality. The statistical results will be paired with
a description of the dilemmas that politicians themselves perceive "in the
field". This will provide the literature with a much needed first-hand
description of these dilemmas in a new democracy. Mexico presents an invaluable
opportunity for three reasons: it has high variation at the subnational level in
terms of electoral competition, the provision of public goods and inequality;
the amount of available raw census data is perfect to engage these broad
theoretical questions; and the researchers have an established network with
municipal, state and federal officials that will reduce the costs of obtaining
the interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Understanding the
heterogeneous effects of party competition across levels of government, income
and inequality is crucial for solid development policy in recent democracies,
and for an efficient allocation of development projects in democracies
previously ravaged by war. The project will involve training opportunities for
under-represented groups. The information generated will be widely circulated to
other scientific communities that will find it useful (e.g. Centers for Latin
American Studies across the U.S.). By establishing a partnership with academic
repositories of massive datasets, the manual for using massive datasets should
aid social scientist shift to a massive-data paradigm.