* 1263820
* Lenape Language Online Dictionary Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,09/30/2015
* James Rementer, The Delaware Tribe
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 09/30/2015
* USD 24,879.00

James Rementer and Bruce Pearson helped the Delaware Tribe of Indians of
Bartlesville, Oklahoma create a lexical database of the Lenape or Delaware
Indian language. Lenape is an eastern Algonquian language historically spoken in
southeastern New York State, all of New Jersey, eastern Pennsylvania, and the
northern part of the State of Delaware. Many place names in the eastern United
States originate from this language, e.g. Manhattan. In this sense, the Lenape
language is part of the heritage of the Lenape people and also the wider US
English-speaking community.

Work on the Lenape Language Database Project began in 1997 and was supported by
funding from the National Science Foundation. The database in its current form
includes 15,460 single-word entries with sound files, 22 linguistically analyzed
narratives and 4 hymns. The current project, Lenape Language Online Dictionary
Project, will add data from lists of Lenape words collected between the 1600s
and 1800s. This addition will allow for commentary on Lenape historical lexical
development. The computational sophistication of the search parameters will be
developed so that grammatical information will be linked to words to provide
semantic and grammatical context to the lexical entries. Consultants on the
project include Delaware tribal member and professor of German, Dr. Grant
Leneaux and author and expert on early materials on the Lenape, Raymond
Whritenour. The resulting products will create a link betwtee the Lenape
community and their heritage language.