* 1263405
* REU Site:   The Temporal Dynamics of Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Garrison Cottrell, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 289,255.00

The faculty and researchers in the Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center (UCSD)
are engaged in REU Site with the overall aim of providing undergraduate students
a research experience that leads to publishable work in a new interdisciplinary
area studying the role of time and timing in learning, at multiple time and
spatial scales, from the scale of synapses operating at the millisecond
timescale up to the scale of teachers and students interacting over months. This
project allows the team to give REU students access to all of the facilities and
activities of the Center, including a state-of-the-art motion capture/brain
dynamics facility, regular meetings of research networks composed of highly
interdisciplinary and collaborative faculty, postdocs, graduate students and
undergraduate researchers from more than seventeen institutions in the US,
Canada, and Australia, and a yearly All Hands Meeting where they present their
results. In addition to the training REU students receive in the individual
laboratories, extensive professional development opportunities are provided
through workshops, an undergraduate research conference, panel discussions, and
GRE preparation courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is the
advancement of a new science of the Temporal Dynamics of Learning through
undergraduate research experiences in highly productive laboratories, and
training in collaborative, rather than competitive, research. The research field
is inherently interdisciplinary, combining cognitive science, psychology and
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
significant number of under-represented minorities are recruited from local
community colleges (as it is a school-year program), resulting in the training
of a diverse group of future scientists advancing the science of learning from
multiple perspectives. The PI-team taps into established working relationships
with these institutions in order to ensure an adequate applicant pool from the
honors program, and use recommendations by their professors so that they can
enroll the best students in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-
funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.