* 1263163
* REU site: Computational Biology Summer Program at Rutgers-Camden
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* Joseph Martin, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2016
* USD 320,970.00

The Center for Computational and Integrative Biology (CCIB) at Rutgers
University - Camden, will provide research training for 10 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015 under a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site award. The program focuses on an interdisciplinary
approach to research in computational biology and will include integrating
experimental biology and computational modeling in fields such as ecology,
animal group movement, plant physiology and synthetic engineering of biofuels.
The CCIB has faculty from five departments who will serve as mentors and
graduate students who will act as near-peer mentors. Participating students are
expected to do full-time lab research as well as participate in seminars and
workshops, such as publishing, insights on global issues and societal needs,
regulatory issues, licensing, and entrepreneurship. The project will introduce
students to research in computational biology; encourage students to pursue a
major in STEM disciplines and/or a career in scientific research; develop
tangible academic, professional, and personal skills; foster a collaborative
environment that encourages discovery and innovation; expose students to areas
of relevance related to scientific R&D such as ethics and responsible conduct of
research, technology transfer; and finally, equip participants to make well
informed decisions on their academic and professional career. The REU Site will
recruit students that would not otherwise have any access to a research
experience. Moreover, the students targeted are expected to be at a critical
stage where they are deciding whether to change academic focus, follow a new
career path, and/or re-engage in academic study. Students will be recruited in
collaboration with a number of New Jersey community colleges and the Joint Base
McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst (JBMDL), the nation?s first tri-service military
installation. Students are tracked to determine their continued academic
interests, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. The program encourages students to stay connected to their REU
experience by participating as "alumni" of the program during orientation of
subsequent years. Information about the program will be assessed by various
means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is
available by visiting http://ccib.camden.rutgers.edu/reu.html , or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Benedetto Piccoli at piccoli@camden.rutgers.edu).