* 1263293
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Mechatronics, Robotics, and Automated System Design
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Industrial automation is essential to modern day manufacturing. Even in these
troubled economic times, U.S. manufacturers are still looking to hire highly
skilled workers in industrial automation and control. Interdisciplinary Research
Experiences in Mechatronics, Robotics, and Automated System Design is a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site supported by NSF's Division of
Engineering Education and Centers. This site will provide a research environment
for 8-10 undergraduate students per year to learn about mechatronics, robotics,
and automated system design. The goals are to help participants to understand
the research process, acquire laboratory skills, and expand their perspectives
on science and engineering research, and to have a lasting influence on their
career paths. The site will target students who have limited opportunities to
participate in research on their home campuses or who belong to groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in engineering and science, including women,
underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate participants will attend a ten-week summer
program in which they will be immersed in a graduate school environment with
access to outstanding infrastructure. Activities will include joining a research
group led by a faculty mentor, completion of a research project, and
participation in weekly seminars, field trips, and career development workshops.
They will also participate in activities and share housing with other summer
research program participants at Texas A&amp;M University. At the end of the
summer, they will present their research at a campus-wide REU poster session.
During the following academic year, the program will provide a mechanism for
participants to continue to interact with their mentors. This will help the
students to connect their research experiences to their overall course of study
and to achieve success in courses of study leading to a baccalaureate degree in
a STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The site is co-funded by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program."