* 1263701
* A Single Particle Imaging Approach for the Detection of Virus Phenotypes in a Mixture
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Susan Daniel, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 367,453.00

1263701(Daniel). Technical part: The overall goal of the proposed research is to
develop a single particle experimental platform for the identification and
characterization of enveloped viruses based on their entry kinetics. This
platform will integrate two key technologies: 1) single particle imaging of
virus binding and viral-host membrane fusion of individual virion particles to a
supported bilayer platform, and 2) statistical analysis of these individual
events to discriminate populations based on variations in entry kinetic
parameters. In this project, virus will serve as a model virus because it is one
of the most studied viruses and thus the entry mechanism is well understood; its
surface proteins are easily mutated and adapted to different cell types; it is
well known that binding and fusion can vary among viral strains, e.g. H5 (avian)
versus H3 (human) strains, and that these variations are correlated to
infectivity. We propose that the rapid characterization of entry kinetics of
virus samples from an infected person, made possible by the methods we employ
here, can be used to determine which phenotypes the person (or a tissue sample)
is infected with. In the case of influenza, this kind of rapid detection may be
critical to promptly tracking the spread of virus during a pandemic outbreak or
intentional release. In influenza, viral entry processes are controlled by the
same protein, hemagglutinin (HA), which complicates decoupling binding from
fusion in the overall entry kinetics. With current technology, it is only
possible to assess separately, but not within the same virion, binding and
fusion kinetics. This proposed platform discriminates between these processes
within an individual virion, providing quantitative kinetic information on both
processes that can then be used to identify phenotypes. Phenotype detection
without PCR is currently a grand challenge in virus detection. Thus this is a
potentially transformative technology that will aid in quickly discriminating
among virus phenotypes in a mixed sample.

Non-technical part: This proposal will develop better understanding of how
influenza virus subtypes enter the cell during infection. This understanding is
important and authors postulate that it may be used to discriminate more harmful
from less harmful types of infleunza. This project will therefore have
significant societal benefit down the road by helping develop better influenaza
diagnostic tools.