* 1263336
* REU Site:The US/France/Belgium iREU Site in Translational Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Randolph Duran, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 346,452.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports an International Research Experiences for Undergraduates (iREU) Site
led by Professors Randolph S. Duran and David A. Spivak both at Louisiana State
University and Gloria A. Thomas at Xavier University in New Orleans, LA. The
Site will have projects located in Grenoble France or Leuven Belgium. Each
summer, 8 participants will have REU projects that feature aspects of
translational chemistry and the Sites will incorporate major European
"Innovation Campuses" where national laboratory, industry, and university
scientists work as teams. This will provide students the opportunity to
experience a network of research not typically available to students at most
American colleges and universities. Students with previous experience and a
strong desire to continue in STEM areas will be recruited nationwide. To ensure
a diverse group of students, the Site will interact with the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (LSAMP) Program for the recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups. The PI has experience in developing and directing iREU
programs and the other members of the leadership team have been PIs of domestic
REU Sites. Outstanding facilities and research support at the proposed locations
ensure sufficient resources for participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iREU site
will expose students to the international community of science, allowing them to
experience first-hand the collaborative nature of research between universities,
national laboratories, and companies. Students will be immersed in a foreign
culture, broadening their understanding of what it means to be an active
participant in an international effort. By incorporating LSAMP and Xavier
University, and by hosting its pre-departure meetings at a minority serving
institution, the program will increase participation by underrepresented groups.
Results will be disseminated through a proposed poster session abroad each
summer, as well as publications and presentations at national and local
conferences. Activities will be integrated with a new LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate Program and several other NSF programs at these sites. Mentoring from
a network of research mentors, iREU alumni, faculty at home institutions and
current graduate students will be encouraged. Eventually, development of an
exchange with French and Belgian undergraduate students working in US labs will
extend the impact beyond this site, encouraging collaboration between European
and US institutions.