* 1263130
* Ultra-Thin, Molecular Layer Deposition Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* John Falconer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 01/31/2017
* USD 306,000.00

1263130 Falconer

The goals of this research are to prepare ultrathin inorganic membranes that are
both highly selective and have fluxes that are at least an order of magnitude
higher than fluxes of previously reported membranes. These membranes will be
prepared by molecular layer deposition (MLD) onto high-flux supports. MLD uses
two self-limiting half reactions in sequence to form inorganic-organic hybrid
layers, which are then oxidized to remove the organic layer and create a porous
membrane. Membranes prepared by MLD can be less than 10-nm thick because MLD
conformally coats surfaces. Both oxide and nitride structures of various
compositions will be prepared in order to obtain selective membranes that are
hydrothermally stable. These membranes will be used to separate H2/CO2 and H2/CO
mixtures at high pressures and temperatures since such conditions are more
demanding tests of membrane quality and better represent separations
applications. This project takes advantage of recent observations that a thin
MLD alumina layer on a SAPO-34 zeolite membrane increased the H2/N2 separation
selectivity almost two orders of magnitude, and these membranes were selective
up to at least 1.5 MPa pressure. The successful completion of this project will
result in the ability to design inorganic oxide and nitride membranes with high
fluxes and high selectivities. Because the MLD layers are so thin (10 nm or
less), fluxes will be high, and such membranes would be potentially
transformative for membrane separations.

Broader Impacts

Preparation of ultrathin membranes that have dramatically higher fluxes and high
selectivities for H2 separations could have a major impact on H2 utilization by
significantly reducing the cost of these separations. Most inorganic membranes
are at least two orders of magnitude thicker than 10-nm, and preparing ultrathin
membranes that are almost defect free would be a major advance in membrane
science. MLD provides a new approach to prepare a novel class of membranes that
have the potential for broad application. Understanding how to control the pore
size of ultrathin membranes prepared by MLD also opens up the potential for many
applications that require separating mixtures with small differences in the size
of molecules (e.g., O2/N2, CO2/N2). High flux membranes with high selectivities
would have a significant impact on energy utilization because traditional
separations are such energy-intensive processes. The PI has successfully
patented results of his research with the potential to rapidly and directly
benefit society through commercialization. This proposed project will directly
impact one PhD student, at least four undergraduate students, and at least two
high school students. Screencasts will be prepared on membrane separations and
on MLD and posted on www.LearnChemE.com to disseminate information about MLD and
membranes.