* 1263601
* Using Spatial and Genetic Tools to Understand Functional Connectivity in a Patchy Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Adrienne Kovach, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2015
* USD 74,998.00

This project investigates the effects of habitat fragmentation on the dispersal
and connectivity of an early successional habitat specialist, the New England
cottontail, in a patchy landscape. Among the most pervasive effects of human
activities across the globe are changes in land use and land cover and the
associated fragmentation of habitat. Understanding how natural populations
respond to landscape features and restoring connectivity on a landscape scale
are critical for effective biodiversity conservation today as well as planning
for management that accounts for climate change. Issues of landscape structure
and connectivity and the relationship of animal movements and landscape
heterogeneity are also central themes in the field of landscape ecology. By
investigating landscape connectivity in an under-studied ecosystem of early
successional and shrub habitats, this project will extend fragmentation theory
beyond forested ecosystems. Landscapes consisting of early successional habitats
present an ideal framework for testing hypotheses about animal dispersal and
fragmentation theory because they are ephemeral and patchy by nature and are
heavily impacted by human modifications of the landscape and changes in land
use. This project will apply geographic tools of remote sensing and spatial
analyses with population genetic techniques, in a landscape genetics approach,
to identify the influence of landscape features in facilitating and impeding
cottontail dispersal. Early successional and shrub habitats will be
characterized and mapped using data sets from moderate to high-resolution remote
sensors that include passive optical, LiDAR and radar. Landscape and dispersal
modeling will be conducted using least cost path, isolation-by-resistance, and
graph theory. By comparison across multiple, replicated landscapes with varying
degrees of habitat fragmentation and population density, this study will test
hypotheses about the effects of fragmentation and effective population size on
genetic structure, dispersal distances and sex-biased dispersal patterns and
also about the two-pronged effects of roads as dispersal barriers and
facilitators for early successional habitat specialists. Results will be
synthesized to develop a model of cottontail gene flow in relation to landscape
structure and a predictive model to identify hot spots of connectivity and to
estimate patch-specific colonization probabilities in restoration landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the societal goal of
mitigating consequences of human modifications of the landscape on natural
populations and ecosystems. By focusing on a threatened species, the New England
cottontail, in a declining habitat, the early successional forest, this project
will generate information that will be directly used in the restoration of a
vulnerable ecosystem. Maintaining a mosaic of forested landscapes that includes
all successional stages will enhance biodiversity and maintain ecological
integrity of this geographic region that continues to experience large-scale
anthropogenic landscape change. Through identifying how the landscape influences
the dispersal patterns and connectivity of cottontails and identifying key
corridors to maintain population persistence, this project will provide key
insight for habitat restoration and the conservation of this threatened species.
Through established partnerships with state and federal agency biologists, the
results of this project are shared with stakeholders, ensuring they will have
maximal conservation impact. This project will contribute to the training of one
graduate and several undergraduate students and foster cross-disciplinary
training among the disciplines of natural resources, geography, and computer
science. Spatial tools developed in this project and their application in
conservation management will also be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate curricula.