* 1263481
* I-Corps:  Meeting Point: Eco Smart Mobility Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Piyush Kumar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to minimize fuel consumption and travel times by finding
common meeting locations for groups of users who are looking to minimize the
maximum or total distance/time traveled. Researchers aim to provide an instant
solution to the above class of problems. This project plans to capture the
underlying geometry of the road network graphs and use efficient computational
geometric tools to solve the problem. Researchers experimentally determine a
method to cast the entire road network graph in a low dimensional Euclidean
space, in order to exploit the geometrical structure of the graph. When query
points are fed from different locations of the road network, geometric
algorithms are used to find the solution instantly, but approximately. Query
points represent the users. Initial experiments on real world data sets indicate
fast computation of constant factor approximate solutions for query sets much
larger than previously computable using exact techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to develop new techniques for computing
centers on road networks. The results could make a large contribution to energy
usage, air pollution and to internet maps in general as it is designed to enable
users to make travel decisions that could lower fuel consumption thus
potentially reducing emissions and pollution. This project is designed to be
used as a web/mobile-based application for its end-users. A web/mobile platform
has the potential to make this application a useful part of travel planning for
a variety of end-users.