* 1263004
* REU Site: Renewable Energy Generation and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,10/31/2016
* Charles Westgate, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 10/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The importance of affordable and high efficiency technologies
for renewable energy has been well established and there is a demand for
scientifically and technologically competent students who have sufficient
experience in research methods, ethics, and teamwork for them to pursue advanced
technology careers. To address these needs, an NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program focused on Renewable Energy Generation and Storage
will be established on the Binghamton University, State University of New York
campus. Working with the Center for Autonomous Solar Power (CASP), an
interdisciplinary team of scientists and engineering faculty, this REU program
will bring up to 10 STEM undergraduate students (sophomore and junior level) and
two STEM faculty from four-year colleges together each year for a 9-week summer
experience in a stimulating and supportive research environment. A special focus
will be placed on incorporating students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines with a plan to reach >50% minority and
female participation, and to accomplish this goal, the REU site will work with
established minority serving partner institutions. Along with conducting
research, the students will participate in education and training programs to
support their professional development, present their work to industry members
of the CASP technical advisory board, and have access to travel funds to present
their work at professional meetings in the year following their experience.
Support for this REU is provided by the National Science Foundation's Division
of Materials Research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Affordable and efficient energy generation and storage is
a critical technology for the future success of the U.S. and world economy. With
the support of the Division of Materials Research at the National Science
Foundation, this REU site will build a new research program at the Center for
Autonomous Solar Power on the Binghamton University, State University of New
York campus. Targeting undergraduate students from groups typically
underrepresented in the science and engineering disciplines, a supportive and
challenging research experience has been created for each participant that
focuses on creating new solutions to current global energy challenges. Students
will benefit from both carefully planned, open-ended experimental problems
designed to yield significant results and the opportunity to contribute as a
member of a research team to the scientific knowledge in their discipline. The
program focuses on the development of the REU participants into future leaders
in the science and engineering energy community.