* 1263745
* Investigation of Boron and Boride Nanoclusters: Laying the Foundation for New Boron Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,035,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Lai-Sheng Wang from Brown
University of Providence, will carry out fundamental investigations of the
structures and bonding of boron clusters and metal boride clusters as a function
of size and composition. The objective of this project is to build the
foundation and knowledge base to understand the stability and viability of
boron-based nanostructures, as well as discovering new forms of boron
nanostructures. Three types of boron-related nanoclusters will be investigated:
1) boron clusters containing between 20 to 100 atoms, 2) metal boride clusters,
and 3) hydrogenated boron clusters. These clusters will be produced using a
laser vaporization supersonic cluster source and characterized by photoelectron
spectroscopy. The spectroscopic information will be combined with computational
studies to elucidate the structures, stability, and chemical bonding of the
boron-based clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clusters are aggregate of atoms and
their structures and properties change with the number of atoms, forming the
foundation of nanoscience. The understanding of how the structures and
properties of boron clusters change as a function of size will provide
information about the viability of boron-based nanomaterials. Metal borides
constitute an important class of superhard materials. Fundamental knowledge
about how metal atoms bond with boron atoms in metal boride clusters will be
valuable in the design of new superhard boride materials. Hydrogenated boron
clusters provide opportunities to investigate chemical interactions of hydrogen
with boron nanostructures, as well as providing a platform to discover new forms
of boron-nanostructures. Through the proposed research, students and
postdoctoral fellows will acquire specialized training in the preparation of
size-selected clusters and spectroscopic and computational tools to characterize
them. The experimental results will be integrated into the classroom for the
teaching of physical chemistry.