* 1263559
* RAPID: Using a drought-enhanced nitrate pulse to understand stream N retention and processing
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Martin St. Clair, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2014
* USD 197,568.00

Nitrogen addition is a cornerstone of modern agriculture, but fertilization has
impacted inland and coastal waters by increasing nitrogen concentrations,
supporting excessive growth of aquatic plants, reducing oxygen concentrations,
and triggering harmful algal blooms. Because of extreme drought in 2012,
Midwestern soils have accumulated nitrogen that is expected to be driven into
river networks by late summer or fall precipitation. This anticipated landscape-
wide nitrogen pulse offers an immediate and unparalleled opportunity to record
how nitrogen enters streams, and to quantify the transport, attenuation, and
fate of nitrogen as it moves through stream networks. An existing stream
monitoring network will be expanded and used to collect water samples during and
after major precipitation events in fall 2012, taking advantage of a short-term
opportunity to characterize nitrogen movement and processing in an agricultural
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;Unintended consequences of fertilization are an
increasingly important issue for resource managers. This project will add to our
understanding of how nitrogen moves from agricultural lands into and through
stream networks, and it will do so under climate conditions that are expected to
be more common in the coming decades. Additionally, this project will support
five early career scientists and a collaboration between the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, the University of Iowa, and Coe College. Inclusion of Coe
College will provide opportunities for undergraduate research and mentoring of
undergraduate students by faculty and graduate students.