* 1263279
* Integrated Computational and Experimental REU Site
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Jeffry Madura, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) led by Professors
Jeffrey D. Evanseck and Jeffry D. A. Madura, both at Duquesne University. The
principal investigators will renew their novel REU Site to continue its impact
on the careers and education of undergraduates from underrepresented populations
and from institutions with limited research infrastructure. Duquesne's model of
undergraduate research builds research teams, where seven student-faculty pairs
recruited from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (LSAMP), and Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUI) are
integrated with nationally recognized and extramurally funded research groups
from Duquesne University. The objective is to deliver a quality undergraduate
research experience that motivates students and faculty to achieve their highest
academic performance and prepare them for scientific research and discovery. The
core idea is to establish meaningful, year-around, and long-term research
collaborations driven by the need for academic productivity and excellence in
undergraduate training. The model is envisioned to perpetuate itself, where
invested collaborations ultimately mature to independent funding, and are
replaced by new partnerships between the host institution and other
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis is that strong financial and
infrastructure support of research collaborations will invigorate HBCU, LSAMP,
and PUI faculty, who will in turn directly impact students and learning
environments at their home institutions. Duquesne faculty will train students,
and gain immeasurably from the research expansion. REU students will have
meaningful and novel chemical research experiences with broad scientific themes,
such as nanotechnology, homeland security, pharmaceutical drug design, forensic
sciences and chemical biology. Each student will work directly with two faculty
mentors in the laboratory (home institution and Duquesne), and consult with a
theoretical faculty liaison from Duquesne, since each REU project is
supplemented by well-defined computational components to expand the students'
experience. Duquesne has extraordinary resources, NSF-funded facilities,
established research programs in molecular modeling, and a proven record in
student placement and strong partnerships. The students will be trained to use
state-of-the-art instrumentation to complement their experimental research and
build invaluable skill sets. The activities planned support the intent of the
REU Program by using meaningful research experiences to attract and retain the
nation's diverse student talent pool, which will have the consequence of
enhancing and diversifying the U.S. workforce by adding experts in the fields of
chemistry or biochemistry.