* 1263127
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Burt Tilley, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 382,000.00

The WPI REU program in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics provides a unique
educational experience for students of the mathematical sciences by introducing
them to research in an industrial environment. It provides a glimpse of the many
career possibilities which are open to students with a strong mathematical
background. The students work in teams on problems that come directly from local
business and industry. Students work closely with a company representative to
define the problem and develop solutions of immediate value to the company. They
work closely with a faculty advisor to formulate the problem mathematically and
maintain a clear focus on the mathematics at the core of the project. Industrial
problems rarely fit into one area of mathematics and this fact is an important
part of the research experience. Many projects require some combination of
classical analysis, modelling, statistics, optimization, and computer
programming. The results from the projects completed in the REU program are of
direct importance to the industrial partners and impact research and development
at these companies. Further, projects developed for the REU program are modified
for use in K-12 mathematics curricula in order to improve student motivation and
generate interest in careers in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many mathematics graduates now follow nonacademic
career paths. Of the roughly 1200 2010-2011 doctoral recipients in the
Mathematical Sciences who have known employment in the U.S., 31.5% of them have
taken up employment in business, government, industry, research institutes and
other not-for-profits. When one takes out those writing statistics or
biostatistics dissertations, one finds that 22% of the new mathematicians are
working outside academia. The WPI REU Program in Industrial Mathematics and
Statistics aims to expose students to mathematics research that occurs outside
of the university setting. It aims to provide challenges to students not faced
in standard undergraduate programs and to develop skills not always developed in
traditional educational programs, such as (a) communication at several levels,
including reading, writing, speaking, and listening; (b) problem formulation as
an interactive, evolutionary process; and (c) the ability to work with a diverse
team. The WPI REU Program in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics has existed
since 1998 and, since that time, we have worked with 167 students who have come
from 119 different U.S. colleges in 37 states and Puerto Rico; 45% of the
students were female. Only 7 of these 167 students were WPI students. Of the 119
universities that have been represented at the REU program over the last 15
years, 50% of them do not offer graduate degrees in mathematics. We have worked
on 47 different industrial projects sponsored by 23 different companies.
Students from the REU program often go on to pursue graduate degrees in
mathematics and in other fields, and they also pursue careers in finance and
industry.