* 1263579
* I-Corps:  Open-path, compact nitrous oxide sensor using quantum cascade laser spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Mark Zondlo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Atmospheric nitrous oxide (N2O), an important greenhouse gas, has poorly
constrained emissions to the atmosphere. To help meet certain societal needs and
minimize effects on the environment, it is necessary to identify practices that
mitigate N2O emissions at minimal economic costs. Existing commercial N2O
instrumentation may be challenging to use in field environments due to their
very high power consumption, large mass and bulky size. Few, if any, sensors are
available that can measure N2O emissions under field environments or as part of
sensor networks. Through this project, researchers propose to demonstrate a
prototype open-path N2O sensor based upon quantum cascade laser spectroscopy.
This project has potential applications for the atmospheric/greenhouse gas
research community, biomedical sensing, automotive emissions and vehicle
combustion as well as industrial gas monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful demonstration of the commercial viability may
result in an efficient path toward understanding greenhouse gas emissions and
providing data to improve mitigation practices with minimal economic damage.
Currently, researchers studying greenhouse gas fluxes, the nitrogen cycle, and
air quality have few sensors available to understand nitrous oxide emissions. In
addition, the proposed activities also have application in automotive emissions,
combustion diagnostics and process control, biomedical sensing, and industrial
trace gas monitoring.