* 1263396
* REU Site: Hojooba' bee la' hooniil, Undergraduate Studies into the Social Psychophysiology of Compassion
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Larry Stevens, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 380,401.00

This project represents an enhancement of a previously funded (2010-12) REU Site
program with the thematic focus on Undergraduate Studies into the Social
Psychophysiology of Compassion (SPC) in the Department of Psychology at the
Northern Arizona University. It builds upon a successful legacy of this
university's prior REU Site by providing research experiences for 8 Native
American, Hispanic, African American, Native Alaskan, and Native
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander students, including first generation
college/university students who are disabled, female, White, and Veterans. Each
student conducts research focused on Compassion, under guidance of active
Psychology Department researchers. The PI-team continues the previously
successful program with significant improvements and an increased recruitment of
primarily Native American community college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This research internship
addresses 8 important intellectual components: (1) Direct, closely supervised,
hands-on original research experiences in individual faculty laboratories
provided by an experienced, productive, and stimulating faculty research mentor,
(2) Faculty seminars on various aspects of scientific research, (3)
Professional, educational, cultural, and career development seminars, (4) Weekly
noon science symposia, (5) A variety of unique educational, cultural,
environmental, and social activities, (6) Student presentations at a local
professional REU conference, (7) Presentation of research outcomes at national
professional conferences, and (8) Co-participation of Psychology REU students
with REU students from other programs in seminars, lectures, and local research
presentations. Students thus participate collegially in original and pioneering
compassion research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
program has far-reaching implications for both the expansion of scientific
thinking and inquiry and the advancement of society. (1) Direct recruitment of
underrepresented minority students via live campus visits and presentations,
innovative college liaisons toward increased engagement of underserved
minorities in research, and onsite research and educational collaborations of
minority students and faculty greatly broadens participation of under-
represented minorities in social science research. Tangible research outcomes,
student presentations at professional meetings, research mentoring, and
collegial group sharing of the research process developed over a 10-week summer
session and continuing into the AY give each student a sense of ownership in a
scientific project and process, and a personalization of the experience to
facilitate continued careers in science. (2) Intensive collaboration with
dedicated career academic researchers and teaching during weekly seminars by
undergraduate students from diverse cultural backgrounds is very likely to
instill a lasting excitement for science in general and for the SPC specialty
areas in particular, thus advancing creative discovery while simultaneously
promoting cross-fertilization of scientific exploration, knowledge acquisition,
skills training, and a commitment to the art of teaching and research. (3)
Utilization of existing educational training facilities for summer internships
enhances the university?s research and educational infrastructure. (4)
Participation of interns and mentors in interdisciplinary seminars, workshops,
research, education, and national conferences broadens dissemination and
enhances interdisciplinary scientific understanding. (5) The proposed innovative
and comprehensive analysis of this REU program allows for a yearly evaluation
and fine-tuning to better achieve objectives and to improve the future
identification, training, and development of behavioral research scientists in
this country. Most importantly, and perhaps most uniquely for our program, (6)
the research projects and thematic focus on compassion offer important answers
to probing societal questions and ultimate benefits to society, and, we hope,
the development of a generation of young researchers whose careers are dedicated
to the understanding and creation of the expression of compassion, the easing of
suffering of others, and the promotion of a more compassionate world.