* 1263988
* Collaborative Research:  Development of Preclinical X-Ray Phase Contrast Tomography for 3D Imaging of Engineered Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Mark Anastasio, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 275,000.00

1263988/1263994 &lt;br/&gt;Anastasio/Brey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field X-ray
imaging is being revolutionized by the development of techniques based on phase-
contrast (PC), which have shown great promise for soft tissue imaging. The
principal advantage is that X-ray PC imaging methods are sensitive to
alternative physical properties of tissues, and can differentiate tissues that
have very similar or even identical X-ray absorption properties. The broad
objective of this research program is to develop and comprehensively evaluate
X-ray PC imaging and tomography for use in the evaluation and monitoring of
engineered tissues. The specific research objects of the project are to: (1)
Investigate non-traditional mechanisms of X-ray contrast produced by model-
engineered tissues and determine conditions for optimal imaging of polymer and
tissue structures ex vivo and in culture conditions; (2) Optimize grating-based
PC imager designs and image reconstruction algorithms for volumetric imaging of
engineered tissues; and (3) Evaluate a benchtop PC imager for 3D in vivo
evaluation of engineered tissues in small animal models. The intellectual merit
of the proposed research arises from the development and refinement of hardware
designs and image formation algorithms for a new X-ray imaging modality and
their application to the important problem of characterizing and monitoring
engineered tissues. Novel X-ray contrast mechanisms that can effectively
characterize engineered tissues will be systematically investigated. Model
polymer scaffolds and engineered tissues will be used in the evaluation and
optimization of these imaging systems in order to ensure broad relevance to many
areas of tissue engineering, regenerative medicine and biomaterials. To
accomplish this research, a combination of physics and fundamental principles of
biomedical engineering and imaging science are employed by our collaborative
research team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several broad impacts of the
project that will yield important benefits to both biomedical science and
society. The successful completion of this project will establish X-ray PC
imaging as a highly effective tool for characterizing the 3D structure of
engineered tissues and will have a transformative impact on the field of tissue
engineering. The acceleration of tissue engineering research will have a
significant impact on human health by leading to new therapeutic approaches for
the treatment of defects resulting from disease, trauma or congenital defects.
The integration of this research with the proposed educational activities will
help attract students to the increasingly important fields of biomedical
engineering, biomedical imaging and tissue engineering and enhance greatly their
educational opportunities.