* 1263027
* REU Site: Computing for Disasters
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2016
* USD 308,897.00

Disasters pose a comprehensive need for critical real-time computing, where data
must be collected, transmitted, transformed, and displayed to stakeholders in
real-time. In this REU program, a cohort of 10 students in computing are
introduced to a new style of holistic, multi-disciplinary research in which they
interact with responders, industry, and agencies, and are embedded into faculty
and graduate students teams to conduct individual research projects. Each
summer, the program begins with the annual Center for Emergency Informatics'
Summer Institute at Texas A&amp;M's Disaster City(R) where the student cohort is
introduced to applying human-centered design to problems in emergency
management. The students use the feedback from responders and agencies in
framing, with their faculty and graduate student mentors, creative approaches to
disaster response. The individual student projects include designing new natural
user interfaces for situation awareness and sensor fusion, applying cognitive
neuroscience to image processing to select key snippets of video data to
transmit rather than send large files over highly limited wireless networks,
analyzing "big data" to understand trends and bottlenecks in decision making,
improving security and privacy, and applying social networking to extract
information about structural and social vulnerability. In addition to the purely
research activities, each cohort attends seminars and brown bag lunch
discussions; goes on tours of Texas A&amp;M laboratories and NASA Johnson Space
Center; and has weekly social functions with other REU students and with faculty
and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader outcomes of this
project are both scientific and educational. The intellectual merit is the
contribution of the projects to the emerging field of real-time computing for
critical events such as disasters. The broader educational outcomes of
integrating research and education are increases in the enrollment in graduate
schools due to: exploiting the attractiveness of humanitarian applications to
attract under-represented groups and encourage social networking and mutual
support; using the topic of emergency response to create a common ground between
students in a cohort, providing a rich set of activities that develops an
understanding of research methods, new communication skills, and ethical
practices; engaging students with faculty, graduate students, and
industry/agency mentors; and exposing faculty outside of Texas A&amp;M to the
emerging emergency informatics research community. Students will gain experience
in presenting results from their individual projects orally, as posters, and as
written reports. The written reports will be targeted for conference
publications or inclusion in journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The website for the
REU site (http://www.cse.tamu.edu/reu/computingfordisasters) provides additional
information.