* 1263450
* Workshop: Identifying Transformative Research in the Geographical Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Eide, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This project focuses on the conduct of a public workshop as a primary source of
information in order to examine transformative research that has influenced the
evolution of the geographical sciences and provide insights regarding how
transformative research evolved in the past so that it can be encouraged in the
future. Transformative scientific concepts have resulted in significant advances
by reorienting existing fields, creating new fields, and providing new
theoretical or technical frameworks. In the geographical sciences, the so-called
"quantitative revolution" in the 1960s adopted a statistical approach to
transform the discipline from its descriptive origins into the explanatory
science it is today. Other transformative developments in the geographical
sciences have resulted from development of new computational and
telecommunications advances, such as global positioning systems and geographic
information systems, or through the emergence of new approaches like political
ecology that draw on insights and approaches from other fields to create new
ways for approaching topics. The workshop will focus on exploring answers to
three sets of focal questions: (1) How has transformative research emerged in
the past, and how did it become transformative? (2) What might be the early
markers of transformative research and how does it become possible to identify
their transformative character? (3) What has helped nurture and bring
transformative research to fruition, and how can it be fostered in the
geographical sciences? A final report of the workshop conclusions will be
published by the National Academies Press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will contribute to development of an intellectual framework designed to
recognize and foster transformative research by examining the mechanism for
significant scientific advances in the geographic sciences, with new insights
likely to have value for other fields as well. It will generate new insights
that could yield potential advances in the discovery, evaluation, and promotion
of transformative research that could provide a valuable guide for researchers,
reviewers, and funding agencies.