* 1263097
* REU Site: Achieving the Next Level:  Research Experiences for Underserved Populations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Graham Peaslee, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 275,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site is led
by Professors Kenneth L. Brown and Graham F. Peaslee at Hope College. The
research projects supported at this Site entitled "Achieving the Next Level:
Research Experiences for Underserved Populations", is dedicated to recruiting
and training underrepresented minority students and students from nearby 2-Year
Community Colleges (2YCs). The collaboration with the 2YCs involves a pre-
training program which will allow students to work on research projects during
the academic year prior to starting the summer research experience. The improved
professional development activities supplement the diversity of research
projects. For example, the REU Site will be supported by the on-campus career
services office in helping students to develop a resume portfolio. In addition,
continued support from the previously established Student Advisory Board,
consisting of professionals from local industry, medical doctors, and attorneys,
will provide students with access to a broad range of expertise in career
planning. The research projects for this REU site are innovative and quite
capable of being completed by undergraduate students. The students involved in
the research enterprise receive a full complement of experiences in literature
review, hands-on training with modern chemical instrumentation, data analysis,
and in the dissemination of results through group meetings and formal oral and
poster presentations. The projects span a wide range of areas from designing
electrochemical sensors and understanding biochemical mechanisms of gene
regulation, to designing polymer coatings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the REU
students will have access to an intensive and transformative research experience
that prepares them to enter competitive STEM fields. This REU Site is focused on
increasing the number of minority students and students from 2YCs entering
graduate school to pursue an advanced degree in the STEM fields. Hence, all of
these enhanced initiatives will help these underserved populations achieve the
next level of success in their chosen STEM discipline. The research activities
described in this proposal will help to build a cohesive community of
researchers who are equipped with the research skills needed to solve current
and challenging research problems that have local and global implications.