* 1263327
* REU Site:  Integrative Biological Studies of Honey Bees in the Republic of Turkey
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Charles Abramson, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2016
* USD 251,250.00

The University of Central Oklahoma REU Site Grant will provide an international
and integrative biological research experience for at least six undergraduates
during eight weeks each summer of 2013-2015. This REU program, centered at
Uludag University, near Istanbul and the Sea of Marmara, is designated as a
Global Venture Fund Award and supported by the NSF's Offices of International
Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO). The research program involves collaboration with scientists at
institutions in the United States, Greece, and the Republic of Turkey.
Hypotheses are posed in a biogeographic and phylogenetic context, using the
honey bee as a model system for understanding the ecological, behavioral,
comparative psychological, and molecular biological aspects of invasive species.
Prior to and during the program, students will be immersed in mini-courses and
discussions that teach ethics and responsible conduct in research and the nature
of scientific research. Students are asked to continue their participation
beyond the eight-week period of the program, reconvening to present results at a
national conference, as well as being offered opportunities to publish research
findings. The program will support a generation of scientists who understand the
relationship between human diversity and intellectual innovation. Indeed,
students participate in enrichment activities that include visiting some of the
most significant locations in the history of human civilization: Istanbul, the
Ancient City of Troy, the Aegean islands, and the Ancient City of Pergamum.
Because many large-scale ecological problems in the United States (including
invasive species, parasites, and disease) originate from outside its borders,
the diverse and interdisciplinary collaborations in the program help to develop
students who can conduct scientific research in an increasingly globalized
setting. Student applications are assessed based upon academic performance,
letters of recommendation, research aptitude, and the quality of a brief written
essay. Students are tracked after the program to understand the impact the
experience has on their career paths; assessment is also made during the program
with surveys and the REU Common Assessment Tool. The program is supported by
funds from the National Science Foundation?s Directorate of Biological Sciences.
Additional information can be found at http://cms.uco.edu/REU/, or by contacting
the Principal Investigator (Dr. John F. Barthell at jbarthell@uco.edu).