* 1263650
* Collaborative Research: Water, Energy, and Food Security in the North: Synergies, tradeoffs, and building community capacity for sustainable futures (Sustainable Futures North)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Lawrence Hamilton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,741.00

The Sustainable Futures North project addresses the question of whether
synergies can be found among the related goals of food security, water security,
energy security, and resource development in the North American Arctic.
Historically, development in one or more of these areas has presented trade-offs
in others; for example, petroleum exploration and development is often
associated with negative impacts on traditional subsistence species and
practices. Similarly, residents of the Bristol Bay region of Alaska are
currently embroiled in a debate over the risks and benefits of developing of a
copper and gold mine, which would ostensibly provide jobs and economic
development opportunities, at the headwaters of a watershed that supports the
world?s largest sockeye salmon run. With an eye toward eliciting best practices
for community development and resource management that target synergies rather
than trade-offs, we plan to combine integrated regional assessments of water,
food, and energy systems in three regions of the North: Bristol Bay (Alaska),
Baffin Island (Canada), and Kotzebue Sound (Alaska), where people and
communities share a variety of challenges relating to climate change,
socioeconomic change, and industrial development. The research methods that make
up our interdisciplinary toolkit include key informant interviews, integration
and analysis of secondary datasets, climate change downscaling, engineering best
practice and gap analysis, and rural-urban network analysis. We will link these
qualitative and quantitative research methods to explore cause-and-effect
relationships between development activities and societal and environmental
changes, and will integrate social and ecological datasets with climate change
scenarios to project future community responses to climatic and environmental
change. The findings of this research will inform a collaborative education and
outreach program designed to build capacity through workforce development, STEM
internships, and post-secondary curricula and programs in environmental
management and engineering.