* 1263889
* Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance (LSPR) Biosensing Microarray for Multiplex, Real-time Single-Cell Immunophenotyping
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Katsuo Kurabayashi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 349,397.00

1263889 - Kurabayashi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immune system plays a critical
role in protecting a living organism against invasions of
viruses,&lt;br/&gt;bacteria, and parasitic worms and in distinguishing diseased
tissue from healthy tissue. Leukocytes -white blood cells - are important blood
constituents that support the immune system and haveseveral cellular subsets
determined by their morphology and response to an antigen exposure.
Comprehensive characterization of the immune cell functions is critical to
diagnose, stratify, and monitor infections, malignancies, autoimmune disorders,
and injuries or to study the efficacy of new drugs. In particular, quantitative
analysis of the cytokine secretion profiles of individual cells is required for
precise determination of the subtle variations in the cellular function and
immune status across their sub-groups. However, there are some shortcomings in
existing methods that need to be overcome for realizing rapid, efficient,
dynamic analysis of leukocyte cytokine-secretion profiles. This research aims to
establish a biosensing platform that enables high-throughput, multiplexed,
dynamic measurement of cytokines secreted by target immune cells isolated from
whole blood at the&lt;br/&gt;single-cell level. This single-cell functional
assay efficiently permits on-chip isolation and stimulation of single cells and
detection of cell-secreted proteins. Our approach will employ localized surface
plasmon resonance (LSPR) imaging within microchamber arrays, each capturing a
single cell. As a result of miniaturization of the whole system, both the sample
volume and the total assay time can&lt;br/&gt;be reduced. The microarray form of
the microfluidic platform coupled with LSPR biosensing will allow for massively
parallel label-free, real-time quantification and mapping of proteins secreted
individual cells with a simple optics setup. The analysis performed for a large
number of single cells will allow for immunophenotypical screening of leukocyte
subsets while detecting subtle differences and time variations of their immune
functions. If the isolation process only yields extraction of identical cell
subsets, the large number of measurements per sample will lead to high
statistical accuracy (i.e., reduced false positives).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel means to
analyze immune cells present in blood. Specifically, the proposal will develop
devices to capture individual immune cells and then monitor release of certain
proteins from the captured cells. The levels and the types of proteins produced
by the immune cells reflect on the state of health or disease of an individual.
Therefore proposed devices will have significant diagnostic implications.