* 1263045
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Keivan Stassun, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2016
* USD 370,014.00

This award supports the renewal of the Vanderbilt University Summer Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU), program, which offers undergraduate physics
and astronomy students the opportunity to work closely with faculty on forefront
research projects in a variety of subfields of physics. The areas include
astronomy, biological physics, condensed matter physics including nanoscience,
laser physics, nuclear physics, and particle physics. The extensive research
infrastructure, including the facilities of several large interdisciplinary
centers, will be available to the students. The Astronomy students will have
opportunity for collaborative international research: they will take data and
participate in exoplanets research with mentors at the South African
Astronomical Observatory and at the Astrophysics Research Centre at Queen's
University Belfast. They may also take data at the SMARTS facilities in Cerro
Tololo, Chile. Physics students will have the opportunity to visit major
facilities at government laboratories, both domestic and international,
including FermiLab, Brookhaven, Oak Ridge, and CERN. The program is designed to
build community among the students and the participating faculty as well as
expose the students broadly to many areas of forefront physics and astronomy.
Students are also offered the opportunity for training in the integration of
research with education through the Fisk-Vanderbilt Physics &amp; Astronomy
Roadshow outreach program. The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program and by the Office of International Science
and Engineering within NSF.