* 1263854
* Cumulative Effects of Arctic Oil Development - planning and designing for sustainability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2021
* Donald Walker, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,402,992.00

This project devises a sustainable approach to assessing the cumulative effects
of oil exploration though combining detailed ground studies, local community
input, industry involvement, and an international perspective. A three-pronged
initiative is proposed: 1) A case study of the cumulative effects of industrial
infrastructure at Prudhoe Bay, Alaska will focus on infrastructure-related
effects associated with gravel mines, roads and other areas of gravel placement.
The study will include ground-based studies, an examination of infrastructure
and landscape change at multiple scales, and a human dimension component that
includes evaluation of adaptive management planning for infrastructure in
northern Alaska and CE studies associated with the Iñupiat village of Nuiqsut.
The study will develop a process-based understanding of infrastructure-related
permafrost/ landform/ vegetation succession in terrain undergoing thermokarst
formation (the development of highly eroded landforms the result from the
thawing of ice-rich permafrost). The study will help to answer the questions
?What will these areas look like in 50 -100 years?? and ? Can adaptive
management methods address the complex issues related to placement, usage and
decommissioning of infrastructure in Northern Alaska?? 2) An Arctic
Infrastructure Action Group (AI-AG) will bring the CE issues to greater
prominence in the international Arctic research community. The AI-
AG&lt;br/&gt;will consist of local people who interact with development
infrastructure, permafrost scientists, ecologists, hydrologists, engineers,
social scientists and educators seeking to develop adaptive management
strategies that address the unique issues related to networks of infrastructure
in arctic permafrost&lt;br/&gt;environments. Three workshops will bring
panarctic participants together, first in a scoping workshop and then to focus
specifically on the two most rapidly expanding areas of Arctic infrastructure,
the North Slope of Alaska and the Yamal Peninsula, Russia. 3) An
education/outreach component will train students in arctic systems and introduce
them to the issues of industrial development and adaptive management approaches
during an expedition along the Elliott and Dalton highways in Alaska. The course
will include a section at Prudhoe Bay to learn firsthand about the issues with
oilfield infrastructure, its impacts and vegetation rehabilitation practices.
Students will also visit the village of Nuiqsut to experience village life and
discuss CE issues with the local residents.