* 1263272
* REU Site: Undergraduate Studies in Earthquake Information Technology (SCEC/UseIT)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 04/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Undergraduate Studies in Earthquake Information Technology (USEIT) is a team-
based Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site implemented by the
Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) at its lead institution, the
University of Southern California. SCEC coordinates earthquake research in
Southern California, which comprises over 23 million people and about half of
the national earthquake risk. The SCEC science plan addresses the most pressing
issues of earthquake system science, and the USEIT REU Site enhances the
computer science and information technology (CS/IT) expertise that SCEC can draw
upon to achieve its objectives in the prediction of strong ground motions and
the understanding of earthquake predictability. Over a period of 10 years, the
UseIT interns have developed SCEC-VDO, a flexible object-oriented, open source
software system that enables interactive, 4D display of diverse geo-referenced
datasets for analysis, presentation, and publication. SCEC-VDO is now widely
used as a visualization platform throughout the SCEC community. More broadly,
the USEIT REU Site benefits all federal agencies that participate in the
National Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP); and in particular, it strengthens the
workforce for the USGS?s program in seismic hazard mapping, as well as major
NEHRP-related initiatives within NSF, including the EarthScope Program and the
George E. Brown Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation. Since 2002, 220
undergraduates from around the country have participated in the program, and
over time, USEIT's broadest impacts will come as these REU Site alumni develop
into a new generation of CS/IT savvy leaders in system science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes pose the greatest natural threat to the built
environment in seismically active regions such as Southern California.
Earthquakes are also among the most complex terrestrial phenomena, and modeling
of earthquake dynamics is one of the most difficult computational problems in
science. USEIT allows students to work in multi-disciplinary collaborative teams
to tackle a scientific "Grand Challenge" where they use the advanced tools of
information technology to solve important problems in interdisciplinary
earthquake research. The topic varies each year but it always entails performing
computer-science research that is needed by earthquake scientists, educators,
and other target audiences. The overarching goal of USEIT is to use this team-
based research experience in the exciting field of earthquake information
technology to motivate undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to pursue STEM
careers. USEIT provides the cross-training in CS/IT and system science that
encourages students to broaden their coursework in college and to consider
graduate work in CS/IT, in the geosciences, and in cyberinfrastructure and
computational science more generally.