* 1263238
* REU Site: Geoenvironmental Challenges in the Southeastern U.S.: A Summer Undergraduate Research Experience for Pre-service Earth Science, Biology, and Chemistry Teachers
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Mark Abolins, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2017
* USD 368,331.00

The investigators will develop the "Earth, Life, and Atmosphere" (ELiA)
interdisciplinary geoscience community of thirty pre-service teachers, two in-
service teachers, and six Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU) faculty. This
community will collaborate in research and teaching within the context of
solving environmental geoscience problems in the southeastern United States.
Prior to each of the summers of 2013, 2014, and 2015, ELiA will recruit five
Earth science pre-service middle school or high school teachers and three
chemistry and two biology pre-service high school teachers from a national
applicant pool. During a nine-week summertime interval, the pre-service teachers
will use laboratories at MTSU and field sites near the university which is
located fifty kilometers southeast of downtown Nashville. The participants will
explore geologic structures which provide pathways for groundwater flow,
investigate surface water quality, explore rare cedar glade plant communities,
experiment with ways to reduce the environmental impact of pavement, and improve
understanding of ground-level ozone. While engaging in scientific research, the
pre-service teachers will also come to appreciate the role of geology during the
pivotal first day of the American Civil War Battle of Stones River, appreciate
the role of geology and botany in the lives of rural African Americans after the
war, and better understand the environmental impact of suburban development. In
addition to engaging in scientific research and widely disseminating the
results, ELiA will develop and disseminate two pre-college educational modules.
ELiA will disseminate results through social media (including YouTube), a
website, an on-line newsletter, ArcServer, Google Earth files, presentations at
meetings, and journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute
to society by helping people better-understand their environment and how to live
as a part of it. In addition, the project will also benefit society by training
pre-service STEM teachers who will, in turn, train numerous pre-college
students. The proposed project will improve understanding of the geology, plant
ecology, and air quality at Stones River National Battlefield near Murfreesboro,
Tennessee, and geological and plant ecological data will contribute to the
planning of historical archeology investigations in the park.