* 1263239
* (Mixed) Integer and Combinatorial Optimization: New Convexification Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Egon Balas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2016
* USD 475,000.00

The objective of this research project is to investigate new ideas that could
potentially further accelerate the revolution in integer programming. This
project will investigate more efficient convexification techniques: a new
cutting plane paradigm that generates a pool of points from which cuts can be
produced, and a theory of cut-generating functions, both aimed at finding deeper
cuts more efficiently. Integer programming has experienced a revolution in the
last two decades that has greatly advanced our ability to solve practical
problems in engineering, manufacturing, transportation, telecommunication,
finance, marketing and many other areas of economic activity. According to
recently performed extensive testing, integer programming solvers are now close
to a billion times faster than they were twenty years ago. Better integer
programming algorithms (including their linear programming components) account
for a speedup of about half a million times, the rest of the improvement (by a
factor of about 1600) coming from faster computers. A key element of this
transformation was a breakthrough in the use of cutting planes in the early
nineties, including the design of the lift-and-project cuts and the ensuing
revival of the Gomory mixed integer cuts, two projects carried out by the
principal investigators with previous NSF support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress
in the ability to solve large-scale mixed integer linear programs will affect
problem solving and improve efficiency of operations in an extremely broad range
of activities that include industrial production, supply chain management,
logistics, transportation, electricity production, airport operations,
telecommunication networks, health care applications such as scheduling
intensive care units and determining radiation dosage, combinatorial auctions,
finance and economics. The widespread impact of tools developed in this project
will contribute to technological excellence and strengthen US technological
leadership.