* 1263050
* REU Site:  Convergence Ecology - Research Experience for Undergraduates in Ecological Diversity across Systems and Disciplines
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Sara Baer, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2016
* USD 344,744.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to
Southern Illinois University (SIU) that will provide research training for 10
students for 10 weeks each summer during the summers of 2013- 2015. The program
has a goal to provide students with hands-on training with a diversity of tools
used to conduct ecological research across a spectrum of research areas (to
include soil, plants, animals, and multiple ecosystems) and processes
(ecological pattern and variability, ecological response to environmental
degradation, ecological response to restoration, and conservation and
management) through the diverse research programs of 12 faculty members
affiliated with SIU?s Center for Ecology. The program will immerse students in
research and educational activities aimed to foster (1) hands-on scientific
inquiry (from observation through conclusion) by conducting a research project,
(2) development of a diverse ecological skills-set through guided quantitative
field and laboratory methods, (3) comprehension of and confidence in
communicating science through weekly reading and discussion, (4) a broad
awareness of ecological science through weekly seminars, and (5) a better
understanding of biodiversity (to include human culture) through educational
field trips to local natural and cultural areas. Students also will be trained
in ethics, responsible conduct of research, and proper animal care and use. The
program will culminate with The Colloquium of Undergraduate Research in Ecology
('The CURE'), a symposium of oral presentations delivered by REU students and
other undergraduate researchers at SIU. The program's multi-phase recruitment
effort consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based
advertising. Students are selected based on academic record, prior research
performance, and potential for outstanding research in ecology. Students are
tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic field of study,
their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience.
Information about the program will be assessed by various means, including use
of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.ecology.siu.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Clay Nielsen at
kezo92@siu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Sara Baer at sgbaer@siu.edu).