* 1263941
* Engineering Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities: An Engineering-Business Alliance
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Joel Dobbs, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 124,616.00

PI: Eberhardt, Alan; Dobbs, Joel Proposal Number: 1263941

The objective of this proposal is to solicit continued NSF support for design
projects to aid persons with disabilities, for undergraduate students in the
School of Engineering at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). These
activities target Biomedical Engineering (BME) students in Senior Design (BME
498/499), as well as general engineering freshmen, who will undertake projects
to aid specific disabled individuals or groups of individuals suffering from
debilitating neuromuscular conditions and injury recovery. Funding by the NSF-
RAPD/GARDE program the past 14 years has led to the delivery of over 50 working
prototype senior design projects to aid local clients, and cumulative training
of nearly 500 undergraduate students. The current proposal seeks to continue
these successes, while introducing a new Business-Engineering Alliance, in which
seniors in Business will join the BME seniors to form multi-disciplinary design
teams with an emphasis on commercialization of devices. The new co-PI (Dr.
Dobbs) will provide mentorship from the business perspective and provide guest
lectures on market analysis, business models/plans and commercialization topics.
We also propose immersion of students in a manufacturing rotation where they'll
gain hands-on experience with state-of-the-art manufacturing of metals and
plastics, quality assessment and control, and good manufacturing practices
(GMP).

To date, projects were completed in partnership with United Cerebral Palsy (UCP)
of Greater Birmingham and their affiliates, Hand-in-Hand and LINCPoint, as well
as UAB Hospital, the Bell Center and the Children's Hospital of Alabama, among
others. These sources will continue to provide project ideas in coming years;
however, with this proposal we introduce a new collaboration with Lakeshore
Foundation (Dr. Rimmer) , with an emphasis on exercise activities and monitoring
for rehabilitation patients. In BME 498/499, project ideas will result from
student rotations with participating clinicians and therapists, who will serve
as clients. Prototypes and marketable designs will be developed by teams of
upperclassmen working over two semesters. Advisory committees consisting of the
PI, individual clients, and physical therapists from the partnering agencies
will continue to ensure adequate student supervision for development of novel
devices to assist those with disabilities. Freshman design projects (5-6 week
duration) will be continued with project ideas from the PI's interaction with
clients. A list of potential projects is included in the present proposal.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed activities are intellectually meritorious:
clinical rotations with participating medical faculty enhance student exposure;
ideation-to-invention experiential learning teaches critical thinking and
integrates new knowledge with prior learning; and students gain expertise in
nearly all Student Outcomes as required by ABET. The new partnership with
Business will allow our students to engage in truly multi-disciplinary team-
based design. Our new alignment with the Lakeshore Foundation will provide
cohesive and engaging hands-on experiences solving modern rehabilitation
engineering problems. The manufacturing rotation will provide needed exposure to
GMP and will provide enhanced opportunities for sophisticated materials and
manufacturing processes. The designs themselves are often novel and will
therefore explore creative and original concepts. The fact that the designs are
constructed, tested and used by disabled individuals provides meaningful design
experiences for engineering students. Our previous success demonstrates
sufficient access to resources, and supports the qualifications of the PI and
the institution.

Broader Impacts: An important benefit is the service to the disabled community,
by providing assistive devices at no-cost to the recipients, resulting in
improved quality of life. Student experiences are heightened through interaction
with their client, and ultimately seeing the fruits of their labor. Project
stories are featured in regional news media, high school and community outreach
activities, and international symposia. These activities attract regional high
school students (large minority population) into math, science and engineering.
The BME undergraduate program attracts a high percentage of women and
minorities. The proposed efforts pilot a new entrepreneurial partnership between
UAB Engineering and Business to turn biomedical devices into commercial
successes that are marketed worldwide. The student teams will be encouraged
pitch their start-up companies and enter a business plan competition with the
Alabama Launchpad, preparing them for a new BME Master's program with a
Certificate in Entrepreneurship to continue these multi-disciplinary,
entrepreneurial activities.