* 1263181
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Biomedical Devices at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Gregory Bashford, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 303,265.00

Students in STEM fields need exposure to research and project experience tying
together the elements of STEM - fundamentally based in science and math, using
technology tools to achieve engineering solutions - in a context demonstrating
societal impact. The growing area of biomedical engineering provides an
appropriate and effective framework in which to implement a high-impact
undergraduate research program addressing this need. Leveraging an existing
research strength in the area of biomedical device technologies, a three-year
REU program (summer site) supported by the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers will focus on providing an intensive research experience in biomedical
devices for undergraduate students. With a focus on biomedical devices, the
project topics include robotics, medical tool design, implanted devices,
imaging, tissue engineering, and so forth. This proposed research is classified
as an institutional priority area and is seen as a growth area for scientific
and technological discovery. The objectives are to: 1) provide interdisciplinary
research experiences to undergraduate students in the area of biomedical
devices, with 50% of the program participants being underrepresented minorities
and/or students from institutions with limited research programs; 2) foster
participants' skills in becoming independent researchers; 3) provide
participants with a broader view of research and development activities in
academia and industry; and 4) expand participants' skills and knowledge in
entrepreneurship and other areas of professional development. Some of the
anticipated outcomes are: 1) stimulate career interest in biomedical engineering
and related STEM fields; 2) improve participants' understanding of the role of
research and development in the commercial sector and its relation to national
interests; and 3) stimulate interest in commercialization of ideas and
technology. Research results and educational outcomes will be published with
students as lead or co-authors. This balanced and diverse summer experience will
influence the upcoming generation of scientists and engineers to make
substantial contributions in their future careers.