* 1263574
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Orbital Theory of Ice Ages Through Analysis of Glacial Deposits and Numerical Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Sean Birkel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2017
* USD 21,450.00

This research project will examine the timing and causes of ice ages in the
Southern Hemisphere and how these observed climate changes compare with those
found in the Northern Hemisphere. A major question in the earth-system sciences
has been ascertaining what drives different sections of Earth to switch in and
out of ice age climates. This is an outstanding question that remains
unresolved. The traditional Milankovitch or orbital "ice-age theory" proposes
that the intensity of summer insolation received in the Northern Hemisphere
paces ice ages across Earth. Measurements of the intensity of summer insolation
in the Northern and Southern hemispheres have been found to be out of phase,
however. If glaciers expand and retreat in similar ways around Earth at the same
time, other driving mechanisms therefore must be involved, such as greenhouse
gasses or a global impact of the largest ice sheets that covered the land in the
Northern Hemisphere. A problem is that in the Southern Hemisphere, there is
insufficient information regarding when the last cold glacial period started,
how long it lasted, and when it ended. Without this information, scientists are
ill-equipped to assess how well Southern Hemisphere glacial climates correspond
to possible driving forces, such as changes in (orbital) solar insolation
intensity, Northern Hemisphere ice sheets, and atmospheric carbon dioxide. They
also are unable to assess the underlying causes of ice-age climates and to
refine the Milankovitch theory. This project will focus on the collection and
analyses of materials that help document how glaciers in southern South America
have changed over time. The investigators will employ state-of-the-art
techniques in dating glacier landforms and glacial-climate modeling. The dated
paleogeography of glaciers will provide boundary conditions for experiments
using models developed by the researchers and others to assess the roles and
responses associated with possible climate parameters, such as temperature and
precipitation ranges that are needed for an ice sheet to grow and retreat over
the southern Andes.

This project will provide deeper understanding of the nature and causes of ice
age climates and related natural environmental processes as well as their
spatial and temporal differences around the globe. The project also will provide
enhanced information about natural climate states, such as the climate during
the last ice age that can be used as test beds for general circulation models
that simulate future change. The project will provide opportunities to enhance
international research collaborations between scientists in the U.S. and Chile.
Education and training opportunities will be provided for undergraduate
students, and educational outreach will be pursued through collaborative
relationships with the American Museum of Natural History and New York City
schools.