* 1263346
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Fluid Power
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kim Stelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Engineering Research Center for
Compact and Efficient Fluid Power (CCEFP) is a network of researchers,
educators, students and industry working together to transform the fluid power
industry?how it is researched, applied and taught. CCEFP research projects are
organized in three thrusts that achieve the following societal benefits:
creation of new fluid power technology that, with improved efficiency, will
significantly reduce petroleum consumption, energy use and pollution; creation
of new fluid power technology that, with improved effectiveness, will make fluid
power clean, quiet and safe for its millions of users; and creation of new fluid
power technology that, with improved compactness, will exploit its attributes in
a new generation of human scale devices and equipment. The CCEFP?s education and
outreach program is designed to transfer this knowledge to diverse
audiences?students of all ages, users of fluid power and the general public.
Through its strategic planning process, CCEFP has identified the following
important goals for the next five years: doubling fluid power efficiency in
current applications and in new transportation applications, increasing fluid
power energy storage density by an order of magnitude, and developing new fluid
power supplies that are one to two orders of magnitude smaller than anything
currently available. The CCEFP fills a void in fluid power research that existed
for decades. Until the Center was established, the U.S. had no major fluid power
research center (compared with thirty centers in Europe). Fluid power
researchers, who were previously disconnected, are now linked through the CCEFP.
The demand for engineers and scientists continues to grow, but the number of
mechanical engineering students graduated each year remains constant. Within
this group, the number of women and underrepresented minority engineers,
including engineers with disabilities, remains small. Attracting and retaining
these groups can significantly address the shortage of skilled
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) supports the NSF Engineering
Research Center for Compact and Efficient Fluid Power (CCEFP), which will
establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program that will
engage 14 undergraduate students in 10-week summer research experience in fluid
power research. Goals of the CCEFP is to change the face of fluid power by
exposing a diverse body of students to the transformational research underway in
hydraulics and pneumatics in the hope that they will become the academic and
industry leaders of the future. This REU site will take advantage of CCEFP?s
unique ability to leverage the power and potential of its broad menu of research
initiatives, the opportunities afforded to pursue these projects in well-
equipped laboratories at seven universities, and the subject matter expertise of
its faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highlights for REU participants include:
immersion in one of the CCEFP 24 cross-disciplinary and cross-institutional
research projects and four test beds under the supervision of faculty and
graduate student mentors, access to state-of-the-art fluid power research
facilities, participation in the bi-weekly CCEFP webcasts on fluid power
research and professional development topics, an intensive two-day fluid power
training boot camp at the outset of the program, a guest invitation to attend
the next NFPA Workforce Summit and CCEFP Annual Meeting, interaction with
industry leaders from the CCEFP 55 member companies. REU students will have the
opportunity to present their research results at a variety of internal, industry
and professional events as well as electronic media. One way that CCEFP strives
to change the traditional face of the fluid power industry to better reflect the
composition of our country's population at large. Recruiting efforts will focus
on identifying underrepresented students in the sciences and engineering
including women, racial and ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and
recent war veterans.