* 1263079
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary REU in the Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Cherie Dotson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 05/31/2017
* USD 311,816.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Michigan (UM) that will provide research training for 10 students,
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. The program will expose students
to the nature of interdisciplinary research. Participants will be engaged in
hands-on experimental training and independent investigation in the areas of
biochemistry, biophysics, cheminformatics, enzymology, molecular biology and
plant biology. The research projects featured in this program all involve
studies of the structure and function of proteins and are representative of
seven departments at UM, which further emphasizes the interdisciplinary nature
of the training offered. In addition to the research experience, students will
participate in a series of weekly enrichment seminars focusing on ethics and
scientific integrity, scientific communication, graduate school admissions and
scientific career options. Opportunities for integration into the UM research
community will be provided through periodic meetings with REU faculty mentors,
graduate students, and undergraduate students from other UM summer research
programs. It is hoped that the REU experience will promote persistence in the
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) disciplines at the
undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels. Students will be recruited
from across the nation via email postings, website listings and announcements at
local/national conferences. Undergraduate students, who are US Citizens or
Permanent Residents, majoring in a STEM discipline will be considered eligible
for participation. Applicants will be selected based on their potential for
research and their interest in obtaining a graduate degree in a STEM discipline.
Special consideration will be given to individuals who are from underrepresented
ethnic/racial groups or from institutions with limited resources for research.
Students from community colleges and those with no previous research experience
will also be given special consideration. All participants will receive housing,
meal and travel allowances and a stipend. The Undergraduate Research Student
Self-Assessment (URSSA), available to BIO-funded REU PIs, will be the primary
summative evaluation tool. Electronic tracking surveys will be sent to program
alumni annually to determine their current level of engagement in the STEM
disciplines. For further information, please visit:
http://pharmacy.umich.edu/reu or contact: Dr. Cherie Dotson (crdotson@umich.edu)
- PI or Dr. Ronald Woodard (rww@umich.edu) - Co-PI.