* 1263774
* Collaborative Proposal: DNA guided assembly of enzyme cascades for biocatalytic fuel cell applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 487,255.00

Enzymatic fuel cells have received considerable attention because of their
potential for direct conversion of abundant raw materials to electricity. The
use of multi-enzyme cascades is particularly attractive as they offer the
possibility of achieving a higher current density by the sequential oxidization
of fuels. However, efficient substrate and electron channeling are two of the
most important bottlenecks in improving the power output of multi-enzyme fuel
cells. An award from the National Science Foundation Catalysis &amp;
Biocatalysis Program to Professors Wilfred Chen of the University of Delaware
and Nosang Myung of the University of California-Riverside will support
investigation of approaches to surmount these obstacles. The overall objective
of this proposal is to investigate the use of a genetically controlled, DNA-
based modular scaffold approach for the spatially-defined self-assembly of a
multi-enzyme cascade for enhanced substrate and electron channeling. A simple
and scalable electrospinning method will be developed to synthesize nanofiber
mat electrodes with a very high surface area. A genetically designed mediator
will then connect the assembly to the mat electrode. The modular nature of the
proposed design allows easy alteration of spacing between the enzymes, mediators
and the electrodes for investigating the optimal substrate and electron
channeling in a rational manner. The unique combination of nanoengineering and
bioengineering approaches will enable Chen and Myung to systematically
investigate the factors affecting the overall performance of the multi-enzyme
fuel cell. The initial testing of the concept will be demonstrated for the
conversion of cellulose to gluconic acid, with other reactions to be studied
subsequently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
scientifically significant because the concept is built on ideas from biology
extending to an entirely new engineering application. Because of the modular
nature of the design, it is anticipated that the proposed framework will have a
huge impact on the assembly of other multi-enzyme cascades. The proposed
methodology will provide a future platform useful for the self-assembly of a
wide range of multienzyme systems for fuel cell applications. From an
educational perspective, graduate students participating in this research will
gain an integrated perspective of the important interfaces and synergies
connecting biochemistry, electrochemistry, and nanotechnology. The PIs plan
outreach programs through the Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement
Program at UC Riverside and the establishment of a Homeschoolers Day program in
Delaware.