* 1263517
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Droughts in the Tropical Americas Using Tree-Ring Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Matthew Taylor, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 61,847.00

This project uses the annual rings of tropical trees to reconstruct past
rainfall in a drought- and famine-prone region, then applies this knowledge to
understanding the role of natural and human-altered variability in the climate
system in influencing regional patterns of drought in the past, present, and
future. Prior research determined that high elevation tree species in Guatemala
and Honduras do form annual growth rings that can be dated to their exact year
of formation; this is unusual for tropical tree species. It is understood that
variations in ring width in these trees reflect the amount of winter and spring
rainfall. With this knowledge, the investigators will develop estimates of past
precipitation along Guatemala's 'Dry Corridor,' a region that currently suffers
from severe water and food security challenges. Tree-ring data will be collected
from mountain sites across this region, and these will be used to develop
estimates of past rainfall over the last five centuries or more. The benefit of
these precipitation reconstructions using tree rings is that they can be used to
understand whether current climate variability is exceptional compared to the
last several centuries and the extent to which natural variability is entwined
with a human-influenced changes. Specifically this research will evaluate the
hypothesis that there are important modes of natural variability in Central
American rainfall at time scales of decades and longer. This knowledge will help
test and improve models that predict future rainfall trends both regionally and
globally and can be applied to understanding their cause and
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research expands the geographic extent
of annual, climate-sensitive tree-ring data further into the American tropics.
Knowledge gained from this project will be relevant in a region with populations
that are particularly vulnerable to climate change, as it is likely that
increases in drought and flooding will be the most direct and immediate
consequences of global warming for human society. Changes in rainfall exacerbate
existing and emerging threats to sustainable water supplies from growing
populations, pollution, declining infrastructure, and boundary conflicts. A
long-term perspective on the potential range of variability in precipitation,
and in particularly decadal-scale fluctuations, is critical for predicting and
planning for the consequences of changes in water availability. This research
project provides a hands-on and international research experience for both
graduate and undergraduate students from the United States and also facilitates
the involvement of Central American students and scientists in geographic
research with US collaborators. Coordination between US and Central American
scientists will facilitate skills training and knowledge development so that
local resources and information are available to address sustainability and
vulnerability reduction efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-
funded by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.