* 1263699
* Collaborative Research: Documentation and Analysis of the Chickasaw Verb [cic]
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Colleen Fitzgerald, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2019
* USD 47,999.00

Chickasaw (ISO 639-3 code: [cic]), is a severely endangered language in the
Muskogean family, with 70 or so fluent first language speakers remaining. The
Muskogean languages have extraordinarily complex verbs, especially with regard
to the intersection of their morphology (word structure) and phonology (sound
system). Chickasaw is prosodically complex, with long vowels, geminate
consonants, laryngeals (consonants produced with constriction near the glottis),
pitch accent, nasalization and rhythmic lengthening, all of which intersect with
a rich morphology that includes prefixes, suffixes and an elaborate system of
internal changes known as verb grades. This project will investigate these
elements of Muskogean verbs. Verb morphology is vulnerable to loss through
language attrition and since all of the Muskogean languages are either highly
endangered or no longer spoken, it is important to document the verb information
now.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a unique collaboration between the
Chickasaw Language Revitalization Program (CLRP) located in Ada, Oklahoma, and
The University of Texas at Arlington. Linguist Colleen Fitzgerald of UT
Arlington and CLRP Director Joshua Hinson have designed a documentation project
that will increase our understanding of the Chickasaw verb and make available a
significantly-sized database of verbs, both in number of verbs and in the number
of inflected forms per verb. This project will collect verbs in paradigms and
connected speech (e.g. narratives). Analyzing paradigms will increase knowledge
of Muskogean verbal structure, theoretically important for linguistics.
Documenting and analyzing texts will record Chickasaw speakers' traditional
knowledge and experiences in context, essential to indigenous language
revitalization.