* 1263343
* REU Site: Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Jon Kellar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 311,860.00

The South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, along with its partner
organizations, propose to implement a 10-week summer research experience focused
on Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting Technology (SPACT), for 10
undergraduate students. Counterfeiting is a growing issue in the U.S., posing
serious economic, safety and national security concerns and impacting a wide
variety of industries (e.g. pharmaceutics, semiconductors). This REU Site will
focus on development of transformative anti-counterfeiting technology, including
security printing. Security printing is a field which demands development in
four key areas including, advanced materials, advanced manufacturing/patterning
technologies, detection and encryption technology, and finally, software and
database infrastructure to convert marked products to security end products. The
key objectives are to: 1) conduct transformative research in the field of SPACT,
and 2) provide STEM research exposure and professional development opportunity
to a diverse group of undergraduate students, half will come from Tribal
Colleges and other institutions with limited STEM research opportunities. A
diverse team of faculty mentors from three partner institutions will build a
program in SPACT by applying research methods from various fields of science and
engineering. The long term goal is to provide a diverse group of STEM
researchers with the needed training and skills to pursue graduate studies and
advance the developing field of SPACT. The faculty will mentor students and also
conduct seminars and workshops to supplement student's existing academic
training in various SPACT disciplines. Students will also participate in a
highly integrated professional development and technical communications program.
This REU Site is supported by the National Science Foundation, Division of
Engineering Education and Centers.

The Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting Technology Research Experiences
for Undergraduates Site at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology has
been established to expose a diverse group of undergraduate students, half will
come from Tribal Colleges and other institutions with limited STEM research
opportunities, to the STEM research environment and help them develop as
professionals. Counterfeiting is a growing issue in the U.S., posing serious
economic, safety and national security concerns and impacting a wide variety of
industries (e.g. pharmaceutics, semiconductors). The focus of the student
research will be on the development of Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting
Technology. Students will also participate in a highly integrated professional
development and technical communications program designed to stimulate
professional development and the development of research skills necessary to
succeed in the 21st century. This Research Experience for Undergraduates Site is
supported by the National Science Foundation, Division of Engineering Education
and Centers.