* 1263932
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Methods for Integrated Analysis of High-Throughput Biomedical Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Zhandong Liu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 469,342.00

Technological advances have led to a rapid proliferation of high-throughput
"omics" data in medicine that hold the key to clinically effective personalized
medicine. To realize this goal, statistical and computational tools to mine this
data and discover biomarkers, drug targets, disrupted disease networks, and
disease sub-types are urgently needed. There are, however, two primary factors
which make the development of such statistical tools challenging. First, many
high-throughput genomic technologies produce varied heterogeneous data, which
include continuous data (microarrays, methylation arrays), count data (RNA-
sequencing), and binary/categorical data (SNPs, CNV). These varied data sets do
not always satisfy typical distributional assumptions imposed by standard high-
dimensional statistical models. Second, in order for scientists to leverage all
of their data and understand the complete molecular basis of disease, these
varied omics data sets need to be combined into a single multivariate
statistical model. This proposal seeks to address these two issues with a new
statistical framework for integrated analysis of multiple sets of high-
dimensional data measured on the same group of subjects. The key statistical
approach uses the theory of exponential family distributions to generalize two
foundational high-dimensional statistical frameworks, principal components
analysis (PCA) and graphical models, so as to jointly analyze transcriptional,
epi-genomics and functional genomics data.

This research will be applied to high-throughput cancer genomics data and lead
to new methods to (a) discover molecular cancer sub-types along with their
genomic signatures and (b) build a holistic network model of disease. By
leveraging information across all the different types available of genomic
biomarkers, the proposed methods will have the potential to make scientific
discoveries critical for personalized medicine. The proposed work will also be
broadly applicable to integrating multiple sets of "omics" data, including
genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and imaging. Beyond medicine, the
theoretical framework and statistical methods will make significant advances in
the theory of exponential families, statistical learning, and the emerging field
of integrative analysis as well as have broad applicability in other disciplines
such as engineering and security. All results will be disseminated through
publications, conferences, and open-source software; this research will also
provide training and educational opportunities for doctoral and postdoctoral
scholars.