* 1263905
* SusChEM: Engineering E. coli for improved production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA)-based biodegradable plastics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Christopher Nomura, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 511,500.00

1263905 - Nomura &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are
microbially produced, biobased, and biodegradable polymers that have a wide
array of uses ranging from substitutes for non-biodegradable, petroleum-based
plastics in bulk commodity products to biomedical applications. One of the
factors that limits the widespread use of PHAs for more specialized applications
is the lack of control over repeating unit compositions and by extension the
inability to produce polymers with desired physical properties. The long-term
goal of this research project is to genetically engineer E. coli for producing
expanded classes of PHA materials with desirable material properties. PHAs
comprised of repeating units of 3-5 carbon atoms are known as short-chain-length
PHAs (SCL-PHAs) and tend to be thermoplastic in nature but lack toughness, while
PHAs comprised of repeating units of 6-14 carbon atoms are known as medium-
chain-length PHAs (MCL-PHAs) and tend to be elastomeric. It has been
demonstrated in previous studies that SCL-MCL PHA copolymers that are comprised
of 80-95% SCL and 5-20% MCL repeating units have material properties that are
very similar to common petroleum-based plastics. The objective of this project
is to further develop strains so that they can produce SCL-MCL PHA and PHA-co-
Polylactic acid (PLA) copolymers with desirable material properties from the
renewable sugar feedstocks, and to produce new PHA-co-PLA copolymers with
specific repeating unit compositions from lactic acid and fatty acids. This will
be accomplished with a combination of synthetic biology, metabolic engineering,
protein engineering, and synthetic chemistry methods to improve PHA production.
Successful completion of these studies will lead to novel polymer production
platforms with the potential to overcome the lack of diversity and control over
repeating unit compositions of existing bacterial PHA producing systems and
expand the number of applications for PHA polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies and research training activities are expected to have a broad
impact on society, ranging from improving upon the science of biodegradable and
biobased polymer synthesis to the development of new biomaterials for research,
industrial, and biomedical applications. The project will contribute to reduce
US dependency on non-renewable sources such as fossil fuels for energy,
materials production, and transportation. The research associated with this
proposal is intrinsically interdisciplinary in nature and will be performed in a
diverse training environment. It will also provide summer research experiences
for underrepresented minority students with a goal of increasing the number of
college graduates from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of
this SusChEM project the award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Bioengineering Program of the CBET Division is co-sponsored by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program of the Molecular and Cell Biology Division and by the
Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.