* 1263155
* REU Site: NEESreu- Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation: Reducing Seismic Vulnerability
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Thalia Anagnos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2015
* USD 192,171.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
provides a unique combination of research and educational experiences designed
to promote reduction in earthquake vulnerability. With support from the NSF
Division of Engineering Education and Centers(EEC) and the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation(CMMI), NEESreu students will engage in
state-of-the-art experiments using large-scale test facilities involving
physical models, computational models, and data analysis to generate new
knowledge that advances earthquake and tsunami risk mitigation. Facilities
include shake tables, large-scale structural testing systems, geotechnical
centrifuges, mobile field laboratories, permanently instrumented geotechnical
field stations, and a tsunami wave. Students will collaborate on active NEES
research projects, which tackle a breadth of high priority earthquake mitigation
issues ranging from performance of the nation's infrastructure (bridges, ports,
pipelines, and levees) to innovative strategies for reducing damage and losses
to buildings to the interaction of structures and tsunamis. In addition, this
NEESreu program will demonstrate advanced methods for preparing engineering
students to participate in geographically-distributed research projects using
collaboration tools that are becoming common place in research and professional
practice. NEESreu students will use the latest IT collaboration tools to form
virtual peer teams for supporting each other's research. Short-term and long-
term assessment will provide data to better understand best practices for
enhancing collaboration among geographically-distributed undergraduate
researchers.

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
provides a unique combination of research and educational experiences designed
to promote reduction in earthquake vulnerability. With support from the NSF
Division of Engineering Education and Centers NEESreu students will engage in
state-of-the-art experiments using large-scale test facilities involving
physical models, computational models, and data analysis to generate new
knowledge that advances earthquake and tsunami risk mitigation. Students will
collaborate on active NEES research projects, which tackle a breadth of high
priority earthquake mitigation issues ranging from performance of the nation's
infrastructure (bridges, ports, pipelines, and levees) to innovative strategies
for reducing damage and losses to buildings to the interaction of structures and
tsunamis. The NEESreu program aims to influence the future of earthquake
engineering with special attention to training and mentoring a diverse,
professionally prepared workforce, and to attract undergraduate and
underrepresented students into STEM careers. Students will gain an understanding
of the global impact of earthquake engineering; gain confidence using Web 2.0
technologies; gain enthusiasm for research that translates into a desire to
pursue postgraduate education; and develop a network of peers that lasts beyond
the REU.