* 1263807
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Ballots and Blockades:  The Normalization of Protest in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Mitchell Seligson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 03/31/2014
* USD 12,324.00

Why does protest surface as a routine form of political participation in certain
democracies, but not others? While protest seems to be a relatively common form
of political voice in Latin American countries such as Argentina, Bolivia, and
Peru, where rates of participation have reached nearly thirty percent of the
total population in a given year (LAPOP 2008), it remains very uncommon in
countries such as Brazil, El Salvador, and Costa Rica. This dissertation
contends that this often-sharp cross-national variation is the result of
differences in political institutions across emerging democracies. Specifically,
institutional weakness in democratic countries precipitates more radical modes
of political participation, as governments' ability to deliver on citizens'
expectations fails to match the capacity for mobilization of newly enfranchised
democrats. Thus, where institutional performance is low--e.g., high corruption,
undisciplined political parties, and low legislative effectiveness--but
political engagement is high--i.e. widespread interest in politics and
participation in civil society--radical mass protest can become "normalized"
owing to the inability of formal political institutions to adequately channel
and respond to the demands of citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this dissertation comes in the form of four specific theoretical and
empirical contributions. First, it draws from the existing literature to offer a
fresh theoretical framework for understanding variation in protest participation
across democratic countries, arguing that political institutions shape the
participatory "tools" chosen by grassroots organizations and actors. Second,
this project will constitute the first effort to systematically test contending
explanations of variations in protest participation across Latin American
countries, utilizing survey data from the AmericasBarometer spanning 2006-2012.
Third, this dissertation grant application proposes to collect data on protest
behavior and subnational democracy in each Argentine province from 1993-2012,
building an original subnational database that will be unique in terms of its
geographic and temporal scope. Finally, this project will include in-depth case
studies of three Argentine provinces characterized by distinct political
environments and levels of protest, drawing on in-person interviews with
protestors, civic organization leaders, and politicians. Together, these data on
Argentine provinces will allow for one of the first comprehensive subnational
comparative analyses of the causes of political protest. When combined with the
region-wide AmericasBarometer data, this project will offer a powerful two-level
study of protest at the national and provincial levels. All original data will
be made available to scholars in the U.S. and abroad on the principal
investigator's personal website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this dissertation can be found in the linkage between the dramatic rise in
protests across Latin America and wide variations in democratic quality across
much of the developing world. Few scholars have examined the consequences of
varying levels of institutional effectiveness for mass political participation
in third wave democracies. By connecting a growing trend in mass political
behavior to specific features of Latin American democratic institutions, this
dissertation will shed light on the ways in which political institutions shape
how citizens engage the political system they inhabit. The region's policymakers
may be interested in knowing how characteristics of political parties,
legislative and judicial systems, and executive politics are shaping the
contentious activities taking place in their
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, in focusing on protest, this
dissertation speaks to a topic that is also currently pertinent to governments
outside the region under consideration. Given recent political upheaval in the
Middle East, elevated protest participation in China and Russia in recent years,
and the rise of the Tea Party and Occupy Wall Street movements in the U.S., this
dissertation will speak to a more universal audience, contributing to a growing
dialogue on a type of political participation that seems increasingly important
in countries of all types. Any lessons drawn from Argentina and Latin America
will also be germane to other societies that are experiencing similar cycles of
contentious politics, therefore making this dissertation unique in terms of the
breadth of its potential theoretical contribution.