* 1263167
* REU Site:  Raptor Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* James Belthoff, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 338,527.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Boise State University that will provide research training for 8 students, for
10 weeks during the summers of 2014- 2016. This REU program is supported by the
NSF's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO REU program).This program engages
undergraduates in field and laboratory research with a thematic focus of Raptor
Research. The juxtaposition of Boise State University?s Raptor Research Center
(RRC), The Peregrine Fund (TPF), Idaho Bird Observatory (IBO), numerous state
and federal natural resource agencies, and the Morley Nelson Snake River Birds
of Prey National Conservation Area (NCA) makes Boise, Idaho a hub for exciting
and important raptor research. REU students conduct basic and applied research
using raptors as focal organisms and participate in a core program that includes
instruction on the biology of diurnal and nocturnal raptors, workshops on
endangered species propagation, and development focused on responsible conduct
of research, career planning, and scientific communication. The program
culminates with an interdisciplinary student research conference that provides
participants the opportunity to communicate their research to a diverse audience
of students, faculty, scientists, and lay people. Weekly seminars and other
activities provide for regular student-mentor and student-student interaction,
and REU students become part of the Summer Undergraduate Research Community at
Boise State University, joining undergraduate research students from numerous
STEM disciplines. Recruitment occurs via digital and print media, and students
from groups underrepresented in science and from institutions with limited
opportunities for research are targeted during recruiting efforts. Students are
selected for participation based on academic record, research performance, and
potential for outstanding research in raptor biology. Students are tracked to
determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the REU experience. Information
about the program is assessed by exit surveys, mentor evaluations, and use of an
REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://biology.boisestate.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jim Belthoff at
208-426-4033 or jbeltho@boisestate.edu).