* 1263049
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research in Engineering (SURE)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Leyla Conrad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 444,298.00

Robotics, as a discipline, is inherently interdisciplinary, combining all
aspects of engineering necessary for designing and deploying integrated systems
and solutions. As students are exposed to robotics, they begin to see
connections among these disciplines and begin to understand how their in-class
book knowledge translates into real-world systems that can assist society in
positive ways. The push of robotics, as it moves from traditional industrial
settings, into public spaces and homes across the world opens up extensive new
research opportunities in important economic areas such as healthcare,
education, and entertainment. This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
award, funded with co-support from the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers, will support the involvement of undergraduate students in an immersive
10-weeks robotics research experience, and as a direct consequence, interest
them in opportunities available through graduate study. The program will recruit
participants locally and nationwide from institutions that provide no or limited
research opportunities. Since we expect this theme to be highly advantageous for
recruiting, retaining, and motivating students who are currently
underrepresented in engineering disciplines, particular emphasis will be placed
on recruitment of minority and female students. Participating students, who are
paired with both a faculty advisor and a graduate student mentor, will undertake
meaningful robotics research projects, visit local industrial labs, attend
weekly seminars on emerging research in the robotics field, and participate in
weekly academic enrichment and skill development workshops. Students will
conclude the program with research presentations to their peers, faculty, and
graduate student mentors. Through this immersive research experience, robotics
REU students will share in meeting the challenges of this promising new robotics
domain and fully reap the rewards of being trained in this interdisciplinary
field.

"The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program."