* 1263215
* REU SITE: Cell and Molecular Biology and Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Sheila Thomas, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 04/30/2017
* USD 323,597.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
Division of Medical Sciences at Harvard University that will provide research
training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. The
scientific focus is in the area of cellular and molecular biology. The main
fields in which students conduct research include cell and developmental
biology, microbiology, neurobiology, biochemistry, genetics, and virology.
Objectives of this REU are to: (a) increase knowledge of basic biological
research; (b) develop students' interest in pursuing research careers; (c)
enhance related skills necessary for success; and (d) provide post-program
advising and networking. In addition to their research projects, program
objectives are attained as students participate in weekly student-faculty
research discussions at which they teach each other about their projects, and in
a weekly career development series, which covers topics including choosing
graduate programs, completing applications, networking, and interviewing.
Special skills sessions on critical reading of the literature and strategies for
preparing for GRE exams are also included. Ethics and responsible conduct of
research topics cover experimental documentation, research fraud and misconduct,
image manipulation, and ethical issues related to lab life. Students participate
in a peer advising/mentoring program with current graduate students and are
provided additional opportunities to meet other research faculty and graduate
students in both academic and social settings. Participants are recruited from a
nation-wide pool, with emphasis on recruiting students interested in research
careers and on recruiting members of under-represented minority groups and those
who have few research opportunities on their home campuses. Selection is based
on statements of interest, recent academic achievement and preparation in
science courses, recommendations, and previous research experience. Several
mechanisms of formative and summative evaluation are employed and will include
an assessment tool common to REU programs. Program alumni receive twice-yearly
newsletters, contact information about each other, and open access to continued
advising and counseling by the REU program director, their individual research
advisors, and their peer mentors. Follow-up activities facilitate effective
tracking. Information about the program can be found at:
www.hms.harvard.edu/dms/diversity/Summer.html. Contacts: Sheila M. Thomas,
Ph.D., (PI); KeyAnna Schmiedl (Program Coordinator); 617-432-4980.