* 1263103
* REU Site: Microbial friends and foes: towards a synthesis of interspecific interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Milgroom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 329,851.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Cornell University that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2014-2016. The program focuses on host-microbe
interactions. It will train undergraduate students in the concepts, research
questions, and experimental approaches central to understanding microbial
interactions with eukaryotic hosts. The Department of Plant Pathology & Plant-
Microbe Biology (PPPMB) has about 40 faculty who will serve as mentors. A common
theme among research programs in PPPMB is species interactions, both mutualistic
and antagonistic. REU participants will learn about broad diversity of microbe-
eukaryote interactions through full-time research, lab meetings, weekly
seminars, and group discussions. Strong emphasis will be placed on teaching
scientific method and strategies for conducting research, and on the synthesis
of concepts of interspecific interactions across diverse systems. Students will
also participate in workshops devoted to research ethics, electronic database
literacy, science citation software, science communication, planning for
graduate study, including attention to personal statements and resumes, and GRE
preparation. REU students will have access to a rich array of individual
mentor's facilities as well as the Cornell University Life Sciences Core
Laboratories focused on genomics, proteomics and mass spectrometry, microscopy
and imaging as well as bioinformatics and computational biology. The program's
multi-phase recruitment effort consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats
as well as digital-based advertising. Undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in science are encouraged to apply. Participants are selected
based on academic record, research performance, and potential for outstanding
research in biology. Students are tracked to determine their continued interest
in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences
of the research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by
various means, including use of an REU common assessment tool available to BIO-
funded REU PIs. More information is available by visiting reu.pppmb.cornell.edu,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Teresa Pawlowska at tep8@cornell.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Michael Milgroom at mgm5@cornell.edu).