* 1263477
* Collaborative Research: A Spatiotemporal Approach to Sensitivity Analysis in Human-Environment Systems Models
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Daniel Kramer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2017
* USD 135,406.00

This Geography and Spatial Sciences (GSS) project will develop novel methods for
understanding and categorizing uncertainty in complex spatial models of human
and environmental systems interactions. Increasingly scientists are utilizing
such models to understand the dynamics of various processes including urban
expansion, climate change, deforestation, and nonpoint pollution of water
bodies. An inherent complexity in these processes, leading to model uncertainty,
is the variability over both space and time. For example, the dynamics of urban
expansion in Detroit are different than those in Cleveland, and their dynamics
today are different than those ten years ago. Models of such systems typically
require a large number of explanatory variables that describe the economic,
social, political, and environmental components of the overall system. To
address model uncertainty, scientists use sensitivity analysis: a technique
employed to understand how different values of an explanatory variable affect
the outcome of interest. For example, how do increasing payments to farmers
affect their willingness to convert agricultural lands for conservation
purposes? This project will develop a new theoretical framework for applying
sensitivity analysis to complex human-environment systems models exhibiting
great variability over space and time. Specifically, the framework will
facilitate 1) the identification of explanatory variables that account for the
greatest variability in model outcomes leading to model simplification; 2) the
exploration of the model outcome variability over space and time; and 3) the
simulation of system dynamics to understand the implications of various policy
scenarios. The developed framework will be tested on a model designed to
understand agricultural land conservation decisions and their effects on lakes,
local economies, and people.

This project will contribute greatly to scientists', policy-makers', and
citizens' abilities to understand the extent to which various drivers in human-
environment systems models affect model outcomes. Moreover, the project will
facilitate the development of simpler systems models with greater explanatory
power. As such, the methods developed will improve the transparency of such
models potentially allowing greater community use, understanding, and
participation in such modeling exercises. The framework will also provide
methods for prioritizing data acquisition, improving the robustness of complex
human-environment models, and enhancing the usefulness of such modeling
endeavors for policy and decision making to address major societal problems. The
project will train students, through graduate student mentoring and a modeling
certification graduate program, to employ the new methods developed in order to
describe and solve complex human-environment systems problems. The results of
our research, including a spatiotemporal sensitivity analysis toolbox (ST-SA),
will be disseminated electronically online, in peer reviewed manuscripts, and at
professional conferences.