* 1263387
* REU SITE: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nano Science and Micro Systems Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Deborah Evans, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 03/31/2017
* USD 331,212.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The overarching paradigm of the Research Experience
for Undergraduates in Nanoscience and Microsystems Engineering (NSMS REU) site
at the University of New Mexico is to bring physical sciences, engineering and
computational modeling together to solve important challenges in the areas of
health, energy and the environment. With support from the Division of Materials
Research at the National Science Foundation, the unique aspect of this REU Site
is that undergraduates are immersed in interdisciplinary research teams where
the goal is to harness the unique properties of nanoscale materials into micro-
and macroscale devices and systems. There are two technical thrusts: (1)
Nanoscience of Biosystems: research to transform and engineer nanomaterials into
functional biosystems. Novel drug delivery systems will be developed, including
silica-based nanocarriers as cancer diagnostics and therapeutics and engineering
live bacterial vaccines for pulmonary delivery. Novel polymers that disrupt the
structural integrity of cell membranes will be used to create antimicrobial
surfaces, and materials that disrupt protein aggregation in cell membranes will
ameliorate the first stages of Alzheimer's disease. DNA templates and biomimetic
protease surfaces will be developed for molecular assembly. Single nanoparticle
imaging on live cells will track how signal transduction occurs from the cell
membrane to the nucleus in response to environmental factors. (2) Functional
Nanomaterials: research on novel nanomaterials for energy applications and the
environment. Synthetic platforms will be designed to create hierarchically
structured electrocatalyts for fuel cells, and platinum/palladium catalysts will
be studied on the nanoscale to optimize automotive exhaust catalyst efficiency.
Manipulation of thermal phonons will be used to design novel nanoscale photonic
crystals. Synthesis of ordered bulk heterojunctions from a single copolymer will
allow for the design of organic photovoltaics of higher efficiency.
Nanostructured materials will be used to design nanocoatings for energy and
national security applications, and ferroelectric polymers will be transformed
into energy devices like ultracapacitors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nanoscience and
Microsystems Engineering (NSMS REU) site at the University of New Mexico
recruits students from diverse ethnic, educational and cultural backgrounds.
Undergraduate students from community colleges, 2 year and 4 year institutions
though out the US work on research projects with a faculty advisor and a
graduate student mentor for 10 weeks in the summer. The goal of the program is
to enhance student interest in careers in science and engineering by instilling
students with a sense of excitement about scientific discovery and engineering
and its broader impact on health, energy and the environment. The NSMS REU
program is based on the premise that to benefit society the unique properties of
nanoscale materials must be integrated into useful devices and systems on the
micro- and macro-scale. NSMS REU students work on research projects to develop
new drug delivery systems, combat diseases, design antimicrobial materials,
develop better catalysts for cars and fuel cells, and to synthesize new
materials for solar devices and energy applications. Students are guided through
the process of developing and executing a research plan. Students learn about
the global significance of their research and its impact on society, and
transition to independent thinkers as the program proceeds. Field trips to
National Laboratories and local industries in New Mexico broaden their
perspective on future careers in science and engineering. A weekly seminar
program featuring faculty and industry speakers provides the context of how
their academic curriculum fits into research projects that aim to solve many
pressing societal and environmental issues.