* 1263133
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering (IREECE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Osamah Rawashdeh, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2016
* USD 366,866.00

Providing young college students an opportunity to function as researchers on
projects that are current, relevant, and interesting can have a profound
positive influence on their desire to pursue a career in a STEM related field.
With support from the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers, the
Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering
(IREECE) Program at Oakland University will provide an engaging research
experience for thirty undergraduate students over the next three years, with
special focus on females and minorities. The students will engage in active
projects that include biomedical research studying the effects of sleep apnea on
canines, studying how to better image the human heart using X-rays, mimicking
the visual system of the common house fly, developing MEMS sensors for
autonomous robots, and learning about electromagnetics vehicular antenna
designs. With close mentoring from faculty, the students will gain valuable
skills in contributing to successful research, teamwork, communication, and
dissemination of their work through technical conferences. Participants will
also learn about the possibilities and the impact of engineering on our lives
through close interaction with faculty, research staff, and industry
collaborators in the Metro Detroit Area.