* 1263951
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale atomistic modeling tools for electrocatalytic systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Janna Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 233,051.00

ABSTRACT

Collaborative Proposals #1264104 - Susan B. Sinnott #1263951 - Michael J. Janik

Scientific Merit: As traditional fossil fuel sources of energy are depleted, new
energy conversion and chemical energy storage approaches will be needed to
supply energy for both portable and stationary applications. Fuel cells offer
efficient conversion of chemical to electrical energy. Electrolysis applications
reverse this process and store electricity from renewable sources, such as the
wind or sun, in chemical form for later use. The efficiency of converting energy
between chemical and electrical forms is dictated by atomistic processes that
occur at device electrodes. These processes are difficult to probe with
conventional experiments. The characterization of these processes is enabled
using atomic and quantum level computational methods. There are two major
limitations in current modeling approaches for evaluating reactivity of
electrode surfaces: the inability to estimate rates for electron transfer
reactions and the lack of atomistic force fields that can describe chemical
reactions and charge transfer, yet retain the thickness required to capture
relevant interfacial phenomena. Professors Michael Janik and Janna Maranas of
Pennsylvania State University and Susan Sinnott of the University of Florida
have received an award from the National Science Foundation Catalysis &
Biocatalysis Program to tackle these limitations. The first limitation will be
addressed through the development of a transferable method for electron transfer
rate constants using methods based on quantum mechanics. This method will be
applied and validated versus experimental data for the carbon dioxide reduction
reaction (of relevance for converting electrical energy and waste carbon dioxide
into a chemical fuel) and the oxygen reduction reaction (of relevance in fuel
cells). The method will be further applied, in collaboration with experiment, to
evaluate the reaction mechanism in the electrocatalytic synthesis of high value
chemicals from bio-derived feedstock. The second limitation will be addressed
through a reactive molecular force field with variable partial charges for both
electrode and solvent. Charge optimized many-body reactive potentials will be
developed for copper and platinum electrodes in contact with alkali hydroxide
electrolytes. Molecular dynamics calculations will evaluate electrochemical
interface, including solvent structure and charge distribution. These multiscale
atomistic modeling tools enable definitive identification of electrochemical
reaction mechanisms. They will be applied to three specific electrocatalytic
applications to evaluate a series of reaction specific hypotheses. Broader
Impacts: The broader impacts of this work secure a clean energy future in which
renewable energy and chemical energy storage work together to provide an
efficient, practical approach to sustainable energy. This project develops a
joint quantum chemistry and reactive molecular dynamics framework to model
electrochemical interfaces, facilitating rational design of materials for
improved batteries, fuel cells, and grid-level electrochemical energy storage.
With this in mind, educational activities are designed to motivate students to
pursue careers in energy related fields. Graduate students will benefit from an
inter-disciplinary research project at two universities, and become skilled in
multiple computer simulation methods. Portions of the proposed work will be
packaged as undergraduate projects at both Penn State and the University of
Florida, including underrepresented groups through the Penn State Minority
Undergraduate Research Experience and Women in Science and Engineering Research
programs. Research opportunities will be provided to high school students
through the U. of Florida. The developed computer simulation methods will be
broadly distributed to the computational community, allowing others to apply the
techniques developed to electrochemical problems outside the scope of this
proposal.