* 1263568
* Travel for Participants to the 26th International Cartographic Conference, Dresden, Germany, 2013
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Michael Leitner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 03/31/2016
* USD 34,628.00

In cartography as in many other scientific fields, advances in research and
education increasingly rely on the development of international collaborations
that bring together skilled scholars and educators from many different nations.
International contacts and collaborations develop through many different means,
but one of the most successful has been the biennial meetings of the
International Cartographic Association (ICA). The ICA has been the primary
international forum for cartographic research since 1959, and it currently
involves over 80 countries. The ICA's next biennial meeting will occur in
Dresden, Germany in August 2013. To facilitate the continued involvement of U.S.
scientists in ICA activities and to facilitate the inclusion of more Americans
in international networks at early stages of their careers, this award will
provide group-travel support to enable at least 22 early-career cartographers
from the U.S. as well as a limited number of mid-career professionals to attend
this ICA meeting. Funds will be distributed to U.S. cartographers whose
applications are evaluated using a number of criteria associated with active
participation in the meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will foster
greater and a more diverse participation by U.S. cartographers in the global
forum of the International Cartographic Association. As has been demonstrated in
follow-up reports from Americans who have been supported with previous travel
grants to other major international meetings, opportunities abound for meeting
professional colleagues from many other nations, for hearing ideas and
information from a broad range of different perspectives, and for participating
in discussions that frequently result in successful research collaborations.