* 1263281
* REU Site: Nuclear Science at Texas A&amp;M University
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Sherry Yennello, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2018
* USD 474,269.00

This award provides continued support for the REU site at the Cyclotron
Institute at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). The new award includes a
collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and a
significantly refined outreach activity, Street Physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for increased efforts in recruiting the next
generation of young people into nuclear science was recently emphasized in a
report by the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee. Involvement in research at the
undergraduate level is believed to be an important component in increasing the
numbers and preparation of students entering graduate programs. The students
supported through this award will be in residence for 10 weeks in conjunction
with the summer session at TAMU, for which they will receive a $5000 fellowship,
housing, travel and most importantly the opportunity to work closely with
internationally renowned scientists at a first-rate university-based nuclear
facility. The research projects are at the leading edge Nuclear Science,
including sub-fields such as nuclear astrophysics, weak interactions, nuclear
dynamics and thermodynamics, nuclear structure, RHIC, atomic ionizations, and
radiation effects. There are proposed projects both in theoretical and
experimental Nuclear Science. Some students will work at the Cyclotron
Institute, which is a DOE Nuclear Physics Center of Excellence. The facilities
include a K500 superconducting cyclotron, a K150 cyclotron and associated state-
of the art detector systems. The Cyclotron Institute and the department of
physics are also home base for involvement in experiments at other facilities,
such as RHIC, ANL, and TRIUMF. The faculty at TAMU are leading scientists in the
field and have a history of working with undergraduates in their research
programs.