* 1263356
* REU Site: Ocean Coastal Zone Sustainability through University of Southern California Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Karla Heidelberg, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2017
* USD 320,328.00

This award provides funding for a new Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the University of Southern California's Wrigley Marine Science
Center (WMSC) located on Catalina Island, CA. The proposed 8-week summer
internship program will provide laboratory and field-based research expertise to
eight undergraduate students from across the nation each summer for three years.
The "Sustainability of Coastal Ocean Systems REU" (SCOS-REU) program will
provide exposure to multiple activities that provide an integrated context for
interdisciplinary undergraduate training related to the sustainability of
coastal oceans. The first week of the program will focus on whole-group
training, including a short course in marine science and an oceanographic shake-
down cruise. Students will then embark on independent research programs with
faculty and "near-peer" mentors. Student projects will contribute to larger,
funded research programs by their mentors related to understanding of human
impacts on environmental systems and be capped with a student research seminar.
In addition to independent research, participants will work and learn as a team
as they receive training in ecosystem ecology and function, the scientific
method, methodological approaches and career and professional development.
Periodic field trips to different parts the island and ecosystems will promote
group cohesiveness and learning.