* 1263018
* REU Site: Chemical Science Leadership Initiative (CSLI)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Karl Booksh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the EPSCoR Office at the
National Science Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site led by professors Karl S. Booksh and Sharon Rozovsky at the
University of Delaware. The research projects supported at this Site entitled
"Chemical Sciences Leadership Initiative" (CSLI), is dedicated to preparing
students with disabilities to become tomorrow's leaders in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). The activities of CSLI address psychological
and sociological studies on "solo status" and "stereotype threat" that identify
the negative consequences of being a minority group member within a large
organization and how the negative consequences manifest as decreased performance
and persistence in post-secondary education. The goal of the REU is to provide
the students with a positive learning experience that delivers the knowledge and
skills required to succeed in graduate school despite added pressures derived
from external factors. CSLI combines a research experience for undergraduates in
a state-of-the-art laboratory with classroom material designed to prepare
students for success in graduate school. Available research opportunities span
all five sub-disciplines of Chemistry. Additionally, a seminar series and field
trips will provide participants with a broader context from which to plan
careers and make decisions on graduate school selection options. Following the
10-week summer session, students will present their research at the following
spring American Chemical Society National Meeting and Exposition and will be
invited to participate in the meeting and activities with the ACS Committee on
Chemists with Disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People with disabilities are a
significantly underrepresented minority in STEM. Graduate school has become a
critical juncture where STEM students with disabilities disproportionately
abandon educational advancement. Although 10% of STEM undergraduate majors and
6% of STEM graduate students have disabilities, only 1% of STEM doctorates are
earned by students with disabilities. The REU Site also focuses on mentoring
assistant professors in working with coordinated outreach programs in general
and mentoring students with disabilities in specific. Of the nine core mentors,
seven are assistant professors and two are full professors who will serve dual
roles as mentors-to-students and mentors-to-mentors. Assessment will be
performed through the Delaware Education Research and Development Center.