* 1263729
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   Why Motivations Matter: Information Processing Goals and Their Implications for Selective Exposure to Political Information
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Thomas Nelson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 15,250.00

Recent literature in political communication has demonstrated the proclivity of
the American news consumer to seek out political information that serves to
confirm prior beliefs. But, the motivations that underlie these behaviors, as
well as what impacts these motivations may subsequently have on the consequences
of exposure to political information, are less clear. The objective of this
project is to contribute to understanding in these areas by applying the concept
of information-processing goals - the objectives that the media consumer wishes
to accomplish in their information-seeking behaviors - to the phenomena of
political media selectivity. This poses two questions: 1) How are information-
processing goals influential in how citizens choose political information
sources? and, 2) In what ways do these goals moderate the relationship between
political information exposure and political attitudes? To this end, a multi-
faceted research approach involving original survey data collection and survey
experimentation is proposed in an effort to determine both the real-world
consequences of information-processing goals on political media preferences and
the causal implications of information-processing goals regarding the effect of
political media exposure on public opinion and political
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project stems
from a decade of research that has identified selective exposure - the
preference for information that affirms prior attitudes and the aversion towards
information that challenges existing beliefs - as a serious threat to the health
of American democracy. While such claims are not without some empirical support,
these studies largely operate under a theoretical paradigm that treats all forms
of political information exposure as being solely motivated by the innate desire
to avoid information that may challenge existing worldviews. However, recent
psychological research has suggested that such an approach is simplistic as it
neglects to account for a number of other motivations that influence information
preferences and subsequently the role of these factors in dictating how new
information is processed in the formation of political judgments. Hence, the
intellectual contribution of this study involves testing an alternative
theoretical approach toward understanding citizens' political media habits,
accounting for motivations in the form of information-processing goals. The
results of this project should ultimately result in a more nuanced understanding
of why individuals prefer the information sources that they do as well as what
consequences (i.e. polarization or moderation) can be expected of such
information-seeking behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond an improved academic
understanding of the correlates and consequences of citizens' political
information-seeking habits, this study should also yield broader impacts
regarding the consequences for democratic society of citizens' engagement with
the political information environment. As numerous scholars have proclaimed, a
shift towards selective exposure is thought to manifest increased attitude
polarization and intolerance. Further, many of these same scholars argue that
the solution to this spiral towards extremity is the promotion of diversity in
information-seeking behavior. The expected outcomes of this study, however,
would suggest that each of these claims is conditional on the objectives that
people wish to accomplish in their political media habits. In other words, if
the empirical analysis supports the theoretical importance of information-
processing goals, improving democratic society must go beyond making normative
claims about which types of political information-seeking strategies are best
and instead focus on the promotion of more deliberative mindsets in how people
make sense of political information, either through citizenship training or
fostering more accountability for the attitudes that people hold about politics.