* 1263818
* Collaborative Proposal: DNA guided assembly of enzyme cascades for biocatalytic fuel cell applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Nosang Myung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2019
* USD 300,356.00

#1263774 / #1263818&lt;br/&gt;Chen / Myung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic fuel
cells have received considerable attention because of their potential for direct
conversion of abundant raw materials to electricity. The use of multi-enzyme
cascades is particularly attractive as they offer the possibility of achieving a
higher current density by the sequential oxidization of fuels. However,
efficient substrate and electron channeling are two of the most important
bottlenecks in improving the power output of multi-enzyme fuel cells. An award
from the National Science Foundation Catalysis &amp; Biocatalysis Program to
Professors Wilfred Chen of the University of Delaware and Nosang Myung of the
University of California-Riverside will support investigation of approaches to
surmount these obstacles. The overall objective of this proposal is to
investigate the use of a genetically controlled, DNA-based modular scaffold
approach for the spatially-defined self-assembly of a multi-enzyme cascade for
enhanced substrate and electron channeling. A simple and scalable
electrospinning method will be developed to synthesize nanofiber mat electrodes
with a very high surface area. A genetically designed mediator will then connect
the assembly to the mat electrode. The modular nature of the proposed design
allows easy alteration of spacing between the enzymes, mediators and the
electrodes for investigating the optimal substrate and electron channeling in a
rational manner. The unique combination of nanoengineering and bioengineering
approaches will enable Chen and Myung to systematically investigate the factors
affecting the overall performance of the multi-enzyme fuel cell. The initial
testing of the concept will be demonstrated for the conversion of cellulose to
gluconic acid, with other reactions to be studied subsequently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is scientifically
significant because the concept is built on ideas from biology extending to an
entirely new engineering application. Because of the modular nature of the
design, it is anticipated that the proposed framework will have a huge impact on
the assembly of other multi-enzyme cascades. The proposed methodology will
provide a future platform useful for the self-assembly of a wide range of
multienzyme systems for fuel cell applications. From an educational perspective,
graduate students participating in this research will gain an integrated
perspective of the important interfaces and synergies connecting biochemistry,
electrochemistry, and nanotechnology. The PIs plan outreach programs through the
Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement Program at UC Riverside and the
establishment of a Homeschoolers Day program in Delaware.