* 1263063
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Transportation Electrification
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 355,277.00

This REU site program will engage undergraduate students in basic research and
provide laboratory experience in transportation electrification-related
engineering projects performed with research mentors from University of Maryland
at College Park (UMCP). The program is aimed at training students and promoting
skills in them to become independent researchers by providing insights into
research methodologies, self-discipline, team integration, and exposing them to
the broader implications of their research. Ethics discussion and training will
be integrated into all aspects of the students' experience. At the end of the
program the participants will make formal presentations and also submit their
work to the NSF Engineering Education Awardees Conference, and other conferences
and journals including IEEE Transportation Electrification Conference and
Expo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the
proposed project is to provide undergraduate students with a strong academic
background and research experience focusing on sustainable transportation
systems, which is the common intellectual focus of the program. The program will
enhance the practical and theoretical foundation of students in the areas of
power electronics, energy storage (battery, ultracapacitor and fuel cell),
optimization and mathematical modeling of grid integrated vehicles, and
sustainable transportations by exploring creative, original, and transformative
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The main broader impact is
ensuring highest quality integrated education and research to meet the emerging
workforce and educational needs of U.S. transportation and energy industries by
educating young and talented undergraduate students. The results will be
disseminated broadly through professional conferences and meetings to enhance
scientific and educational achievements. It is essential to point out that since
the transportation industry is going through a major restructuring to introduce
next generation of electrified vehicles, it is critical to train young minds in
this field. The integrated research and educational activities will certainly
facilitate this objective. It is the intention of the project team to diversify
the number of participants, specifically from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are over 250 million registered passenger
vehicles in the U.S. Over 40% green house gas and 70% of emissions comes from
transportation and transportation is 99% dependent on one source of the fuel,
which is petroleum. Considering the fact that oil and gas are finite resources,
which are becoming scant and expensive, there is no doubt that advanced
electrified automotive systems are one of the ways of independency to oil. In
fact, as identified by Electrification Coalition, transportation electrification
is an inevitable path towards nation?s independence from oil and achieving
energy security. Hence, it is vital to prepare the future STEM workforce to
tackle grand challenges of national and global significance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program, funded by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers, through award ENG-EEC-1263063, will ensure highest
quality of integrated education and research to meet the emerging workforce and
educational needs of U.S. transportation and energy industries. It is aimed at
training, educating, and inspiring undergraduate students to tackle such
challenges, and convey to them the need for superior, passionate researchers in
the field of transportation electrification. Efforts will be made to recruit a
diverse pool of students from underrepresented groups in engineering. The
participants will be exposed to broader implications of their research and
training through technical and professional development seminars, field trips to
national laboratories and tours of industrial facilities. The results of our
experiences will be shared with interested universities, colleges, high schools,
industries, and government organizations. The outcomes will be disseminated in
national and international journals, conferences, and relevant workshops.