* 1263339
* REU Site: Application of Microscopy and Microanalysis in Multidisciplinary Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 03/31/2017
* USD 310,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research at the NSF will
fund the summer REU site at Portland State University (PSU). While the objective
of the program will continue to focus on inspiring undergraduate students to
pursue careers in science and engineering by involving them in hands-on
research, US military veterans will be added to the targeted demographic in
order to fulfill a pressing need for educational and technical training for our
returning troops. This addition to the program further broadens the reach of
this multi-disciplinary program that encompasses seven fields of study
represented by seventeen faculty mentors. The combination of faculty enthusiasm,
cutting-edge research projects, and thoughtfully designed training activities
motivates students to pursue further education and careers in related fields.
Specifically, the site will offer students nationwide the opportunity to take
part in cutting-edge research spanning nanomaterials synthesis, characterization
of biological and geological samples, nanodevice fabrication and investigations
concerning the impact of atmospheric trace gases on climate change. Through a
concentrated summer program, the participants will obtain technical training,
conduct independent research, visit local high-tech industries, present their
research at an REU symposium, and publish their papers in a specially designed
online journal. The summer program will begin with a three-day research
orientation including workshops on laboratory safety, library database searches,
and graduate school applications. Also offered is an intensive short course that
trains students in using electron &amp; focused ion beam microscopy and
spectroscopy for material and device characterization. Students will then use
these acquired skills in research projects offered by faculty from seven
departments. It is highly anticipated that REU participants will leave the
summer program with a quintessential skill (electron microscopy) applicable to
all disciplines and a broader perspective of the impact and feasibility of
sustainable technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Over the last several funding cycles, the REU site at Portland
State University has achieved a high level of participation from women and
minorities and remains the first and only NSF sponsored REU site at PSU and the
only one in the Portland metropolitan area as well. Concerning the broader
impact, this site provides opportunities for underrepresented female and
minority students as well as students who are veterans of the US Armed Services
across disciplines to participate in research critical to their career
development. Furthermore, the PIs have developed relationships with other
principle investors and project leaders, allowing their interns and students to
participate in well-structured training activities. This, in turn, exposes the
REU participants to multiple perspectives. This dovetails nicely with the multi-
disciplinary nature of this program and helps to magnify the program's effort to
produce a unique cohort of graduates - a group that honors diversity, values
teamwork, and prizes multi-disciplinary approaches to research and technology
development.