* 1263207
* REU Site: Combining Integrative Biosciences and Bioinformatics for Undergraduate Research Experiences (IBS REU)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Deloris Alexander, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 04/30/2017
* USD 355,800.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Tuskegee University that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The Tuskegee University IBS-REU site
offers undergraduates (in the STEM majors, but particularly in Biology,
Chemistry, Animal Sciences, Plant and Soil Sciences, Agricultural Economics, and
other bioscience majors) a novel approach to conduct research by integrating
multiple areas in the biosciences with an emphasis on bioinformatics. We define
"integrative biosciences" research as any research where the continued
integration of two or more science disciplines is requisite, for example,
determining the consequences of genetically-modified sweet potato (Plant
Genomics, Plant Sciences) on soil microbial biodiversity (Soil Science, Soil
Microbiology, Genetics). Over 30 university faculty will serve as mentors,
offering a wide range of interesting and exciting projects for participants.
Students are expected to do full-time lab research as well as participate in
seminars and career development workshops, such as the ethics and responsible
conduct in research, professional communication skills, career opportunities in
industry, government and academia, preparing for the GRE and the graduate school
application process. REU students have access to a rich array of individual
mentor's facilities as well as many labs and centers with core facilities across
the Tuskegee University campus. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort
consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based
advertising. Students are selected based on academic record, research
performance, and potential for outstanding research in integrative biosciences
with an emphasis in bioinformatics. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs. More information is available by visiting
http://www.onemedicine.tuskegee.edu/IBS/project/IBS_REU.htm , or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Olga Bolden-Tiller at obtiller@mytu.tuskegee.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Deloris Alexander at dalexander@mytu.tuskegee.edu).