* 1263183
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Cybersecurity, Robotics, and Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Joseph Urban, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2016
* USD 357,337.00

This funding renews a highly-successful CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Texas Tech University. The site covers research
topics in cybersecurity, robotics, and software engineering. The intellectual
focus of the REU site is on addressing the underlying theoretical concepts in
each research project and on developing a research proposal that can be
reasonably conducted during the research period. Modeling uncertainty is a
common theme within several of the research topics, with application areas that
include the Smart Grid, surveillance, assistive care, reconnaissance, unmanned
vehicles, climate forecasting, and irrigation management. Cross-discipline
seminars will be held at the beginning of the summer to help the students get a
smooth start on their research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site will
introduce 30 undergraduate students (over three years) to computing research,
with a goal of directing more U.S. undergraduates into graduate computing
programs. The site will aid the professional development of the participating
students by providing weekly educational activities, such as how to write a
research paper and pursue research in ethically sound
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.