* 1263374
* REU Site: The Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Erika Camacho, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 10/31/2018
* USD 539,975.00

The Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Institute (MTBI) is an eight-week
multi-summer research experience for undergraduates in mathematical biology
hosted by Arizona State University (ASU). MTBI focuses on dynamical systems
(broadly interpreted to include continuous and discrete deterministic and
stochastic systems) and modeling applied to biology. The first part of the
program consists of morning lectures given by the MTBI faculty that introduce
the students to core mathematical topics in the context of biological
applications. Typical lecture topics include qualitative behavior of nonlinear
differential and difference equations including stability and bifurcation of
equilibria; probability and stochastic processes; population modeling and
epidemiology from both a continuous and discrete perspective (both time and
population); and data fitting through statistical methods including inverse
problem solving. Afternoon computer laboratories introduce the students to
programming and computation in MATLAB and Maple; students often are also exposed
to Mathematica, R, XPP AUTO, LaTeX, and other software that will help with their
mathematical research. During the second part of MTBI, the students divide into
groups and identify a research topic of interest. With the help of the MTBI
faculty, they formulate this topic into a mathematical question and then work on
their self-selected projects for the remainder of the program under the
direction of MTBI faculty. The research results are presented to the ASU
community in a colloquium and each group submits a manuscript. Students and
faculty are encouraged to continue their work during the year and submit their
research papers to professional journals. Students are also encouraged to
present their work at national conferences throughout the year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTBI recruits heavily from U.S. underrepresented
minorities, women, and those individuals with limited STEM and research
opportunities in their home institutions. The MTBI faculty has extensive
experience in mentoring these types of students, in helping them develop
research projects, and in guiding these research projects. The overall goals of
MTBI are 1) to develop and nurture individuals who will impact the culture and
diversity of the U.S. mathematical sciences while strengthening their
communities and 2) to increase their success rate as they journey through their
baccalaureate programs to successful Ph.D. scholars working in academia or
industry. MTBI's objectives support these goals: to recruit primarily but not
exclusively targeted individuals; to provide an intensive and in-depth research
experience in the mathematical sciences; to familiarize students with
computational tools and software essential for research in mathematical biology;
to foster a collaborative learning environment and strong bond among all
participants; to develop a strong support network for them; and to track
students for at least six years after completion of their MTBI experience. With
quality mentoring and research, MTBI will continue to bring about change at the
national level and truly impact the U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.