* 1263100
* Cerro Jazmin Archaeological Project: A Study of Urbanism in the Mixteca Alta, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Veronica Perez Rodriguez, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 307,902.00

Currently, over half of the world's population lives in cities, making the study
of urbanism central to anthropology and relevant in addressing current global
challenges and debates surrounding urban living and sustainability. The Cerro
Jazmín Archaeological Project (CJAP) studies an ancient city that was
intermittently inhabited for nearly 1800 years to learn about the city's form,
function, and environmental impact through time. The ancient city of Cerro
Jazmín is located in the mountainous Mixteca Alta region of Oaxaca, Mexico,
where modern farming communities are struggling to survive on an agricultural
economy. By learning about the history of occupation and agricultre at Cerro
Jazmín the project will investigate different models of sustainable and
unsustainable urbanism.

Phase I of CJAP, also funded by NSF, identified a long, but intermittent history
of occupation at the ancient city and geomorphological data study identified a
period of landscape stability and soil formation at a time corresponding with
massive urban growth in the 10th century AD. This find suggests that the city
was able to strike a balance, if at least momentary, between population growth
and the environment. This period of stability was followed by one of erosion and
terrace construction. CJAP Phase II will investigate the city's structure,
function, and system of food production to learn about the successful and failed
models of urbanism followed at Cerro Jazmín. These finds and the proposed
investigations will build on a growing number of studies that have found that
higher populations need not result in land degradation. Instead, correct land
management and targeted labor inputs from large populations are needed to build
and maintain anthropogenic landscapes of production associated with urban
centers.

In Phase II the project will conduct archaeological excavations of residential,
civic-ceremonial, and agricultural areas to learn about the relationship between
the city's political and economic function and prominence (reflected on
monumental architecture and agricultural terraces) and the activities of high-
and low-status households. The project will study monumental architecture, craft
production, and foreign goods to investigate the city's local and regional
function and its involvement in regional trade and political interaction
spheres. The investigations will focus on times of residential stability (Early
Classic), possible abandonment (Late Classic), and re-occupation (Postclassic).

Today the environmental impacts of urbanism are becoming increasingly
problematic and Cerro Jazmín provides a valuable case study on humanity's urban
experience. Archaeology is strategically poised to make a broad contribution to
current socio-natural studies and debates pertaining to sustainability and the
impacts of human action and urbanism.

In the Mixteca Alta flat land and water are rare commodities and frost is a
constant risk. Still, the archaeological record demonstrates that despite these
challenges urban communities flourished for centuries. Perhaps the project's
most significant contribution is that it will investigate: What urban strategies
did the ancient Mixtec follow to grow food for dense urban populations in a
challenging environment? Efforts directed towards answering this question will
be of interest not only to scholars, but also to rural communities trying to
survive in the Mixtec highlands today.