* 1263796
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Modeling of Mammary Gland Development
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* John Lowengrub, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 421,082.00

The structure of the developing mammary gland is regulated by stimulatory and
inhibitory epithelial-epithelial and epithelial-stromal cell interactions (e.g.,
signaling, adhesion). While mammary developmental biologists have gathered a
wealth of molecular and cellular data, fundamental questions remain. For
example, it is still unknown how cells of various types become organized into a
duct. How is the organization affected by system perturbations such as altered
signaling processes? The answers to these questions rely on an understanding of
signaling and behavioral "rules" governing normal ductal morphogenesis and
maintenance. Experimental investigations of these interactions, complemented by
mathematical models, can help facilitate the understanding and definition of
these rules. In this project, the investigators employ a joint experimental and
mathematical modeling approach to study mammary gland development with a focus
on ductal morphogenesis. With respect to cellular and tissue level parameters,
the investigators design specific experiments to measure model parameters and
validate model results. Particular emphasis will be placed on the nature of the
signaling vs. receiving cell type(s). In parallel, the complementary expertise
will be leveraged and used to develop a multiscale mathematical and
computational framework to bridge the gap between tissue scale models of ductal
morphogenesis and cellular scale models with detailed cell arrangements. This
integrative project will allow for predicting what occurs in response to system
perturbations such as loss-of-function due to mutations or epigenetic events.
This can provide insight on the emergence of abnormal development programs and
the initiation of tumors. The methods developed here will be applicable to
modeling other organs with branching architectures such as lung, salivary,
olfactory epithelium and prostate glands. Beyond these applications, the new
tools developed here will also impact other problems in the biological sciences
including development of other tissues and organs, wound healing, and tissue
regeneration that are characterized by processes occurring in concert over a
wide range of space and time scales. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the
fundamental questions in biology is how tissues and organs develop and become
organized. Developmental processes are the result of complex mechanical and
signaling processes occurring inside and outside cells, and between cells and
the environment. Such complex processes are very difficult to understand by
using conventional experiment-based approaches alone. Recently, it has been
recognized that mathematical modeling can provide a unique and complementary
tool to experimental investigations by generating experimentally testable
hypotheses, and that an integrated experimental and computational approach can
potentially be more powerful than solely using experimental investigation, in
identifying mechanisms responsible for non-intuitive developmental behavior
frequently observed in experiments. However, the developmental processes involve
interactions across a wide range of spatial and temporal biological scales.
Thus, new mathematical models describing biological behavior at different
scales, and at different levels of complexity, should be developed, linked
together, and experimentally validated to provide a theoretical predictive
framework to complement current developmental biology research. This is
precisely what this project will address in the context of the mammary gland,
for which it is still unknown how the cells of various types become organized
and how this organization is affected by perturbations to the system such as
from mutations. Specifically, these questions will be addressed by drawing on
the complementary expertise of the researchers in mathematical and computational
modeling and in experimental techniques to create and analyze a multiscale
modeling framework for mammary gland development. The parameters in the models
will be measured, and the models will be validated, using specifically designed
experiments. The integrative work presents a necessary first step towards
further development of a comprehensive, multiscale computational framework
capable of accurately predicting the development of normal and abnormal mammary
gland morphologies.