* 1263713
* Antibody Purification via Affinity Chromatography that Utilizes the Unconventional Nucleotide Binding Site
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Basar Bilgicer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 01/31/2017
* USD 314,431.00

1263713 Bilgicer

The objective of this project is to engineer a novel affinity chromatography
technique for purification of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies from cell
culture media and ascites fluids. This method targets the unconventional
nucleotide binding site (NBS) that exists on antibodies to facilitate their
capture on an affinity column. Antibodies have extraordinary specificity and
affinity for antigens and are used in a vast array of applications including
detection, diagnosis, catalysis, and therapy. In the last fifteen years,
therapeutic antibodies have revolutionized the treatment of many diseases
including cancers and autoimmune diseases. Despite their benefits to patients,
monoclonal antibody-based therapies are expensive, making them unaffordable to
many patients. A major contributor to this cost is use of Protein A (or G)
affinity columns during antibody production. These columns are expensive and
have a short cycle life. The results of this project may lead to a low-cost
purification method. In preliminary studies, the PI targeted the NBS with indole
butyric acid (IBA). Preliminary results showed that IBA column's capture
efficiency for selected antibodies was >95%, with purity of >98%. The PI's
research plan includes the following specific aims: i) screening for high
affinity small molecules (nucleotide analog) for the NBS; ii) identification of
the NBS resin for the best antibody purification performance; iii) determination
of antibody yield and purity achieved by NBS column; iv) determination of column
regeneration and reusability. The potential advantages of the NBS column are: i)
reduced production cost, ii) increased column capacity, iii) increased column
lifetime (more durable material is stable under harsh column regeneration
conditions), iv) no leaching of protein A/G into purified antibody, and v)
capture and elution of only bivalently active, purified antibody. Because the
nucleotide binding site is present on all antibodies, the column can be used to
purify both monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies of all isotypes from all
species.

Broader Impacts. Antibodies are of high significance in therapy, diagnosis and
life-science research. An NBS-based purification method will potentially
contribute to increasing quality as well as lowering the overall cost associated
with antibody production and be of societal benefit in all these areas. In
addition to the scientific impact of the proposed research, the PI is also
committed to enhancing the educational climate to inspire graduate,
undergraduate, and pre-collegiate students to pursue careers in science and
engineering. As a junior faculty, the PI seeks to leverage the project to help
achieve three long-standing goals in education: 1) Enhance the undergraduate
education of students by participation in cutting edge research. 2) Increase the
participation of members of underrepresented minorities in science. The PI has
recruited several minority students for his research group 3) Improve the
standard of science education in area high schools, and raise minority students?
interest in careers in science and engineering. The PI will help develop a
hands-on Career Decision Workshop that the PI will host in his laboratory each
semester. The PI also seeks to enhance core-high school biology. He has teamed
up with South Bend New Tech High School teachers to generate the curriculum for
a new biotechnology course. Successful establishment of the pioneering
biotechnology course in the New Tech high school in South Bend may lead to
implementation in New Tech high schools throughout the nation.