* 1263011
* REU Site: Advances of Machine Learning in Theory and Applications (AMALTHEA)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Georgios Anagnostopoulos, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The Advances of MAchine Learning in THEory &amp; Applications (AMALTHEA) REU
Site aims to provide top quality educational experiences to a diverse community
of undergraduate students through research participation in the area of Machine
Learning (ML). The relevance and importance of ML is not limited to specialized
technological innovations, as it was in the past. Nowadays, it also increasingly
influences everyday life through its contributions to applications such as
voice/face recognition, credit fraud detection, intelligent recommendation
systems and many others. Furthermore, ML is inherently multi-disciplinary as it
draws from advances in disciplines such as computing, statistics, mathematics,
physics, biology and engineering, to a name a few major ones. The project's
thrust area is the theory of ML and how it can be integrated and applied to
important real-life problems, thus exposing participants to both theory and
applications. AMALTHEA involves 10 undergraduate students per year from a broad
spectrum of disciplines for 10 weeks in the summer. These participants perform
supervised research, whose results are going to impact the field of ML itself,
as well as how ML is applied in other scientific disciplines. For this purpose,
the faculty mentors have ample expertise in ML and past experience of
effectively engaging undergraduate students into state-of-the-art
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over its lifespan, the project will directly
impact a diverse group of 30 motivated students, the majority of which may not
have access to such research participation opportunities otherwise. The
participants will be exposed to cutting-edge ML research, as well as
professional development activities, such as technical seminars and career-
related workshops. Furthermore, AMALTHEA aims to involve overall 10 graduate
students in undergraduate teaching and mentoring activities during the summer
experiences. Finally, the project's research and education endeavors are
supported by its advisory board, which consists of seasoned educators, ML
industry practitioners and researchers. Research results will be published in
interdisciplinary conferences, and, potentially, technical
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site web site (http://www.amalthea-
reu.org) provides additional information for students as well as educators and
researchers in machine learning.