* 1263427
* Collaborative Research: Uneven Economic Geographies from Recession to Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jamie Goodwin-White, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2016
* USD 111,507.00

This project is about the impacts of the Great Recession that began with the
2008 financial crisis and its recovery on workers across different metropolitan
labor markets in the U.S. as impact of the recession were not uniform across
places or people. Some places fared better than others, and some workers fared
better than others and this project investigates why. Skill-biased explanations
of employment inequality emphasize education as the primary reason that
employment outcomes differ among individual workers, but evidence also reveals
that the institutional characteristics of metropolitan labor markets influence
individual employment and wage outcomes. In particular, institutional
explanations of labor market inequality emphasize local social and political
factors that influence conditions of work and employment, such as unionization,
size of the public sector, and employment policies (e.g., minimum wage laws).
This project investigates if and how local economic and institutional factors,
such as the economic mix of a regional economy, changes in public sector
employment, levels of unionization, and employment policies, shaped differential
trajectories of decline, rebound, and resiliency for both places and individual
workers during and after the Great Recession. The project will also examine
changing patterns of inequality among workers in the same labor markets before
and after the recession. In particular, the PIs will examine if greater levels
of inequality accompanied recovery and how inequality was influenced by local
institutional factors. This analysis will help establish a more comprehensive
picture of recovery as well as identify new patterns of inequality that may be
emerging between places and among workers. Methodologically, the use of mapping
tools, distributional statistical methods, and publicly available census data
will help identify how the characteristics of metropolitan labor markets and
individual workers influence employment, wages, and wage inequality. The project
focuses on these effects especially among more disadvantaged workers, such as
African Americans, immigrants, and less-educated individuals.

The research will contribute to the training of students, both at the doctoral
level in geography and at the master's level in social work. Concerted efforts
will be made to recruit student researchers from underrepresented groups. In
addition to research dissemination in geography and social science journals, the
project will generate two reports focused on the analysis of employment trends
in Chicago and Los Angeles that will be disseminated to local community-based
organizations. A project website will be developed to house digital maps,
disseminate findings, and make available classroom exercises developed from the
research and data. The results of the research will identify local institutional
practices and policies that moderate or intensify the negative effects of
economic transformation on particular segments of the workforce. These findings
are relevant to policy makers and voters engaged in policy debates about
economic and employment inequality.

This project is being co-funded with the Sociology program.