* 1263053
* REU Site: Chemical Research Addressing Energy and Environmental Challenges
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Mary Williams, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 11/30/2016
* USD 279,334.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry a the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site led by Professors
Mary E. Williams and Landy K. Blasdel both of Pennsylvania State University. The
Site will continue its highly successful program that focuses on chemical
research that addresses energy and environmental challenges. Each year, the REU
Site will introduce nine undergraduate students to a ten-week summer research
experience. The goal is to inspire students to continue their scientific careers
by providing an exciting and relevant chemical research experience with an
outstanding group of research mentors and support structure. In this way the
Site will attract and prepare a diversified pool of talented young researchers
and future professionals.

REU students will gain experience in cutting-edge research using state of the
art equipment at Pennsylvania State University. Graduate students and faculty
will mentor the new young investigators. Prior to the REU summer program,
mentors will be trained on how to effectively direct and advise the REU
students. The broader impacts of the Penn State Chemistry REU site are to
provide training and preparation to the future generation of researchers by
educating a well-prepared, diverse, and scientifically literate workforce, and
to contribute by advancing energy and environmental research.