* 1263531
* Core Support for the NRC Geographical Sciences Committee
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Kara Laney, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2016
* USD 330,000.00

The National Research Council (NRC) established a Geographical Sciences
Committee (GSC) in 1997 because spatial and place-based approaches to human-
environment science had demonstrated themselves to be of increasing importance
in addressing major societal and environmental topics. This award renews core
support for the GSC, which has as its mission: (1) to bring the theories and
perspectives of the geographical sciences to bear on society's problems; (2) to
foster international cooperation by serving as a liaison to other national
geographical organizations and initiating collaborative research programs among
those organizations; (3) to provide advice to the National Academy of Sciences
(NAS) on all matters pertaining to geography, especially to the NAS Foreign
Secretary on matters concerning international organizations, programs, and
research; and (4) to serve as the official U.S. liaison to the International
Geographical Union (IGU) and promote and facilitate participation of U.S.
geographers in the IGU. The GSC undertakes its work through the conduct of
special studies and through meetings. The GSC will identify study topics that
will meet the needs of the geographical sciences community and incorporate the
recommendations of the 2010 NRC report titled "Strategic Directions for the
Geographical Sciences in the Next Decade" into the GSC agenda. The GSC will
address both these items through the identification of study tracks related to
health; human dimensions of global climate change; and the global recession's
role in the restructuring of American society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued
support for the GSC will enable this group to bring academics, private sector
and government researchers, and policy makers together through roundtables and
studies to reach consensus on the most challenging and significant issues in the
geographical sciences. The GSC provides a forum to enable geographers to make
assessments on the current state of the science and develop a vision for future
research directions. GSC activities will enable the geographic sciences in
directly inform public policy at the national level. The committee also will
advance the role that geographers and related scientists play in a range of
contexts in the U.S. and internationally through the International Geographical
Union.