* 1263302
* REU Site: Bioenergy Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 274,987.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln that will provide research training for 10
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The program focuses on
bioenergy -- the application of molecular and physiologic principles using
microbes, algae and plants to create renewable sources of energy thereby
promoting a sustainable society. The School of Biological Sciences and the
Center for Plant Science Innovation have 15 participating faculty who will serve
as mentors. There is a wide range of very interesting and exciting projects for
the students. Projects employ molecular biology, biochemistry and or genetics to
understand energy dynamics in model species. Students are expected to do full-
time lab research as well as participate in seminars and various workshops, such
as the responsible conduct in research, professional communication skills,
career opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school
application process. Students are also provided tours of local industries of
relevance to renewable energy production. REU students have access to a rich
array of individual mentor's facilities as well as many interdepartmental labs
and centers with core facilities such as electron microscopy, microarray
analysis, surface analysis, etc. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort
consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based
advertising. Students are selected based on academic record, research
performance, and potential for outstanding research in biological engineering or
quantitative biology. Students are tracked to determine their continued interest
in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences
of the research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by
various means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information
is available by visiting http://www.unl.edu/summerprogram/research#bioenergy, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Paul Blum at pblum1@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Heriberto Cerutti at hcerutti@unlnotes.unl.edu ).