* 1263142
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Complex Psychological Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Heidi Kloos, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2017
* USD 255,714.00

This REU site at the University of Cincinnati, Research Experiences for
Undergraduates in Complex Psychological Systems, aims to broaden participation
of underrepresented individuals within the STEM disciplines by recruiting,
engaging, and training undergraduates with an interest in psychological science.
Undergraduate students are trained in an interdisciplinary approach to exploring
psychological science that emphasizes the reciprocal relationship between basic
and applied science. Employing the integrative framework of complex systems,
students are exposed to theories and methodologies that promote understanding
and investigation of psychological phenomena that emphasize how the interactions
that bind components of an environmentally situated, complex human system give
rise to emergent and self-organized patterns of behavior. &#8232;&#8232;
Intellectual Merit: The primary objectives of this REU are to (1) provide
undergraduate students with direct scientific experience and enable an in-depth
understanding with the field of complex systems and psychology, (2) offer the
preparation necessary for graduate training, (3) engage students through
professional development and immersive mentoring to facilitate engagement with
the field, and (4) broaden the participation of underrepresented groups through
targeted recruitment and mentoring. Specifically, students gain experience in
all aspects of scientific work as they daily conduct individual research
projects with a faculty mentor and the faculty member?s lab. Students are also
afforded an opportunity to learn about all aspects of psychological science
beyond their specific project across such sub-disciplines as social, cognitive,
clinical and community psychology, through weekly faculty colloquia and
community and industry networking opportunities. At the end of the program,
students present the outcomes of their training to the University community in a
day-log symposium. In addition to research, students participate in a series of
weekly professional development workshops designed to prepare them for the
different career paths of psychology, including preparation for graduate school
admission, GRE preparation, skills training, and scientific methods and
discipline specific practices. Finally, students work and interact with an
ethnically and racially diverse group of mentors and graduate students that
provide not only critical research skills, but also important role models that
can engender a sense of belonging and efficacy within the discipline.

Broader Impacts: A number of broader impacts will emerge for participants in
this REU. First, students gain the valuable experience of developing long-term
collaborative relationships that will result in scientific and scholarly
research products. Second, this REU is specifically designed to promote
engagement and development of underrepresented undergraduates within psychology.
As such, it broadens participation in the STEM disciplines by creating pathways
that ensure a more diverse supply of interested and prepared future doctoral
candidates. This program further promotes sustainability of pathways through
proactive recruitment practices and collaborative, cross-institutional
networking. Finally, this REU also provides an innovative training opportunity
unlike any other in both its focus on complex systems and psychology, and its
synergistic approach to basic and applied science.