* 1263767
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Partisan Polarization and the Representation of Women in the U.S. Congress
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Suzanne Mettler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 22,400.00

Intellectual Merit

This dissertation makes two main theoretical contributions. First, the theory
provides an explanation for contemporary patterns of descriptive representation
in the legislature. Second, Party Fit Theory has implications that extend beyond
the realm of descriptive representation and politics.  The theory offers an
additional explanation for the persistence of polarization.  Party Fit Theory
suggests that it may be difficult to elect moderate candidates to a polarized
political environment.  This dissertation advances both the representation and
partisan polarization literatures.

This dissertation seeks to explain partisan differences in representation by
developing a theory of Party Fit. Party Fit Theory suggests that a party's
ideological reputation sends messages about the type of candidate that belongs
in the party. This project focuses on three mechanisms to explain differences in
descriptive representation. The first hypothesis explores patterns of attraction
among potential members of the legislature. The second hypothesis analyzes
patterns of retirement among members of legislature. The third hypothesis
examines patterns of support from party activists. A notable feature of the
project is that Party Fit Theory is tested on data from within and outside the
legislature, whereas previous research tends to focus on one or the other in
isolation.

Broader Impact of the Research

This research contributes to the broader academic and non-academic communities.
The findings will be presented at academic conferences and submitted to
scholarly journals, and the datasets generated will be made publicly available
to scholars. In the future, the Co-PI will teach classes on representation, and
the research will enhance the teaching, training, and learning of undergraduate
and graduate students. The project also has important consequences for American
politics and the quality of representative democracy. We must consider how
partisan dynamics affect the election of representatives. This dissertation
provides the most complete picture to date of the impact of partisan
polarization on representation.