* 1263385
* REU Site: Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Angela Bielefeldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 299,959.00

The goals of this ten-week summer REU Site at the University of Colorado Boulder
and supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, are to
provide undergraduate students with the opportunity to conduct research in the
area of Environmental Sustainability, emphasizing multimedia approaches (air,
water, soil), while training them in experimental design, data collection, and
data interpretation. A seminar series will foster group discussions of societal
issues in Environmental Sustainability, ethics, and policy. Students will also
participate in tours of local research facilities (like NREL, NOAA, NIST, USGS).
Students will be recruited from disciplines inside and outside engineering and
at least fifty percent of the participants will be from colleges and
universities where research opportunities in STEM are limited. Participants will
experience gains in knowledge, skills, attitudes, and identity that will foster
their success in future research and/or professional settings.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the proposed activities, which
will advance knowledge and understanding across different fields related to
Environmental Sustainability with projects ranging from innovative water
treatment using UV light, to evaluating emission consequences of shale gas
production in the Rocky Mountain Region. The research team has the experience
and creativity to pursue the proposed projects and to involve undergraduate
students in meaningful ways in this endeavor. The proposed organization and
activities have been informed by the successful practices of prior local REU
sites as well as others. Research resources include recently expanded laboratory
facilities in the Environmental Sustainability Center and a supportive research
environment at the University of Colorado Boulder.

The broader impacts of this project include leveraging ties to the highly
successful Colorado Diversity Initiative and the Minority Engineering Program
network to reach underserved populations. This program will encourage diverse
group of students (women, underrepresented minorities, and students at
universities with low research activity) to pursue advanced degrees in
environmental engineering and related disciplines. These students will also
develop skills and knowledge of benefit in their undergraduate studies and
future careers. Student and faculty participants will actively collaborate
across disciplines and graduate students will engage in the training of
undergraduate researchers.