* 1263407
* REU Site:   Yosemite Environmental Science Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Stephen Hart, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2016
* USD 318,150.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to the
University of California Merced (UCM) that will provide research training for
eight students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The Yosemite
Environmental Science Research Training REU program will be based at the
Yosemite Field Station in Yosemite National Park (YNP). Students will be
involved in research projects with UC Merced faculty mentors and YNP/United
States Geological Survey co-mentors that span a range of sub-disciplines, but
that all use the "living laboratory" of Yosemite to answer key questions in
environmental science. These projects examine both the unique ecosystems and
organisms found within Yosemite (i.e., montane meadows and the Great Gray Owl),
as well as key processes of broad relevance (i.e., fire and hydrology). Many of
the projects seek to understand human interactions with and alteration of
ecosystems, organisms, and processes; these include quantifying local impacts
(e.g., pack stock use and visitation patterns), as well as the effects of global
change. Project results will contribute fundamental scientific knowledge to a
variety of fields, while also generating information of direct value to natural
resource managers. REU student outreach activities will be broad and diverse,
including a public presentation of their research open to the Yosemite community
and YNP's many visitors. Training will include a session on scientific ethics
and the responsible conduct of research led by staff from the Office of Research
at UC Merced during the first week of the program. The program's multi-phase
recruitment effort consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as
digital-based advertising. Students are selected based on academic record,
research performance, and potential for outstanding research in the
environmental sciences. Students are tracked to determine their continued
interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting
influences of the research experience. Information about the program will be
assessed by various means, including use of a REU common assessment tool. More
information is available by visiting http://snri.ucmerced.edu/Yosemite_REU, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Stephen C. Hart at shart4@ucmerced.edu) or co-PI (Dr.
J. Michael Beman at mbeman@ucmerced.edu).