* 1263851
* The Art and Science of Reduced-Complexity Modeling in the Environmental Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Vaughan Voller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 38,974.00

Numerical models are a critical tool in many disciplines for generating and
testing hypotheses, examining sensitivity to perturbation, hindcasting or
filling in data gaps, and making predictions about future behavior. Numerical
experiments offer advantages over field or laboratory experiments in that they
provide complete control over critical variables and can expand the spatial and
temporal scales over which experiments are run. Although improvements in
computing technology have allowed for highly detailed simulations, does the
ability to see everything (i.e., the perfect experiment) improve our overall
understanding of phenomena? An alternative to highly detailed simulations,
reduced complexity models (RCMs) have persisted and are even becoming more
pervasive in the environmental sciences. RCMs offer advantages in their ability
to couple physical, biological, and chemical dynamics and provide highly
intuitive yet quantitative understanding of system behavior and sensitivities.
However, these advantages depend on the rigor of the processes simulated and the
assumptions involved in model simplification. A diverse array of assumptions and
strategies used in formulating RCMs is present in ecology, hydrology, climate
science, and other environmental science fields, highlighting a need for the
community to come together for synthesis. In this workshop, participants from
diverse fields will come together to discuss common strategies for reducing
complexity in models, probe assumptions, and evaluate issues of scale and
parameterization of RCMs. Strategies for testing the rigor of RCM processes and
assumptions using direct numerical simulations, physical models, and/or
databases will also be developed.

RCMs are common elements of larger climate change simulations and are also used
to predict how large ecosystems such as deltas, wetlands, and desert landscapes
will likely change as a result of restoration, urbanization, and/or changes in
climate. The workshop will result in tools for the scientific community that
will make the use of RCMs more efficient, reliable, and effective for use in
management of thee complex environmental systems. The tools include online
resources (code, model test cases, data, descriptions of common steps in
formulating RCMs) that will help streamline and validate RCM development. Two
synthesis papers, targeted for general publications of geophysical and
ecological societies will also result. Because of their simplicity and their
ability to produce intuitive understanding of how complex environmental systems
function, RCMs, or ?toy models,? are an ideal teaching tool. Part of the
workshop will focus on developing online teaching resources using RCMs. An
additional workshop session focused on graduate student research will reinforce
an emphasis on training a diverse assemblage of early-career scientists.