* 1263092
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Delegation of Bureaucratic Policymaking Authority in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Anibal Perez-Linan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,174.00

How do politicians in Latin America achieve successful policy outcomes with
oftentimes bloated and inefficient bureaucracies? Why do some policies, like
Brazil's conditional cash-transfer program Bolsa Familia, achieve success while
similar programs in the same places falter? Political Science has rigorously
studied the ways in which laws are made, but has focused far less on how they
are carried out, especially in the developing world. This is a salient topic
inside and outside of academia. As recently democratized countries overcome
political and economic instability, policymakers and citizens alike are
increasingly concerned with the quality of public policy. Constructing effective
policy is impossible, however, without first understanding the gap between how
policy is supposedly implemented, and how it is actually implemented. This
project seeks to address this lacuna through use of a novel theory, original
data on presidential delegation and administrative capacity, and an in-depth
examination of policy success in various Latin American
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project examines policy
delegation decisions and policy success across 18 Latin American democracies to
understand how governments increase the odds of success for their favored
policies. It argues that politicians in low capacity environments often employ
"bureaucratic circumvention" for politically important legislation, bypassing
existing government agencies in favor of creating new agencies, delegating
policies to the military, or outsourcing. These circumventing agents possess
higher capacity or can be more easily managed, and thus increase the chances of
successful policy implementation. The project can be divided into three parts:
1) development of a formal model of bureaucratic circumvention applicable to a
wide range of countries; 2) empirical tests of the determinants of circumvention
with an original database of over 50,000 executive decrees from Latin America;
and 3) controlled comparisons of twelve policies in Brazil, Venezuela, and
Ecuador to test the effect of delegation strategy on policy
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results should offer evidence as to how
politicians can improve the provision of public services across political
systems, even when faced with poorly performing bureaucracies. Beyond the
theoretical and analytical contributions of this research, two practical
elements stand out: 1) the size and detail of the decree database, and 2) the
valuable research experience gained by four undergraduate assistants. The
database--which will include over 50,000 Latin American executive decrees,
including myriad characteristics of each policy--will be an instrumental
resource for other scholars of comparative politics, public administration, and
public policy. These data will be publicly available upon completion of the
project via the Dataverse Network Project. Additionally, the project offers four
undergraduate research assistants the opportunity to gain experience in
collecting data, reading a codebook and coding those data, and then
systematizing and interpreting the aggregated data. In sum, this project seeks
to make theoretical and empirical contributions to the understanding of
comparative executive and bureaucratic politics, while offering learning
opportunities for undergraduate students and providing valuable data for other
scholars.