* 1263124
* REU SITE: ASSET: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in  Advanced Secured Sensor Enabling Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Sitharama Iyengar, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)Site focused on
secured sensor technologies at Florida International University. Undergraduates
will work with faculty on research projects to explore new technologies and
solutions utilizing sensor networking as well as software and hardware solutions
essential to the advancement and practical proliferation of new technologies.
The site includes a range of research projects including trajectory privacy
preservation in sensor networks, secure social sensor networks, on-chip switch
architectures for sensors, software for visualizing large-scale sensor network
applications, resource management for security, and surveillance over sensor
networks and game theoretic approaches to self-configuring non-cooperative
mobile sensors. The objective of the program is to nurture students into
computer and communications research fields through an intense,
interdisciplinary, collaborative research environment. The program serves as an
excellent opportunity for students to participate in many aspects of a
scientific research program through a set of well-planned and focused activities
that will ramp up student research skills and knowledge in emerging
technologies. All activities ensure development of student-faculty and student-
student communication to enhance and accelerate the students' research skills
and learning in the field. The program will spark an interest in continuing
relevant research careers. The goal is to build human capacity in computing and
communications research and knowledge. This site is co-funded by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.

Intellectual Merit: This project brings together fields of sensing, computing
and communications to pioneer new core technologies along with supportive
methods, architectures and toolkits sensor enabling technologies. This effort is
based upon an existing and highly successful undergraduate research experience
site where diverse group of undergraduates is learning how to conduct research
and is becoming prepared to pursue graduate studies. The topics are timely and
focus on emerging research with that has the potential to contribute to the
research frontiers of the field.

Broader Impact: The goal of this project is to build human capacity in computing
and communications research and knowledge. The program will provide an
unparalleled scientific and cross-cultural experience to motivated
underrepresented undergraduate students. It aims to influence their choices
about further education and future careers and continue to give them confidence
to pursue these choices. With specific recruiting efforts that target
underrepresented groups such as women, minorities and persons with disabilities,
this REU program also aims to increase the size and diversity of the scientific
workforce.