* 1263667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Electoral Violence in New Democracies: The Institutional Foundations of Peaceful Transitions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Stephan Hamberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,967.00

This project examines whether electoral commissions and tribunals can reduce the
risk of electoral violence in new democracies. Research in procedural justice
shows that individuals will accept outcomes they perceive as unfair as long as
the procedure is perceived as fair. The project hypothesizes that those who lose
elections are likely to accept the results and refrain from using violence as
long as competent and independent election commissions and tribunals exist to
legitimize elections and guarantee that today's losers can compete in tomorrow's
elections. These arguments are tested in comparative case studies and
statistical analyses.

Intellectual Merit: This project makes four important contributions. First, by
focusing on institutions that secure free and fair elections (i.e., electoral
management bodies or EMBs), this project examines institutions that may be
critical to democracy. Second, by focusing on electoral governance and the
institutionalization of procedural certainty, the research suggests new
solutions to well-known problems of democratic instability in plural societies.
Third, by examining EMBs as institutions that limit the incumbent's power, this
project challenges the idea that democracy is a credible commitment by elites to
redistribute wealth in exchange for the masses' quiescence. Rather, elections in
new democracies produce a credible commitment problem and that EMBs can help
overcome this problem and so ensure peaceful elections. Finally, this project
contributes to the civil war literature by explaining why some democratic
transitions turn violent while others do not. The argument is assessed through
case studies of Ghana and Kenya, as well as a cross-national statistical
analysis of all elections in sub-Sahara Africa between 1990 and 2010.

Broader Impact: This research will have broader impacts in at least three ways.
First, by examining different types of electoral management bodies and their
effects on people's perceptions about the fairness of elections, this research
can help policymakers, donor organizations and NGOs design electoral management
bodies which can improve electoral governance in new democracies, and thus
reduce the likelihood of electoral violence. Second, the research can also help
election observers better understand how citizens evaluate elections and as
such, the results from this research can be used to educate future election
observers about what citizens find most important when they evaluate the
fairness of an election. Third, by collecting data on both electoral management
bodies and electoral violence, this project will benefit scholars who study
elections and electoral institutions as well as those who focus mainly on
political violence.