* 1263113
* REU Site: Aquatic Sciences Research at the School of Freshwater Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Russell Cuhel, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2016
* USD 219,050.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee's School of Freshwater
Sciences (SFS). The proposed program would provide 10 students with a 10-week
active learning experience each summer for two years. The Site provides
environmental aquatic science research training for nationally-recruited
students in a cohesive, multi- and interdisciplinary environment. Students
interested in physics, chemistry, geology, and biology of lake and ocean
settings are paired with mentors supervising active, often interdisciplinary
research laboratories. Together they develop a program of empirical study
compatible with the advisor's interests and capabilities within one of the
dynamic interdisciplinary research programs. After an introduction to SFS,
students spend a day of offshore Lake Michigan sampling experience, a day of
analytical and conceptual interaction, and a second day of ROV exploration on a
nearby reef aboard the research vessel R/V Neeskay. They then write a short
research proposal and begin a combined field, laboratory, and library
investigation. In some cases, small teams of students (2-3 each) work within an
umbrella project. Scientific seminars and workshops on graduate school, career
options and opportunities, writing and public presentation of results and
related topics are included in the program.