* 1263251
* REU Site:  The Environmental and Earth Systems Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program at Biosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Katerina Dontsova, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2018
* USD 475,756.00

The Biosphere 2 Research Education for Undergraduates site: the Environmental
and Earth Systems Research at Biosphere 2 (B2- EESR REU) program leverages the
unique nature of the University of Arizona Biosphere 2 (B2). B2 serves as a
laboratory for controlled scientific studies that monitor global environmental
change and that allow integration across spatial and temporal scales. The goals
for students in this summer REU program are to: (1) develop research skills; (2)
experience the cross-disciplinary collaborations that characterize work in Earth
system science; (3) develop an understanding of practical aspects of pursuing a
career in science, including the nature of graduate school., and (4) receive
training and experience communicating research to the public. Research projects
conducted through this program contribute to an interdisciplinary understanding
of the Earth system with particular focus on the critical zone, how ecosystems
respond to environmental variation and anthropogenic change, and how physical
and biological elements of systems are integrated. Projects draw from several
disciplines, including, ecology, biology, geosciences, hydrology, soil science,
climate and atmospheric sciences. Students work with a faculty mentor on an
individual field or laboratory project, participate in weekly training sessions
on career skills, and present their research to the public and scientific
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site investigates the responses of the
Earth's ecosystems to variation and human-induced changes by linking physical
and biological processes and linking model and real-world systems. Through
active research, students learn first-hand how model and real world systems are
used to generate scientific understanding. The program trains the next
generation of scientists to tackle environmental issues with necessary skills
that bridge disciplines and with the ability to communicate research findings to
the public and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is co-funded by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.