* 1263094
* REU Site: Research Experience for 2-year College Undergraduates at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Allan Headley, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 01/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site led by Professors
Ben Jang and Allan Headley both of Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce. The Site
will provide interdisciplinary research opportunities for a diverse population
of community college students in geographically isolated Northeast Texas.
Students are drawn from rural areas and are unlikely to have a research
opportunity before committing to their chosen career paths. There are 23
community colleges with total enrollment of over two hundred thousand in
Northeast Texas that serve rural, urban, and suburban undergraduate students.
Approximately 50,000 of these students currently enroll in science courses and
yet most do not proceed to college graduation with a STEM degree. This program
will target ten student researchers per year based not only on GPAs, but also on
the recommendation of the instructors, work ethics, ability to persevere,
laboratory skills, and problem solving abilities with special emphasis given to
the recruitment of underrepresented groups enrolled in the community colleges in
this region. This proposed project will also recruit students in the neighboring
areas in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana, which enrolls about 1.0
million community college students. The experiences and momentum gained from the
previous REU programs will help to expand the impact on the undergraduate
researchers participating in the proposed program. All students will complete
basic laboratory and project-based instrumentation training followed by
intensive work with faculty mentors on several newly designed collaborative
research projects, which will accelerate the development of critical research
areas. This will include biweekly oral presentations, progress reports, a final
symposium including both oral and poster presentations, and a final report. To
better expose students to real world research, two trips to world class
companies and institutions that have proven effective in the previous REUs and
will be continued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site will serve as a model for
addressing undergraduate research issues among a diverse group of underserved
community college students, an important population in the higher education
pipeline for STEM enrollments and one that is steadily growing nationwide. The
project will not only serve this underserved region but also attract
underrepresented groups including female, Hispanic, African American, Native
American, and economically disadvantaged students. In addition, non-science
majors taking science courses will be exposed to STEM disciplines through
exciting information and knowledge presented by mentors and students.