* 1263455
* Integrated Platform to Construct and Image 3-D Perfused Vascular Network Within Thick Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Guohao Dai, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

PI: Guohao Dai CBET ID: 1263455

Intellectual Merit: One of the major challenges in tissue engineering is the
inability to grow thick tissues due to lack of vascular perfusion. In addition,
a key feature of many adult stem cell niches is their proximity to the
vasculature in vivo. Vascular cells not only form conduits to deliver nutrient
and oxygen, but also provide cues to control the cellular phenotype in the
surrounding tissues. Therefore, building a functional vascular network with
physiological perfusion is critical to both fields of stem cells and tissue
engineering. The objective of this proposal is to create a perfused, functional
perivascular niche with controllable components and physiological parameters.
Our approach is to build a 3-D perfused functional vascular channel within
hydrogels using a new bio-fabrication technology developed in our lab. These
fabricated vascular channels provide a realistic in vitro model system to
investigate capillary morphogenesis around the perfused vascular channel within
the 3-D matrix. Meanwhile, the imaging modalities to assess the 3-D structures
and functions of the vascular channels and to observe the outgrowth of vascular
networks is lacking for such thick 3-D matrices (2~3mm). To overcome this
problem, we are also developing and improving a new imaging technique called
Laminar Optical Tomography (LOT). LOT is able to obtain depth-resolved 3-D
quantitative images to depths of several millimeters with high sensitivity. To
achieve the full potential of LOT in imaging thick tissue and promote its
application in tissue engineering research, we propose to merge these two
disciplines (3-D imaging & 3-D tissue printing) in a new platform to study the
vasculature formation in thick matrix: Specific Aim 1: Create a perfused,
interconnected vasculature within 3-D matrix utilizing a novel cell printing
technology. Specific Aim 2: Integrate a high-resolution, multi-spectral
molecular laminar optical tomography platform for thick tissue imaging. Specific
Aim 3: Validate the LOT in multi-color imaging of vascular structures and fluid
flow; Study the maturation process and functionalities of the synthesized
structure with regard to matrix properties and culture parameters. The proposed
research will generate significant intellectual merits in the fields of stem
cells, tissue engineering and biomedical optics: (1) By integrating a novel cell
printing technology into the vasculature formation process, this research will
lead to a new method to recapitulate and study perivascular niches ex vivo.
Through studying its patterning and maturation process under a 3-D perfused
environment, this research will define critical factors for the 3-D vasculature
to achieve its functions. (2) This research will integrate a new CCD based LOT
system and will develop specialized reconstruction algorithm for large data
sets. This will establish a new high-resolution mesoscopic fluorescence imaging
technique, which will provide a new method to perform functional and molecular
imaging of 3-D tissue engineered construct. (3) More generally, this work will
identify a set of design principles for the printed structures to support the
growth of the surrounding tissues in vitro, and thereby lay the foundation to
biofabricate thicker tissues in the future.

Broader Impacts: This research has broad impacts in research, society, and
education: (1) The proposed research activities will generate fundamental
knowledge related to 3-D vascular tissue formation as well as new technologies
to obtain functional molecular imaging of the tissues. Both of these
advancements will be critical for engineering thick tissue construct and
understanding the complex biology of cell interactions within 3-D matrix, which
has become increasingly important to the whole field. (2) The proposed
educational components will educate undergraduate/graduate students with up-to-
date technologies, experimental skills, and creative thinking that are
indispensable in the growing field of biomedical engineering. (3) The proposed
research and education activities will also have a broad impact on K-12
education through several proposed programs for underrepresented groups in
science and engineering, as well as extensive outreach programs targeting
students from throughout New York's Tech Valley region. Through activities
demonstrating how engineers can solve societal challenges, our students will be
more likely to pursue career in science and engineering.