* 1263802
* Student Support: 2013 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC) and 41st North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC); Madison, Wisconsin; 10-14 June 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Laine Mears, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 04/30/2014
* USD 24,900.00

The purpose of this award is to provide funding offsetting registration and
travel expenses to enable 83 undergraduate and graduate students to attend the
2013 joint conference of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (ASME MSEC) and
the Society of Manufacturing Engineers North American Manufacturing Research
Conference (SME NAMRC). The attending students will participate in the
conference by giving technical papers, participating in a poster session to
display their research, and taking part in a design competition. The conference
will be held June 10-13, 2013, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The
funding opportunity will be broadly announced, affording students ample notice
and time to apply. Applications will be reviewed by committee, and $300 in
support will be provided to each winning student.

The students who attend this conference will have a chance to see the latest
work in their respective fields and to talk to the investigators directly. This
will both give them a better perspective on the world of manufacturing and
better prepare them to complete their thesis research. There is also an
international aspect to the conference, enabling the students to become more
internationally oriented. The benefits to the nation in the long term will
include a better educated manufacturing engineering workforce.