* 1263020
* Training and Experimentation in Computational Biology (TECBio)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Srinivas Chennubhotla, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2017
* USD 397,235.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to The
University of Pittsburgh to provide research training for 10 weeks for 10
students, during the summers of 2013-2016. This Training and Experimentation in
Computational Biology (TECBio) REU program has the overarching theme of
"multiscale modeling, simulation, and systems-level analyses for biological
discovery". TECBio students can expect a challenging and fulfilling research
experience that will prepare them for a successful career in graduate school.
Rising Juniors and Seniors from all facets of the life, physical, and computer
sciences and engineering, and particularly those students from small school
and/or underrepresented backgrounds, are encouraged to apply. TECBio students
will select from a pool of 38 diverse research mentors, whose work cover areas
that include bioinformatics, bioimage analysis, computational drug discovery,
computational structural biology, and systems biology. In addition to performing
cutting-edge research, TECBio students will participate in a weekly journal
club, attend research and career seminars organized specifically for the
program, take part in an ethics forum that will instruct them in the responsible
conduct of research, present their work at a Pittsburgh-wide annual research
symposium, tour research facilities such as the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center, and experience the various social and cultural activities available in
Pittsburgh - America's most livable city. TECBio students will also play an
active role in enhancing the TECBio program and will have several opportunities,
including the common assessment tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs to give
their feedback. Following the completion of the program, TECBio alumni will
receive continued mentoring by the program directors and mentors, who will
maintain contact with students to help them establish and maintain success in
their nascent careers. Additional information can be found at
www.tecbioreu.pitt.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joseph C. Ayoob at
jayoob@pitt.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Chakra Chennubhotla at
chakracs@pitt.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-funded by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.