* 1263283
* REU Site: Research on Security of Mobile Devices and Wireless Networks at New York Institute of Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Ziqian Dong, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2016
* USD 359,513.00

The award establishes a new REU Site focused on the security of mobile devices
at New York Institute of Technology (NYIT). Undergraduates will gain hands-on
research experiences in simulating the spread of malware on mobile devices,
implementing cryptographic algorithms and authentication schemes studying
topology control of wireless networks, geolocating smartphones, detecting
physical attacks on a network of mobile devices, and developing privacy
protected sensing methods using mobile devices. Students will work during the
summer with a team of experienced faculty in labs on the NYIT campus. The
project includes professional development activities for students and engagement
with industry. This project is co-funded by the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual
merit of the project is focused on the research topic which is timely and of
national concern. The students will work with a team of experienced researchers
in state-of-the art labs on topics that are current and relevant to the cyber
trust research community. These research experiences are aimed at building a
strong background for undergraduates to become researchers and motivate them to
pursue graduate studies in computer science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide
hands-on research experiences in a high-demand science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) field. The project team is committed to recruiting women
and underrepresented minority students for these research opportunities and to
retaining them in academic and professional capacities related to STEM.
Participants will collaborate with faculty, graduate students and fellow
undergraduates in research teams comprised of individuals of diverse ethnic
backgrounds. Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer science
graduate students and faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding
while promoting learning.