* 1263772
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Participation in Loyalist Protest Activities in Northern Ireland
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Jack Snyder, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 03/31/2014
* USD 22,400.00

Objectives: Cultural protest actions are used by political actors around the
world to achieve political objectives, but existing political science theories
cannot fully explain their dynamics. In particular, the current literature does
not account for why individuals participate in actions that have significant
political consequences but that do not offer material inducements for
participants or social punishments for non-participants. The aim of this
dissertation is understand who chooses to participate in politically-relevant
protest actions and why.

Theory: To address the inadequate treatment of the characteristics of cultural
protest actions in the political science literature, this project draws on two
key findings from the literature. First, cultural actions are not "merely
symbolic," but provide meaningful benefits to participants; and second, they
carry multiple and ambiguous meanings. Briefly, the argument is that individuals
choose to participate in cultural actions that provide them with meaningful and
enjoyable benefits that are intrinsic to the act of participation. This
contrasts with prevailing theories of collective action and collective identity
that focus on the beneficial outcomes for participants, and ignore the content
of identities.

Methods: This project uses original quantitative and qualitative data collected
during extensive fieldwork in Northern Ireland, where traditional protest
actions by Protestants carry enormous political weight. In fact, these
controversial actions are one of the greatest sources of sectarian tension and
violence today. The quantitative data will come from a two-wave survey of
randomly selected protest participants and non-participants, where each
respondent will be interviewed before and after the largest protests of 2013.
The qualitative data will come from in-depth interviews and careful observation
of protests. These data collection efforts build upon research conducted over
three months of recent fieldwork.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research synthesizes previously disparate
strands of research in sociology and political science to advance a novel theory
about the relationship between political collective action and collective
identity. Students of politics tend to study identities as a static collection
of individuals or a set of beliefs, but collective identities are a richer
phenomenon and can affect politics through other channels. This dissertation
will identify how and why one of these other aspects of collective identity--
cultural protest actions--matter politically. The focus on such actions will
also illuminate understudied dynamics of political collective action, such as
roles of emotional processes, symbols, and collective identities in motivating
participation.

Broader Impact: Anticipated research findings have the potential to improve the
management of divisive political conflicts. Evidence of cultural protest actions
being used to polarize groups can be found in divided societies throughout the
world, but the creation of effective policy solutions is hindered by a lack of
understanding about their dynamics. The findings of this research will be
distributed to members of civil society organizations in Northern Ireland, many
of whom have already expressed enthusiasm and interest in the project. The hope
is that providing community leaders and activists with comprehensive and
rigorous results will help them develop strategies that minimize the harmful
effects of protest while still allowing groups the right to cultural expression
that is inherent in, and necessary for, a robust democratic society.