* 1263132
* REU Site: Nebraska REU in Applied Math
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Richard Rebarber, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2016
* USD 285,263.00

This grant funds the Nebraska REU in Applied Mathematics, held at the University
of Nebraska in Lincoln, Nebraska, and run by the Department of Mathematics. The
PIs will offer projects during the summers of 2013, 2014 and 2015, and each
project will last for eight weeks. Most of the projects are interdisciplinary as
well as applied, and many incorporate computer exploration in order to gain
insight into mathematical problems. There is an emphasis on mathematical
biology, and the site will offer projects in herbivore-plant interactions,
population movement along a river, and dynamics in recurrent neural networks.
There will also be projects in differential equations, including discrete
fractional calculus on time scales, nonlocal models for elasticity and
diffusion, and finite element schemes for wave equations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students work in two teams of five undergraduates
each, along with one or two faculty mentors and one graduate student mentor.
Each group works together on one or more problems with a common theme. The main
goal is to give the students a complete research experience, with attention
given to defining good problems, solving problems and (in some projects) giving
rigorous proofs, writing mathematics, and presenting work with a talk and a
poster. This is achieved by using a structure carefully designed to make use of
the strengths of talented undergraduates while compensating for their relative
inexperience and limited background. The students meet with their mentors almost
every weekday, and spend significant additional time with their graduate student
mentors. Over the course of the eight weeks, the projects will gradually
transition from a focus on preparation to an exclusive focus on research to a
focus on preparing results for dissemination. Research, educational, and social
activities will combine to cultivate an environment that emphasizes interaction
and collaboration. The students document their work as a written report in
professional mathematics style as results are produced. In the final week of the
Site, the project teams devote the bulk of their energy to preparation of
results for dissemination, which includes a group talk presented to the larger
University of Nebraska-Lincoln mathematics community and a poster intended for
presentation at the Joint Mathematics Meetings the following January. REU
projects result in one or more conference presentations, and many also produce
papers published in undergraduate or professional journals.