* 1263357
* NSF REU in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Carol Gross, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 478,456.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to UCSF
that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2013- 2016. The program offers state of the art hands-on training in
the methods and logic of Molecular Biosciences with a goal of facilitating
successful transition to graduate research. Interdisciplinary faculty expertise
is drawn broadly from the fields of genetics/genomics; biochemistry;
cell/developmental biology; systems/synthetic biology and bioengineering. The
centerpiece of the program is an intensive research experience to learn modern
technologies and how to use them creatively to solve research problems. REU
students have access to a rich array of facilities for their research. Students
also participate in seminars and workshops including: responsible conduct in
research, professional communication skills, career opportunities in industry
and academia, and the graduate school application process. Additionally students
meet weekly in small groups with a teaching assistant to learn to communicate
science and digest the research experience. The program culminates with oral and
poster presentations. The program aims to increase the scientific workforce by
recruiting groups underrepresented in science including
minority/disadvantaged/disabled students, those from colleges with limited
research opportunities, and first in family to attend college. Recruiting
strategies include attendance at national meetings (SACNAS, ABRCMS), visits to
campuses in the California State University system, website information, and
mailings to universities across the country. Students are selected based on
academic record, research performance, and potential for outstanding research.
Letters from previous research mentors, including those of mentors from previous
summer programs are of particular importance. Students are tracked to determine
their continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths,
and the lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the
program will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool available to BIO-funded REU PIs. More information is available
by visiting http://graduate.ucsf.edu/content/summer-research-opportunities or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Carol Gross: cgrossucsf@gmail.com) or the co-PI (Dr. Hana
El Samad: Hana.El-Samad@ucsf.edu)