* 1263066
* REU Site in Applied Physics at the University of South Florida
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Sarath Witanachchi, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 12/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, funded by the Division of Materials
Research at the National Science Foundation (NSF), is aimed at advancing the
goals established by the previous REU site in Applied Physics at University of
South Florida. The primary goal of the proposed NSF REU site is to provide high
quality motivational research experiences in Applied Physics aimed at attracting
bright undergraduate students to enter this important area of research, and
continue their careers in Science and Engineering as graduate students. The
secondary goal is to expose some of the students involved in application-
oriented projects to innovative research that enables transformation of basic
research ideas into applications that are aimed at advancing current
technologies. Expectation is to inspire future scientist to become
entrepreneurs. The program is specifically designed for students from
predominantly undergraduate institutions who have had limited or no research
experience. Program offers research and professional development activities that
are built upon the urbane university setting, excellent infrastructure and
facilities for research, and the enthusiasm, experience, and commitment of our
faculty to provide a high-quality research experience for undergraduate
students. Students have the choice of acquiring their research experience with
15 faculty mentors in four thrust areas. In addition, their research experiences
will be enriched by several special professional development programs such as
weekly REU-wide seminar programs, a weekly lecture series in "Advances in
Applied Physics", and workshops to develop oral and communication skills. At the
end of the program they will present their work in a university wide REU
symposium. Students involved in application-oriented projects will learn the
steps involved in transforming basic research into commercial
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Applied Physics
is a diverse and interdisciplinary area that is critical to technological and
societal advances that affect our national competitiveness on the global level
and lead to improvements in the quality of human life. This REU site in Applied
Physics will strive to nurture the next generation of scientists and engineers
who will work in areas of critical importance such as energy, environment,
medicine, micro and nanoelectronics, information technologies, and other key
enabling technologies. Program aims to kindle the entrepreneurial spirit in some
students that may help to propagate American ingenuity. This program will
attract undergraduate students from predominantly undergraduate institutions who
may not have had a chance to be involved in research before. The adopted
recruitment strategy guarantees that this REU opportunity will be available to a
large percentage of groups that are underrepresented in science and engineering.