* 1263316
* Superconductor-Insulator Transitions of Ultra-thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 575,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This program will investigate
superconductor-insulator transitions (SITs) of ultrathin films of elements and
simple compounds. These transitions are the simplest examples of continuous
quantum phase transitions, which occur at zero temperature, when the ground
state of a system is changed in response to the variation of an external
parameter. Quantum phase transitions, which are macroscopic manifestations of
quantum mechanics, are studied through measurements of behaviors influenced by
quantum fluctuations that persist at low, but nonzero temperatures.
Investigations will include a study of the Nernst effect across the magnetic-
field-tuned transition, and measurements of the penetration depth in the
critical region with the goal of identifying the critical exponent of the order
parameter and the universality class. In addition, the electronic
compressibility near the critical point, which would be a thermodynamic
signature of the SI transition, and the dissipation-tuned-SI-transition will be
investigated. Electric double layer transistor configurations will be used to
modify the electronic and superconducting properties of FeSe films. The broader
impacts include training of graduate students in a traditional physics Ph.D.
program and providing a venue for useful and positive research experiences for
undergraduates. The work proposed will impact the understanding of known novel
superconductors and the search for new ones. The primary outreach activity will
be the teaching of freshman seminars by the PI on physics topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports investigations of the superconductor-insulator transitions of elements
and simple compounds. Superconductor-insulator transitions are among the
simplest quantum phase transitions, and they are especially fundamental because
of their connection to the Uncertainty Principle of quantum mechanics. Quantum
phase transitions are an important paradigm in contemporary condensed matter
science and understanding their nature is an important challenge in part because
of their role in high temperature superconductivity. Quantum phase transitions,
in contrast with conventional thermodynamic phase transitions, which are
controlled by temperature, and occur at nonzero temperature, are transitions,
which are controlled by external parameters such as magnetic field, pressure, or
charge density, and occur at absolute zero. They have measurable signatures at
low, but nonzero temperatures, which will be used to characterize them. The
study of superconductor-insulator transitions requires advanced tools of
experimental science such as nanofabrication, thin film growth, and ultra-low
temperature cryogenic measurement techniques. This project supports the training
of both Ph.D. and undergraduate students that is excellent preparation for a
scientific career. The primary outreach activity will be the teaching of
freshman seminars by the PI on contemporary physics topics.