* 1263006
* Search for Electron-Deficient Semiconducting Polymers to Rival Fullerenes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2017
* USD 512,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at synthesizing a
series of new electron deficient semiconducting polymers that can rival
fullerenes in electronic properties for applications in bulk heterojunction
polymer solar cells. This proposed work plans to establish the
structure/property relationship of these types of organic polymers through
structural design, synthesis, and physical studies. A series of new electron-
deficient monomers have been proposed, which allow the development of three
types of accepting polymers: 1. electron-deficient polymers with tetrahedron
atomic centers along the polymer backbone; 2. polymers that can chelate with
boron trifluoride to form charge transfer complexes; 3. polymers that exhibit
planar structures. Detailed structural and physical characterizations of these
polymers will be conducted. Standardized solar cell configuration will be used
as a platform to characterize the materials properties. This work will impact
basic polymer chemistry and organic electronics. Approaches to integrating this
work with educational efforts, especially in attracting underrepresented
students and industrial outreach, are also included.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To convert
solar energy into electricity, positive-negative charge-transporting junctions,
"p-n junctions", are needed in inorganic solar cells. Similarly, organic solar
cells require both p- and n-types of semiconducting materials. Much progress has
been made in recent years in developing p-type semiconducting polymers. However,
n-type materials used in organic solar cells rely mainly on expensive fullerene
(C60 or C70) derivatives. This project plans to develop electron-deficient
semiconducting polymers that rival or surpass the properties of fullerene
derivatives and to establish structure/property relationships of electron-
deficient polymers. The resulting polymers will be candidates to replace
expensive fullerenes. These materials could also find wide applications in
organic electronics. The fundamental chemistry developed will enrich our
understanding of the synthesis of electron accepting polymers and monomers. The
successful completion of this project will have impact in several areas, ranging
from basic polymer chemistry, molecular photophysics, materials science, and
renewable energy. The proposed work involves an interdisciplinary effort that
integrates chemistry, materials science, and molecular photophysics to explore
new science, thus offering a broad spectrum of research and educational
opportunities to students. Efforts to attract under-representative minority
students will be made. Students working in this program will be well prepared
for future opportunities in the area of organic/materials chemistry and organic
electronic materials. The new materials generated will have impact on
sustainable energy and the electronics industry.