* 1263250
* REU Site: Green Energy Technology for Undergraduates Program (GET UP!)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Evelyn Erenrich, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2016
* USD 367,890.00

This project is funded by the National Science Foundation, Division of
Engineering Education and Centers, under EEC-1263250.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the REU Site: Rutgers University Green Energy Technology for
Undergraduates Program (GET-UP) are to provide an enriching research experience,
engineering training and professional development to three cohorts of ten
sophomore or junior students for ten weeks in the summer. During this period of
time, the students will have opportunities for cross disciplinary exploration
through seminars in Engineering Ethics and Energy and Environmental Policy, and
tours to facilities that generate power or produce "green" devices. Students
will also participate in Industrial Spotlights where engineers and scientists
from local companies present on ongoing product and system research/development,
which will foster STEM research and industrial entrepreneurship. In addition,
students will have numerous opportunities for student-faculty interaction and
student-student communication; and support will be provided to students during
the academic year through continual education, e-mentoring and funding for
publication of papers and travel to conferences focused on energy related
topics. Students will be encouraged to maintain contact with their faculty
mentors throughout the year to complete writing and editing of technical papers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of GET-UP centers around three
thrusts: nanotechnology and materials, renewable and sustainable fuels, and
devices and energy management systems for energy generation, conversion and
storage. These are areas where Rutgers has a critical mass of faculty interest,
existing academic and physical infrastructure, and funding; as evidenced by our
IGERTs, K-12 programming, RET program, and research centers. This program
leverages Rutgers' existing infrastructure: Rutgers University Research
Experience for Teachers in Engineering (RU RET-E) in Green Technology program,
two Integrated Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERTs) programs;
IGERT: Nanotechnology for Clean Energy and IGERT: Renewable and Sustainable Fuel
Solutions for the 21st Century; and Research in Science and Engineering (RiSE)
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work are the
infusion of Green and Energy-Based Engineering and Environmental Policy and
Economics into four year and community colleges, via participation of their
students. All undergraduate students will be targeted, in particular, those who
may not have an opportunity to engage in undergraduate research, such as (but
not limited to) underrepresented minorities and women, students from two-year
colleges, and first-generation college and economically disadvantaged students.