* 1263987
* Collaborative Research: Nanofabricated multisite opto-electrical probes for optogenetic stimulation and neuronal recording applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Mo Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 310,960.00

1263987/1263785&lt;br/&gt;Li/Masmanidis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will advance both engineering, through innovative
use of nanofabrication techniques and device assembly schemes, and neuroscience,
through newly enabled lines of research in which very small groups of cells (~1
to 10) can be optogenetically manipulated and electrically recorded. In the
proof-of-concept study proposed here, the probes will be incorporated into the
co-PI?s behavioral experiments on the neural mechanisms of reinforcement
learning in the nucleus accumbens, an important brain area in the reward
processing pathway. Optogenetically tagged neurons will be activated or silenced
and recorded with the optoelectrodes during an associative reward learning task,
allowing their activity to be perturbed at specific epochs of learning. These
experiments will help both demonstrate the operation of the probes, and provide
new insight into how information about appetitive stimuli is dynamically encoded
in this brain area. The development of neural probes with unsurpassed photonic
and electronic capabilities will have broad impact on how optogenetics and
electrophysiology are incorporated into neuroscience
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The development of
neural probes with unsurpassed photonic and electronic capabilities will have
broad impact on how optogenetics and electrophysiology are incorporated into
neuroscience experiments. If the development strategy proposed here is
successful, the PIs will seek additional funding opportunities to mass-produce
these tools at commercial device foundries. This collaborative project will
provide a highly interdisciplinary environment for training of graduate students
and a postdoctoral scholar. Additionally, the two PIs will use existing
university programs to involve high school and undergraduate students in the
research effort.The investigators also plan curriculum enhancement as a direc
result of this work, and have a planned program of k-12 outreach there are
numerous additional educational components, including collaboration between
different institutions,a plan for device dissemination in the neuroscience
community, K-12 education and outreach and inclusion of high school students in
summer lab projects,undergraduate training and research opportunities, graduate
training, curriculum development, and interdisciplinary exchange.