* 1263075
* REU Site:  Collaborative Undergraduate Research in Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Sankaran Thayumanavan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by Professors
Justin T. Fermann and Sankaran Thayumanavan, both at the University of
Massachusetts- Amherst. The principal investigators will offer authentic
research opportunities in the area of Renewable Energy to 10 students per year.
Fourteen faculty members from five academic departments at UMass Amherst will
offer ten-week intensive research internships within their existing federally
supported research groups to perform original research on the science behind
next-generation renewable energy technologies. The Collaborative Undergraduate
Research in Energy (CURE) REU program trains students in the rigors of
individual investigation in the context of intellectual collaboration that is a
signature of work on scientific solutions to real societal challenges. Students
will work in pairs on separate aspects of one overall scientific question,
sharing their results and insight to compliment and reinforce each other's work.
Each student pair is mentored by two faculty members with active research
collaborations in the specific area and two near-peer mentors who guide the day-
to-day activities of the participants. Students will complete collaborative
proposal presentations, education and outreach projects, and manuscript writing
in different formats to provide training in communicating science to distinct
audiences. The research projects will address challenges in the development of
solar cells, fuel cells, and biomass energy technologies. Weekly seminar
discussions will provide a venue for cohort scientific development.

Recruitment of participants leverages programs that involve underrepresented
students, such as the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (LSAMP), the McNair Scholarship
Program, and institutions with the NSF's HBCU-UP Program. The Site will also
have dedicated partners in Lincoln University, the University of Puerto Rico
Mayaguez, Mount Holyoke College, Smith College, and the Northeast Alliance LSAMP
Program. These recruiting efforts have been successful at increasing the
participation and retention of historically underrepresented groups in research.
Participants will be tracked after completio of the program to evaluate the
impact of the REU experience on their later career steps. Dissemination of
student research is accomplished through the "Journal Challenge" manuscript
preparation in anticipation of eventual publication. Participants are trained in
public outreach through the creation and presentation of Outreach and Education
Project materials.