* 1264706
* Unraveling the Mechanisms of Facile Oxygen Reduction Reaction Promoted by Molten Carbonates: Implications for Low Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Kevin Huang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2017
* USD 260,685.00

ABSTRACT #1264706 Kevin Huang

The growing need for clean and sustainable energy has stimulated a global
imperative that demands new technologies for the way we produce and use energy.
The high-efficiency, low-emission and fuel-flexible solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC)
is a promising power generation technology to meet that demand. For solid oxide
fuel cells to become a commercial product, however, they must be made more
economical to operate and reliability must be improved to a level capable of
competing with the existing internal combustion engine technology. One of the
leading technical approaches toward that goal is to lower the operating
temperature window from the current 700-1000C to 500-700C or lower by
drastically improving the electrochemical performances of the electrodes,
particularly the cathode for oxygen reduction. Increasing the surface area of
the active cathode has been common research strategy for boosting cathode
performance, but often with the expense of high fabrication cost and poor
stability.

Other means to improve catalytic performance are under investigation. Professor
Kevin Huang of the University of South Carolina recently demonstrated that
molten carbonates (MCs) can significantly boost the rate of the oxygen reduction
reaction (ORR). Further, this unconventional catalyst appears to be simply
prepared with single-step fabrication. The National Science Foundation Catalysis
& Biocatalysis Program is making an award to fund Prof. Huang's project which is
aimed at understanding from a fundamental science perspective the mechanisms of
charge-transfer governing the MC-promoted ORR kinetics in SOFC cathodes operated
at <650C. The innovative approach to enhance ORR kinetics through the use of
molten carbonates may transform the conventional wisdom in understanding ORR
mechanisms and in developing new catalytic cathode materials, thus providing the
enabling technology for SOFCs to move toward commercialization. This has
significant potential for an energy strategy for the US.

The PI plans several educational and outreach activities to enhance the
understanding of SOFCs and the energy picture, and of the impact of this
research work. Undergraduate students including minority and underrepresented
groups will play an active role in this research through clearly identified,
focused research projects. A new course °Solid State Electrochemistry¡± will be
developed for the graduate students in the spring of 2015. The importance and
potential impact of ongoing scientific advances in the area of energy research
will be disseminated to the general public via an annual "Science Cafe" program
at the University of South Carolina. A joint summer workshop with Benedict
College, a historically black college, will be held in the summer of 2014 at the
University of South Carolina to promote education and workforce development in
the energy realm.