* 1264015
* Student and Junior Faculty Travel Support for Engineering Sustainability 2013: Innovation and the Triple Bottom Line, Pittsburgh, PA, April 7-9, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2013
* USD 30,720.00

1264015 (Beckman). Engineering Sustainability 2013 will bring together engineers
and scientists from academia, government, industry, and non-profits to share
results of cutting edge research and practice directed at development of
environmentally sustainable buildings and infrastructure, especially urban water
infrastructure. The conference is unique in its focus on environmentally
sustainable engineering for the urban environment, and its ability to bring
together engineers, architects, economists, and urban planners and managers.
Plenary presentations and concurrent oral and poster sessions will be organized
around the following themes: green building design and construction; greening
the indoor environment; sustainable distributed power for the built environment;
sustainable urban drinking water, stormwater, and wastewater infrastructure;
design of more sustainable transportation grids; using principles of
sustainability to foster innovation and new product development. There will also
be numerous planned opportunities for informal exchanges and networking. The
interdisciplinary presentations on cutting edge research in sustainable
engineering for the built environment and infrastructure, the mixture of
disciplines and backgrounds represented among the participants, and the
networking opportunities provided by the conference will enable participants to
leave the conference with new information and ideas about research needs and
opportunities. This will strengthen the ability of the participants to develop
novel and impactful proposals to organizations funding research in
sustainability science and engineering. The conference will further the public
interest in sustainable community infrastructure by advancing the state of
scientific knowledge of issues affecting human health and the environment. This
conference will also enhance interdisciplinary dialogue on environmental
sustainability research with cross-cutting applications in basic and applied
sciences and engineering.