* 1264024
* Multistage Separation of Cells using Hydrophobic Interactions Enabled by Temperature-Responsive Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Di Gao, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2017
* USD 299,999.00

1264024 Gao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to develop a
multistage cell separation technique to overcome selectivity problems caused by
non-specific interactions using temperature-sensitive polymers and multiple
temperature cycling. A simple and rapid method for separation of cells is to
functionalize magnetic particles (MNPs) with a receptor that selectively
captures the target and then remove the MNPs from the mixture by applying a
magnetic field. The efficiency of magnetic separation is typically limited by
the non-specific interaction between the MNPs and non-target species. To
overcome the inefficiencies caused by non-specific interactions in current
single-stage magnetic separation techniques, the PI aims to develop a multistage
cell separation technique that is analogous to multistage distillation. The key
idea is to allow the MNPs capture and release the target cells by manipulating
the hydrophobic interaction between the MNPs and the cells. This process will be
enabled by attaching temperature-responsive polymers to both the MNPs and the
target cells. Through temperature cycling, which triggers the reversible
hydrophilic-to-hydrophobic phase transition of the polymers, the target cells
can be reversibly captured and released by the MNPs (due to hydrophobic
interaction) at a higher efficiency than the non-target cells. The difference in
the capture-and-release efficiencies of target cells versus non-target cells in
a single cycle will be amplified by multiple separation stages. The hypothesis
is that a multistage separation process will be able to effectively circumvent
the problem caused by the non-specific interactions in the current single-stage
magnetic cell separation process. The PI will (i) construct a platform to
realize the proposed multistage cell separation scheme, (ii) test the hypothesis
that this scheme is able to overcome the inefficiencies caused by non-specific
interactions, and (iii) develop general principles for designing multistage cell
separation processes, guided modeling tools developed for multistage
distillation processes. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed technology may
find applications in medical diagnostics and therapeutics, environmental
monitoring, and homeland security. As part of the educational mission, this
project will integrate research and education by (i) providing training for
graduate and undergraduate students at the crossroads of chemical engineering,
materials and surface science, and biochemistry, (ii) developing new materials
for the multistage separation course in chemical engineering education,
highlighting possible innovations by applying established chemical engineering
principles to emerging fields, (iii) increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in research through established programs for recruitment
and retention of underrepresented students at the University of Pittsburgh, and
(iv) outreach to K-12 students through collaboration with Carnegie Science
Center in Pittsburgh.