* 1264940
* Collaborative Research: In situ Characterization of Methanol Oxidation Catalyzed by Copper-Based Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Guangwen Zhou, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2018
* USD 201,376.00

Catalysts are used in the manufacturing of more than 60% of all synthesized
chemicals and more than 90% of chemical industries use catalytic materials
world-wide, with an estimated combined impact on the global economy of over $10
trillion per year. Furthermore, catalysis is essential to chemistry where
reactants are efficiently converted to products while minimizing the production
of by-products that are environmentally harmful. Yet, technological advancements
in catalysis have frequently depended more on chemical intuition than
fundamentals. The recent emergence of ?nano-characterization tools? has
fundamentally changed this and is allowing the discovery of fundamental
principles of catalysis via detailed characterization of catalysts and its
correlation with their chemical reactivity. In a collaborative program between
the University of Pittsburgh, SUNY Binghamton, and Brookhaven National
Laboratory, PIs Judith Yang, Goetz Veser and Guangwen Zhou will use state-of-
the-art characterization tools including environmental transmission electron
microscopy, in situ scanning tunneling microscopy, and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, complemented with reactivity studies using a specially designed
spatially resolved microreactor in order to gain essential insights into
catalytic structure-reactivity relationships. The PIs will focus on copper-
containing catalysts, a class of catalysts with importance for existing and
emerging energy technologies, such as partial oxidation of methanol and the
water-gas-shift reaction. Experiments will be performed on simple model systems
including Cu single crystals and Cu oxides produced by controlled oxidation of
Cu surfaces in-situ. Correlations between the phases and surface and interface
structure of Cu-based catalysts and their catalytic activity will be identified.
The results will be compared with commercially available Cu/ZnO catalysts to
provide a commercial base-line for these fundamental studies. An important
global topic such as energy production requires not only advances in scientific
research, but trained people to aid in the transfer of these advances into
industrial practice. The partnership between two major universities and a
national laboratory will enrich the education of the students involved in this
program. Graduate students will be trained in materials physics/chemistry and
catalysis science and will learn about new microscopy, spectroscopy, kinetics
and modeling techniques as well as materials issues that are at the forefront of
current energy research. The training of graduate students in the broader area
of clean energy technology, as well a fundamental scientific discipline (e.g.,
catalytic kinetics, materials science, physics, etc.), will result in future
leaders that are better equipped to solve the complex energy and environmental
problems that face society. Results from this project will also be incorporated
into new graduate-level courses and high school outreach programs at both
Universities.