* 1264537
* Collaborative Proposal: Integrated Investigations of Isotope Fractionation in Magmatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Adam Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2014
* USD 106,675.00

Intellectual Merit. Significant variations in stable isotope ratios of several
non-traditional stable isotope (NTSI) systems have recently been observed in
igneous rocks. The origin of these variations remains largely unknown despite
the critical observation that the variations correlate with extent of
differentiation. At present, it is not possible to evaluate whether traditional
processes such as fractional crystallization may account for the observations,
because the fractionation factors among magmatic phases have not been
determined. The exciting new discovery that large isotopic fractionations occur
in melts held within a temperature gradient offers an alternative possible
explanation for the observed isotopic variations, but to fully assess this
mechanism requires further experimental investigation. The fractionation by
thermal diffusion appears to be so large that it may provide the basis for a
unique tool to discern the role of thermal-gradient-driven processes for
magmatic differentiation. This project represents a synergistic collaboration
involving four interrelated and complementary studies: 1) Characterize NTSI
fractionation in laboratory silicate Soret (fully molten) experiments. Soret
experiments will use both natural compositions and selected simple systems; 2)
Characterize major and trace element behavior and NTSI fractionation in thermal
migration (partially molten) experiments; these will focus on basalt to rhyolite
bulk compositions and also determine thermal diffusion fractionations for Mg, Si
and Fe; 3) Use molecular dynamics simulations of isotope fractionation within a
temperature gradient in the MgO-SiO2 system to investigate the physical basis
for the effects of thermal diffusion on NTSI fractionation; 4) Determine
equilibrium fractionation factors between melts, vapor and mineral phases for
Mg, Si and Fe using the three-isotope method. The proposed science plan brings
together four groups of researchers with complementary expertise. The team
connects diverse areas of petrology/geochemistry research from field petrology
to experimental petrology to molecular dynamics simulation. The project will
provide constraints on a first-order problem in igneous petrology, the origin of
NTSI fractionations in igneous rocks. It will provide further understanding of
the fundamental process of thermal diffusion and its strong mass dependence and
improve the NTSI tool for discerning the role of temperature gradients in magma
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will support
involvement of three graduate students, a postdoc and early career faculty
(UNLV) and a research scientist (UCD) in a complex project utilizing a broad
range of conceptual, analytical, experimental and simulation tools. Group
meetings and video conferencing will foster the collaboration and involve the
students and postdoc in all aspects of the study. Each PI expects to incorporate
the results of this study into regular teaching of petrology, geochemistry and
numerical modeling.