* 1264690
* GOALI: Application of an Innovative Anti-Biofilm Technology for Overcoming Biofouling on Water Purification Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2018
* Eva Garland, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2018
* USD 325,975.00

1264690 &lt;br/&gt;Coronell Nieto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves an
interdisciplinary university-industry partnership between UNC-Chapel Hill and
Agile Sciences, Inc. with the objective of: (1) developing innovative reverse
osmosis (RO)/nanofiltration (NF) membranes with enhanced anti-biofouling
properties, and (b) building a fundamental understanding of how targeted
incorporation of small molecules in the structure of RO/NF membranes affects
their physico-chemical properties and performance. The anti-biofouling behavior
of the proposed membranes is based on the incorporation of 2-aminoimidazole
(2AI) into the structure of the polyamide active layer of RO/NF membranes. 2AI
molecules are the only small non-toxic organic molecules that have been shown to
inhibit biofilm formation for a wide range of bacteria, and to retain their
anti-biofouling properties when attached to a surface. The 2AI molecules will be
incorporated both throughout the entire membrane active layer (bulk
incorporation) and only at the surface (surface incorporation). Once the 2AI
molecules are incorporated into the polyamide active layer, the extent and
location of incorporation will be varied systematically to build a fundamental
understanding of how targeted incorporation of 2AI small molecules in active
layers affects the active layer physico-chemical properties and membrane
performance. Equipped with this understanding, the PIs will optimize membranes
for anti-biofouling activity, fouling/scaling behavior, water flux and salt
rejection. The optimization process will use a series of screening performance
tests that will evaluate biofilm inhibition in static conditions, anti-
biofouling activity under accelerated biofouling conditions during membrane
filtration, conservation of anti-biofouling activity upon successive fouling-
cleaning cycles, and organic and colloidal fouling and scaling behavior. The
tests will use cross-flow membrane systems, bacterial solutions and natural
waters provided by treatment plants. In this project the PIs plan to develop the
first non-biocidal biofilm-inhibiting membranes that actively interfere with
bacterial signaling mechanisms that trigger biofilm formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The development of anti-biofouling water
filtration membranes based on 2AI molecules will help establish this new
chemistry as a viable approach to achieve anti-biofouling behavior. This
development will benefit all fields where antibiofouling surfaces are important
(e.g., medical implants, fuel cells, food processing, etc.). The fundamental
understanding of the effects that membrane modification with small molecules has
on membrane physico-chemical properties and performance will serve as valuable
information for membrane developers to accelerate development and optimization
cycles. The educational and outreach activities in collaboration with the Chapel
Hill High School, Institute for the Environment (Chapel Hill, NC), and Elizabeth
City State University (NC), a historically black university, will foster and
broaden the participation of women and minority students in engineering and
sciences and produce water-related educational materials for dissemination to
the broader education community. The PI also plans to disseminate information
regarding procedures based on time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry
(TOF-SIMS), Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) as useful methods in the study of the structure and
properties of RO/NF membrane active layers.