* 1264462
* Individualized Adaptive Robot-Mediated Intervention Architecture for Autism
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2017
* USD 312,753.00

PI: Sarkar, Nilanjan and Warren, Zachary&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1264462&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: A novel and transformative robotic
intervention technology, called ARIA&lt;br/&gt;(Adaptive Robot-mediated
Intervention Architecture), with the potential to accelerate social
communication skill development for young children with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) is proposed in this research. ARIA will fluidly integrate a
humanoid robot, multiple spatially distributed network of cameras, an array of
display monitors, as well as a complex but efficient computational face, gaze
and gesture detection methodology in order to create a highly flexible and
adaptive intelligent environment to potentially advance early joint attention
and imitation related skills for young children with ASD. Application of this
system will be examined across two user studies with well-defined samples of
young children with ASD to provide specific answers and direction to important
questions of generalization and potential impact of robotic
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
advances the design and development of intelligent adaptive robotic platforms to
offer a potentially transformative intervention application for young children
with ASD. The specific technological innovation proposed here has the potential
to significantly contribute to new non-invasive and closed-loop human-robot
interaction learning paradigms with potential broad extension to individuals
with a vast array of neurodevelopmental conditions and limiting sensory
vulnerabilities across the lifespan. From the perspective of the science and
technology of robotics, the project will contribute towards the design and
development of smart environments for learning, intelligent system architecture
for adaptive robotics as well as affective computing and control of dynamic
human-robot interaction. In particular, it has the potential to significantly
contribute towards developing novel efficient applications of computational
methods for affective computing, particularly affective computing mediated by
non-invasive gaze and attention processing. It will also contribute towards
closed loop gesture-based human-robot interaction by developing new
methodologies for gesture recognition and adaptive response from the robot. The
project will develop a framework and tools to design adaptive environments for
enhanced robotic and embodied social interaction that intelligently and fluidly
integrates real-time behavioral indices of attentive and gesture information
into flexible and controllable response systems. In short, the proposed activity
represents a system has the potential to fundamentally advance the engineering
knowledge of intelligent human-robotic interaction. This paradigm may also
potently impact our understanding of the science of ASD intervention itself. The
embedded user studies will test the potential efficacy of robotic intervention
on the earliest core symptoms of ASD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: With
the most recent Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) prevalence
estimates for children with ASD at 1 in 88, effective early identification and
treatment is often characterized as a public health emergency. The costs of ASD
are thought to be enormous across the lifespan, with recent individual
incremental lifetime cost projections exceeding $3.2 million and national cost
over $35 billion annually. The proposed research explicitly focuses on realizing
robotic intervention technologies with potential for improving early ASD related
impairments and could have significant beneficial impact on this population.
This research may further a technology that can enable all core components of
effective intervention at only a fraction of the cost of typical intervention
programs, while at the same time increasing the ability of the intervention
provider to systematically control and promote intervention related skills
targeting individual deficit. The educational activities will train and mentor
undergraduate and graduate students in the proposed research, and bring research
into classroom through several courses. The outreach activities will include
offering research opportunities to high school students, especially among groups
currently underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) fields, and providing high school teachers with research experience
during summer. The project offers a strong community connection through formal
dissemination to ASD family, clinical, and scientific communities.