* 1264801
* Probing the Molecular Structure and Dynamics of Spider Silk Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jeffery Yarger, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 440,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1264801 PI: Yarger, Jeffrey ORG: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Probing the Molecular Structure and
Dynamics of Spider Silk Proteins &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Spiders
produce a variety of proteins, which are pulled into silk fibers possessing
mechanical properties that can outperform other natural and synthetic fibers. A
full molecular level understanding of the physical properties of these fibers
has not yet been achieved. The fibers contain a complex set of secondary protein
structures and nanocrystalline domains. The PI will explore the molecular
structure and protein-protein dynamics of major and minor ampullate silk
proteins (dragline and web-building), cylindrical silk proteins (also named
tubuliform, used for egg case) and aciniform silk proteins (prey wrapping). The
ultimate goal is to establish relationships between structural features and
mechanical function in a variety of natural silk proteins from several different
spiders, including orb-weaving (Nephila and Argiope) and cobweaving (Latrodectus
hesperus) spiders. Elucidation of molecular structure will primarily be carried
out using multidimensional solid-state NMR (ssNMR) techniques. Use of 13C, 15N
and 1,2H isotopically enriched silks will allow 2D/3D carbon and nitrogen homo-
and heternuclear NMR experiments to determine extensive through-bond and
through-space correlations. These techniques, along with ultrafast magic angle
spinning (MAS) and advanced 1H homonuclear decoupling, should allow for complete
assignment of spider silk spectra and elucidate all secondary structure elements
in these biopolymers. Pair distribution functions (PDF) obtained from fiber
x-ray and neutron diffraction will further be developed to characterize the
nano-structures and short-range amorphous structures in oriented spider silk
fibers. The PI will also develop and use 2H/13C 2D NMR techniques to interrogate
molecular dynamics of spider silk proteins. Taken together, these studies should
produce an unprecedented level of detail regarding the molecular structure and
dynamics of natural spider silk fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:
Spiders produce various protein-based polymers that we call silk. Understanding
silk at a molecular level is critical to utilizing this material and reverse
engineering its properties. The ability to duplicate spider silk properties in
man-made protein-based materials is the key to using these high-performance
biopolymers in 'real-world' applications. A first step in this process is giving
engineers the molecular level detailed information about the structure and
dynamics in the natural material in order to reproduce this in recombinant or
synthetic constructs. The proposed project will develop new understandings into
the structural design of several natural spider silks. Accomplishment of the
objectives outlined above will provide new methodologies to determine protein
fiber structures and correlate these structures with mechanical properties as
well as provide broad training in molecular structure analysis to students.
These research projects will involve a student research team consisting of
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students. The research team will be
exposed to scientific research and instrumentation at both Arizona State
University and Argonne National Laboratory. The research group will also
participate in NSF sponsored K-12 teacher summer research programs and will
provide demonstrations of spider silk research to local area K-12 schools.
Specific emphasis will be placed on outreach to underrepresented Hispanic and
Native American schools and neighborhoods.