* 1264356
* Imaging the elastic properties of cells in 3D environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Roger Kamm, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

PI: Yun&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1264356&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims at characterizing both intracellular and extracellular mechanical
properties in 3D cell culture models using novel Brillouin optical microscopy.
The biomechanical interaction between cells and their local microenvironment is
a crucial regulator of cell function and system level behavior. Most of our
current knowledge concerning cell biomechanics came from the studies of 2D
monolayers. Although the importance of 3D models have been recognized, it has
been difficult to measure the biomechanical parameters, particularly the modulus
of elasticity, in 3D cultures. Current standard technologies, such as atomic
force microscopy and microrheology, require physical contact between a sample
and a probe or are limited to the analysis of few points randomly distributed
within a sample. This project will develop and validate Brillouin microscopy and
will be used to investigate the differences and similarities in cell mechanical
behavior between 3D and 2D microenvironments in various experimental settings
relevant to the natural environments in vivo. This study will provide new data-
inspired insights into how the dimensionality of cellular microenvironment
affects the cells and cell-matrix interactions, and in the process, it will make
a novel microscopy modality available in the field of cell biomechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves highly multidisciplinary
approaches integrating the cutting edge optical technology and cellular
biomechanics and, therefore, will advance both engineering and life sciences.
Brillouin cell microscopy is expected to have broader impacts on several
research areas, such as tissue engineering and cancer research, beyond cell
biomechanics and has the potential for commercialization. Furthermore, this
project provides an excellent opportunity to educate and train graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers at the interface between engineering and life
sciences in a highly interdisciplinary environment at Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Undergraduate students enrolled in the
Harvard-MIT Summer Institute for Biomedical Optics and other summer internship
programs will be given the opportunity to contribute to this project.