* 1264171
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Policy Tools and Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Sarah Binder, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/29/2016
* USD 5,490.00

American public policy today is characterized by indirect governance -- the
delivery of benefits to individuals and other entities through mechanisms such
as tax breaks or loan guarantees rather than direct payments. Existing
scholarship argues that citizens react to and evaluate indirect benefit programs
differently than they do traditional direct spending programs, even though they
may produce identical benefits. Still, scholars have yet to articulate and
rigorously test alternative theoretical accounts to explain why citizens
perceive these programs differently. Why would the mechanism of delivery shape
citizen perceptions of government programs? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the apparent public bias in favor of indirect programs, with an
explicit focus on citizens' perception of benefits delivered through the tax
code. It elaborates a series of hypotheses based on framing effects, and tests
them through a set of survey experiments that manipulate the delivery method and
other aspects of described public policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
meets NSF's intellectual merit criterion in several ways. First, it engages and
contributes to several relevant and emerging areas of political science, ranging
from American political economy to public opinion and policy analysis. Second,
the project is methodologically rigorous in that it uses an experimental design
to make reliable causal inferences, avoiding the pitfalls of omitted variable
bias that plague observational research designs. Third, the project is
innovative in the way that it employs this approach to rigorously test arguments
about variation in public perceptions of public policies. Fourth, the results of
several earlier pilot studies demonstrate the feasibility of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has significant broader impact
beyond academia. Citizens' understanding of and reactions to government policies
are central to any modern democracy, but we know surprisingly little about
exactly how these processes work. The findings of this project will be of
interest to both scholars of and practitioners in the policy process. Already,
several journalists, policy practitioners and others outside of the discipline
of political science have expressed interest in the preliminary findings of this
study, indicating its potential to contribute to public understanding of the
implications of policy design. Finally, given the current political momentum to
revise the nation's tax code, the delivery of policy through tax expenditures
has become a salient element of debates about tax reform. Understanding the
forces that shape citizen views about indirect government programs will shed
important light on the political feasibility and impact of potential tax
reforms.