* 1264624
* GARDE: FEASIBILITY AND USABILITY ASSESSMENT OF AN INTRAORAL INCONSPICUOUS CONTROL SURFACE
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Young Mi Choi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 269,435.00

PI: Ghovanloo Proposal Number: 1264624

The PI and his team have developed a wireless tongue-operated assistive
technology (AT), known as the Tongue Drive System (TDS). Clinical trials on
participants with tetraplegia using an external version of the TDS (eTDS), which
resembles a wireless headphone, have well established the functionality, ease of
use, and acceptability of the eTDS over traditional devices, such as Sip-n-puff.
However, mechanical stability of the eTDS is insufficient, and affects its
reliability and usability in uncontrolled daily life conditions. While it is
possible to firmly secure the eTDS on the user's head with stretchable traps and
buckles, the result may reduce the comfort level in long term usage and
negatively impact its appearance. An alternative solution is a highly
miniaturized intraoral version of the TDS (iTDS) in the form of a dental
retainer, which can be customized based on the user's oral anatomy and clasp
onto the user's teeth similar to an orthodontic brace. However, very little is
known about the feasibility, level of comfort, and usability of an intraoral
appliance to be used as a wireless tongue-operated control surface.

Intellectual Merit: The main objectives of the proposed research are: (A) Design
and development of a fully functional proof-of-concept iTDS prototype that can
be used in human subject trials, while solving key technical challenges. (B)
Qualitatively compare the eTDS and iTDS in terms of acceptability, level of
comfort, and potential interference with other activities such as speech and
ingestion using mockup oral appliances and headsets, interviews, and focus
groups involving potential end users with severe physical disabilities. (c)
Detailed quantitative assessment of the pros and cons of the intraoral approach
in comparison with the eTDS approach based on widely accepted performance
measures in the field of human-computer interfacing as well as reliability and
robustness against external interfering factors.

Broader Impacts: The number of people with disabilities is increasing among all
age groups, particularly the elderly who currently comprise 12% of the U.S.
population. Individuals severely disabled as a result of various causes from
spinal cord injuries to stroke, cerebral palsy, and ALS find it extremely
difficult to carry out everyday tasks without continuous help. We intend to
transform the lives of the most severely disabled individuals by helping them
live active, self-supportive, and productive lives. Paralysis is considered one
of the most expensive disabilities. Solutions such as the iTDS could help reduce
healthcare and assisted-living costs and increase the employability of people
with severe disabilities, allowing them to participate more fully in the
society, while relieving their family members or dedicated caregivers. iTDS can
even be used by able-bodied individuals, where motion of the limbs is hindered.