* 1264051
* Temperature dependent subcellular localization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Sheldon Park, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

1264051&lt;br/&gt;Park, Sheldon J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature sensitive
(ts) mutants are widely used in functional studies but are cumbersome to
generate, since a separate library screening is needed for each target protein.
Using high throughput yeast assays, we will engineer ts intein mutants that are
only active at a permissive temperature. By characterizing engineered intein
mutants, we will develop a mechanism based understanding of temperature
sensitivity. The engineered ts intein will be used to design a structurally
independent domain that can be genetically fused to a heterologous protein to
send it to different subcellular compartments in a temperature dependent manner.
Controlling the localization of a protein with temperature may be useful to
regulate their in vivo activity and generate useful conditional mutants. We will
demonstrate the design by targeting model transcription factors, rtTA and Gal4,
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in a temperature dependent manner, and show
that their transcriptional activities correlate with their nuclear targeting. We
will also show that the cytoplasmic kinase, Ste7, can be localized to different
cellular compartments using engineered inteins. The designed targeting module
will allow dynamic control of the localization, and hence the function, of
intracellular proteins using the growth temperature, and simplify the
engineering of new ts mutants based on simple cloning rather than library
screening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ts mutants are commonly used in research but
are difficult to engineer predictably. The physical basis of temperature
sensitivity is also not well understood. We will engineer ts intein mutants to
design a modular targeting domain that can be fused to a heterologous protein to
regulate its subcellular localization in a temperature dependent manner. Facile
construction of temperature sensitive conditional mutants will be useful for
studying protein function in vivo. The PI participates in a broad range of
initiatives at the department, school, and university levels to improve pre-
collegiate, undergraduate, and graduate education. The current grant will
support continued participation in these outreach programs, and provide
additional research opportunities to both K-12 and undergraduate students. There
will be new teaching materials developed based on the proposed experiments to
advance engineering education both in and out of the lab. By implementing the
described experiments, the students will learn essential synthetic biology based
on modular construction of biological components.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division
is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology.