* 1264703
* Collaborative Research: Block Copolymer Compatibilizers for Controlled Morphology and Interfacial Properties in Polymer-Fullerene Blends
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2016
* USD 232,006.00

The PIs have previously found that a hierarchical morphology of donor and
acceptor domains led to a high yield of electron transfer, enhanced exciton
dissociation, and a high power conversion efficiency (PCE). In this proposal,
they seek to combine theory and experiments in a coordinated approach to
manipulate the nanostructured hierarchical morphologies in a controlled manner
in order to quantify the influence of different morphological length scales on
the optoelectronic properties and the efficiencies of solar cells composed of a
semi-conducting donor and the fullerene acceptor system, PCBM. One way to ensure
increased contact between the donor and acceptor phases is to use block
copolymers (BCP), PTB7, as ?compatiblizers? to meld the two phases. Their
approach is to find what the ?design rules? are for OPVs by undertaking a
systematic combined experimental-theoretical investigation for designing
efficient compatibilizers in the context of OPV applications. Their general plan
is to synthesize PTB7 block copolymers, measure the รท-interaction parameter
between model polymer blocks, PTB7, and fullerene in thin film, multilayer
blends, then elucidate and correlate the thermodynamics and microstructures of
the BHJ blends to the morphology and optoelectronic properties of bulk
heterojunction photovoltaics with PTB7 block copolymer compatibilizers.