* 1264833
* Measuring the effect of mechanical forces on receptor signals through nanoscale AFM measurement of the cytoskeleton
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Manish Butte, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

PI: Manish J. Butte&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1264833&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that mechanical
forces upon the cytoskeleton regulate signals from cell-surface receptors. In T
cells it has been shown that exogenous mechanical forces in addition to ligation
of the T cell receptor seem to be required for the T cell to become activated.
In cancer cells, it is known that mechanical forces plus ligation of integrin
receptors by the extracellular matrix can lead to an invasive and proliferative
phenotype. How does force act as a cue to modify molecular signaling events?
Recent discoveries in my lab using biological Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
showed that naive T cells have a stiff cytoskeletal architecture, which softens
immediately upon TCR triggering, and that the facility with which the
cytoskeleton softens, mediated by kinases and tethering molecules, actually
controls the threshold for activation. This proposal seeks to test generally the
capability of cytoskeletal structures to modulate the signals of cell-surface
receptors, thus tying together the fields of mechanobiology and signaling. While
the cytoskeleton's important roles in cell motility and intracellular
trafficking are well characterized, its functional roles during receptor
signaling have been largely unexplored. The PI lab's results prompt to
investigate the role of mechanical forces at the cellular level, to study how
durable cytoskeletal structures control the activation or invasiveness of cells,
and at the single receptor level, to show how force upon the receptors modulates
its signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this program lies
in PI's unique ability to control and study the linkage between nanoscale forces
and receptor signaling. The ability to ligate receptors on live cells and
deliver forces by AFM, plus image simultaneously by spinning disk confocal
microscopy, is a unique and powerful capability of my lab. What will emerge will
be an improved understanding of how force signals are sensed, exerted, and
"stored" by cells. It is inferred from PI's findings in T cells that, generally,
loosening of cytoskeletal tethers controls the threshold of receptor signaling.
Cells may interpret mechanical forces to gate receptor signals as a way of
preventing inadvertent triggering (i.e., autoimmunity), or as a way of utilizing
inter-cellular forces that occur during certain developmental, embryonic
checkpoints as a trigger for proliferation and growth. "Storing" these receptor
set-points in the form of cytoskeletal structures may be more durable than, for
example, tyrosine phosphorylation or gene
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this work includes an
Educational Outreach Plan that proposes to develop tools to teach Nanoscale
Biology by direct experience. The PI has utilized the latest 3D printing
technology to print palm-sized cell models complete with nanoscale features.
These cell models can be held and touched to sample cellular features, and will
inspire interest in nanoscale science and biology. In conjunction with the
models, the investigators are developing a haptic interface that allows users to
experience "touching" the nanoscale features of cells when using a 3D joystick
and the AFM. It is proposed to share these cell models and haptic interfaces
with local classrooms and science museums, to inspire participants of all ages
to interact with the nanoscale features and dynamic movements of cells. Beyond
this educational impact, this project will help build a unique research group
with expertise in cellular biomechanics, enriching interdisciplinary group of
collaborators who are interested in applying the methods developed through this
work to their cells and their biological questions. The findings will be
disseminated though publications and the website, making the AFM techniques
developed accessible to students and researchers. Finally, the PI will
collaborate with Molecular Vista, a local AFM startup, and with Agilent
Technologies to build the mechanobiological insights into their AFM instruments.
This proposal addresses one of the National Academy of Engineering's Grand
Challenges: to engineer the tools of biological scientific discovery.