* 1264216
* I-Corps:  Roadmap to Commercialization for Electric Field Encephalography
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Srinivas Sridhar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The I-Corps team is developing an electric field measurement technology for
brain signal monitoring. This technology is a system of measuring and analyzing
the electric fields generated by the brain arising from intrinsic activity or
external stimuli. It is comprised of a system of high density array of sensors,
accompanied by electronics and signal processing algorithms. This technique used
through this technology has several advantages over current modalities,
Electroencephalography (measuring the electric potential on the scalp) and
Magneto-encephalography (measuring the magnetic field). This technology has
higher spatial resolution, is unaffected by stray magnetic fields, does not
cryogenic equipment and improves source reconstruction precision. Technologies
developed through this project have the potential to provide new information for
understanding brain activity and obtaining clues to a variety of neurological
disorders.

The technology developed through this project is a new brain signal measurement
system for researchers and clinicians, which would be cost-effective and fully
portable/mobile. The ability to measure bioelectric brain signals at high
spatial resolution and in a user-friendly manner may lead to new civilian and
military applications. Some of the immediate areas of impact of this technology
could include: Functional brain imaging at high temporal and spatial resolution,
pattern recognition, cognition; insights into neural correlates of vision and
speech; again, sleep, epilepsy and mental health research and applications;
military applications of traumatic brain injury, war-fighter performance
assessment and enhancement and; human-machine and brain-computer interfaces.