* 1264599
* Zeolite Nanosheet on Hydrogen Permeable Membrane: Coupling Catalysis  with Hydrogen Removal in Non-oxidative Direct Methane Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Eric Wachsman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 260,500.00

1264599 &lt;br/&gt;Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The non-oxidative direct methane
conversion (NDMC) to more valuable and easily transportable chemicals and fuels
has remained a grand challenge due to the intrinsic kinetic and thermodynamic
constraints. A recent report by the US Energy Information Administration
envisions inexpensive and abundant natural gas as a raw material that can
significantly impact the chemical and energy supplies of the world. A membrane
reactor composed of a metal/zeolite (Mo/ZSM5) catalyst and a hydrogen (H2)
permeable membrane has the potential to overcome these kinetic and thermodynamic
barriers. The essential feature of the membrane reactor is that Mo species
within spatially constrained ZSM5 channels containing Broensted acid sites
activate methane to form carbon chains while concurrently restricting the carbon
chain length; the H2 permeable membrane continuously removes H2 product to
increase conversion relative to feed equilibrium limitations. The key objective
of this research is to fabricate and describe novel tubular membrane reactors
composed of ZSM5 lamellar catalysts and thin H2 permeable ceramic membranes. A
focus of the research is controlling the ZSM5 crystal size by assembly of ZSM5
nanosheets and ceramic membranes to optimize methane (CH4) reaction kinetics and
H2 separation in NDMC. Preliminary data show that activity of Mo/ZSM5 and H2
permeation through the ceramic membrane depends strongly on the ZSM5 crystal
size and membrane thickness, respectively. A cross-disciplinary strategy will be
used to control NDMC and create new and potentially transformative ways of
converting reactant methane gas to high value-added fuels and chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of efficient NDMC
membrane reactors may lead to new thermochemical processes to meet the demand
for high-energy density fuels from methane gas. The project integrates research
on zeolite chemistry, solid state ioincs, chemical catalysis, and separation
processes with an education and outreach component designed to highlight the
importance of chemical engineering relevant to energy conversion. Education will
be enhanced by developing a new course based upon PIs' research interests in
materials, catalysis, separation, and energy, by recruiting and mentoring
undergraduate students from underrepresented communities in research activities,
and by outreach programs for K-12 students near the University of Maryland.