* 1264146
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling and Space Weather Using the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies (MACCS)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2017
* USD 428,949.00

This project consists of two activities. The first will continue the operation
and data distribution of observations from the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and
Cleft Studies (MACCS). The second is a research program using the MACCS data
along with SuperDARN radar, the Relocatable Atmospheric Observatory in Resolute
Bay, nominally conjugate stations in the Antarctic and GPS TEC receivers at two
of the MACCS sites. Data from the AMPERE satellites also will be used. The
proposal identifies four topics: * Performing detailed studies of dayside high-
latitude ULF waves and transient events, using multi-instrument ground-based and
satellite data. * Providing observational and theoretical support for the
recently-launched Radiation Belt Storm Probes mission by investigating the role
of ULF waves in energizing or depleting radiation belt electrons during magnetic
storms, in part using the recently developed ULF index. * Investigating the
high-latitude field-aligned current structures associated with both transient
events and steady convection, using magnetic field and GPS TEC data along with
global data from the AMPERE project. * Using the combination of MACCS data with
simultaneous data from both low-orbiting and high-orbiting satellites to
separate spatial and temporal variations in magnetospheric and ionospheric
processes, and carrying out theoretical and modeling studies of the excitation
and propagation of ULF waves through the global magnetosphere-ionosphere system.
This study will use the BATS-R-US global magnetohydrodynamic simulation code.

The MAACS data are freely distributed to the entire science community.