* 1264508
* Collaborative Research: Stepwise Functionalization and Surface Modification for ZnO Nanostructure-based Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Yicheng Lu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 220,000.00

1264508(Lu) The goal of the proposed research is to perform in-depth scientific
understanding of surface and interface chemistry of nanostructured ZnO and MgZnO
and biomolecules in order to design and develop the innovative surface
functionalization at the molecular level to enable a new generation of
biosensors with ultra-high sensitivity and selectivity, and multi-modal
operation. This multidisciplinary research will include MOCVD growth of ZnO and
MgZnO nanostructures with controlled dimension and morphology, design and
experiments of chemical binding of molecular linker layers, comprehensive
characterization of the ZnO/organic molecule interfaces, and implementation of
the functionalization technology for sensing applications. The main approach
includes (i) synthesis of highly ordered ZnO and MgZnO nanostructures with
controlled dimension, morphologies, and surface wettability; (ii) Study of the
photophysical and chemical properties between these nanostructures and the
molecular linker layers designed by using the probe chromophores to achieve
unprecedented understanding of the interfacial chemistry, and (iii)
Implementation of the interfacial chemistry to design and develop the surface
functionalization technology for application in the ZnO nanostructure-based
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General public statement:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study how molecules important in sensor development, for example
antibodies or enzymes, may be immobilized on nanomaterials. Ensuring that
biomolecules function well after immobilization is critical to the successful
development of biosensors and this proposal will develop new immobilization
strategies.