* 1264861
* An Integrated Systems Engineering Approach to the Modeling of Cellular Dynamics and Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Thomas Jeffries, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2018
* USD 412,000.00

PI: Wang, Jin &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Auburn University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1264861&lt;br/&gt;Title: An Integrated Systems Engineering Approach to
the Modeling of Cellular&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics and
Bioreactors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the inherent complex regulation
mechanisms of living organisms, the modeling and control of bioreactors present
unique challenges to control engineers. The key to addressing this challenge is
to obtain a model that can adequately describe the dynamics of cellular
metabolism. The PIs plan to use Scheffersomyces stipitis as the model system to
answer the following engineering and scientific questions:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Engineering question: how to effectively model the dynamics of cellular
metabolism and then the dynamics of the bioreactor?&lt;br/&gt;2. Scientific
question: what are the regulatory mechanisms that govern the transition of S.
stipitis from aerobic growth to anaerobic fermentation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
answer the first question, they propose a computational framework named flux
balance analysis guided dynamic programming (FBA-DP) to model the dynamics of
cellular metabolism. Complementary to the computational component is an
experimental component, where new equipment and experimental procedures have
been developed to obtain dynamic process information required by the
computational component. To answer the second question, the time course
transcriptome measurements will be obtained using next-generation sequencing
technology through a continuing collaboration with Prof. Thomas W. Jeffries
(UW?Madison). Through the collaboration with Prof. Q. Peter He (Tuskegee Univ.),
the dynamic in silico fluxome details with the in vivo trancriptome data via
novel multivariate approaches to elucidate the cellular regulatory mechanisms
will be integrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits:&lt;br/&gt;o By
integrating the optimal control theory with flux balance analysis, the FBA-DP
framework should be able to provide genome-wide intracellular details of the
dynamic cellular metabolism without requiring in vivo enzyme kinetics
information; &lt;br/&gt;o This project will produce the first ever data set of
the time course transcriptome data on S. stipites during the transition from
aerobic to anaerobic condition. Such time course data are highly desirable for
researchers who are interested in elucidating the dynamics of the gene
regulatory network; &lt;br/&gt;o By integrating time course in silico fluxome
information with in vivo transcriptome information, the PIs will be able to
obtain knowledge on the dynamics of various regulatory mechanisms that govern
the cellular transition of S. stipitis from aerobic growth to anaerobic
fermentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;o This framework
can be applied to study cellular metabolism of various microorganisms and other
living cells, such as cancer cells, as soon as their metabolic network models
are made available.&lt;br/&gt;o The discovered knowledge on cellular regulation
mechanisms will provide valuable insights on why S. stipitis, like most other
yeasts and fungi, cannot grow anaerobically, which is an unsolved fundamental
biological question. In addition, such knowledge will enable significant
advancement in metabolic engineering for new strain development.&lt;br/&gt;o
Because of the bioreactor?s wide applicability, this modeling approach has the
potential to not only improve manufacturing in a wide range of industries, such
as biofuels, biochemical, food and pharmaceutical industries, and but also to
improving the nation?s energy security and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;o This
research promotes education of engineers and scientists for bioengineering and
biotechnology at both graduate and undergraduate levels. In addition, the
projects will actively involve minorities and give them research experience in
biotechnology and renewable energy areas.