* 1264840
* Doped-nanocrystal/graphene hybrid structure for noble metal-free photocatalytic hydrogen production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Hae-Kwon Jeong, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

In typical semiconductor-based photocatalysis to produce hydrogen, noble metal
co-catalysts, typically Pt or Pd, are often used to enhance the efficiency of
charge carrier separation and transfer that are essential for the function of
catalyst. This noble metal component makes the economics of the overall system
untenable. Many approaches have been investigated to reduce the dependence on
noble metals. In this award from the National Science Foundation Catalysis &amp;
Biocatalysis Program, Profs. Dong Hee Son and Hae-Kwon Jeong of Texas A&amp;M
University propose a new and more economical strategy based on unique material
combinations and properties. The proposed research aims to greatly enhance
hydrogen production efficiency of semiconductor-based photocatalysts by
exploring the synergistic effect of transition metal doping of the semiconductor
catalyst combined with the formation of a hybrid structure with reduced graphene
oxide (RGO). The role played by the costly noble metal co-catalyst will be
replaced by abundant transition metal dopant ions (e.g., Mn or Cu), which were
recently shown to extend the electron lifetime in semiconductors and thus
enhancing the efficiency of charge separation and transfer. The combination of
the doped nanocrystals with RGO offers the advantage of a more efficient
photocatalytic reduction reaction, facilitated by the RGO functioning as the
large-area electrode. The investigative team will develop the correlation of the
structure of nanocrystal/RGO hybrid photocatalysts with the efficiencies of key
steps of photocatalytic reduction (i.e., charge separation, charge transfer) and
the overall hydrogen production efficiency, leading to an optimized structure of
the catalyst for hydrogen production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the proposed research will focus on the development of
experiments for undergraduate research as a part of training the participants in
a NSF-REU program and in undergraduate research classes. These experiences will
lead to the development of a transportable experiment kit that will be used on
site at local high schools, with training of local high school teachers through
a RET Program. This will be designed as a new component of the university-wide
outreach effort, exploiting the dissemination mechanisms that are already in
place at Texas A&amp;M.