* 1264098
* The Atlantic Water Boundary Current in the Eastern Arctic: Composition, Transport, Variability and Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Robert Pickart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,133,301.00

This project will use moored velocity and hydrographic time series to quantify
the input of the warm Atlantic Water emanating from Fram Strait into the Arctic
Ocean and determine the dynamics of the flow that lead to exchange with interior
waters. This is made possible through collaboration with scientists from five
international research institutions (known collectively as the ATWAIN project)
who will contribute moorings and provide the ship time. Together, 9 moorings
will be deployed across the Atlantic Water boundary current for a full year in a
configuration that will resolve the relevant dynamical scales of the current.
Four of the moorings will be provided by the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI), and five by ATWAIN. The array will be deployed and recovered
using a Norwegian ice-strengthened vessel. The funds to fabricate all of the
moorings and the technician time to deploy and recover them have already been
obtained through a combination of private sources (for the WHOI moorings) and
foreign funding agencies (for the ATWAIN moorings). In this proposal the PI is
seeking support for (i) participation on the recovery cruise by the PI and a
shipboard technician; (ii) processing of the mooring data and shipboard
hydrographic/velocity data; (iii) scientific analysis of the resulting
observational data in conjunction with the foreign collaborators; (iv) a
graduate student to work on the project; and (v) an outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow and modification of warm Atlantic Water
within the Arctic Ocean contributes to the waters that form the Meridional
Overturning Circulation, sometimes known as the ocean conveyor belt, that is a
major aspect of the global climate system. This project will significantly
enhance our understanding of the time and space varying processes contributing
to that modification.