* 1264195
* Understanding the Response of the Austral Jet Stream to Changes in Greenhouse Gases and Stratospheric Ozone
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Edwin Gerber, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 04/30/2017
* USD 506,695.00

The first goal of this research is to assess and attribute the response of the
Southern Hemisphere jet stream to anthropogenic forcing in comprehensive climate
models in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). The
Principal Investigator (PI) suggests a simple method to partition the impact of
ozone and greenhouse gas induced changes on the jet stream will be sugg. It will
allow to better quantify uncertainty in climate projections, separating
differences in the thermal response to greenhouse gases and ozone from
differences in the sensitivity of the jet stream to changes in atmospheric
temperature. Analysis of CMIP5 models to previous generation climate models from
the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 3 (CMIP3) and Chemistry Climate
Model Validation Activity 2 (CCMVal2) will be undertaken to assess the impact of
model improvements on climate projection.

The second goal of this research is to understand the mechanism(s) causing
changes in the jet stream, using a series of controlled experiments with an
idealized general circulation model. Preliminary analysis of CMIP3 and CCMVal2
models suggests that the jet is sensitive to the temperature gradient in the
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, so that the response is similar when
the tropics are warmed or the high latitudes are cooled. This hints at a common
mechanism behind greenhouse gas and ozone induced changes. In addition,
stratospheric ozone induced changes have a strong seasonal footprint. The PI
will explore interactions between the background seasonal cycle in the
stratosphere and troposphere with a seasonally localized ozone-like forcing.
Observed trends in the midlatitude circulation of the atmosphere are stronger in
the Southern Hemisphere summer than in other seasons (or in the Northern
Hemisphere), due to the combined effect of greenhouse gases and ozone. This has
had significant impacts on precipitation throughout the Southern Hemisphere,
even the tropics. Thus this project will increase our understanding of how
changes in model configuration, e.g. representation of the stratosphere, impact
a model's response.

This research will involve a graduate student and postdoctoral scientist,
providing opportunity for their development as a research scientists.