* 1264807
* Engineering Proteins for Reabsorption in the Renal Proximal Tubule
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Casim Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 307,320.00

1264807&lt;br/&gt;Lazzara, Matthew J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clearance of
proteins from plasma by the kidneys constitutes one of the most significant
pathways leading to reduced bioavailability of protein-based therapeutics. The
loss of such proteins via the renal system is greatest for proteins which are
not efficiently retained by the filtration apparatus of the glomerular capillary
wall and which are not efficiently reabsorbed from the primary urine within the
proximal tubule. While some protein-based therapeutics have been engineered for
reduced renal clearance by covalent modification or fusion to bulky inert
proteins, such modifications may alter therapeutic availability to intended
target tissues. The investigators propose to identify minimal epitopes within
albumin that trigger the efficient proximal tubule reabsorption of this abundant
plasma protein through cognate transport receptors expressed in the proximal
epithelium and to use this information to engineer generic peptides that can be
fused to any therapeutic protein to reduce its renal clearance by causing its
intact reabsorption. The experimental aims will leverage tools within the
investigators? laboratories to engineer proteins, analyze protein interactions
with cells and receptors, and measure intracellular protein trafficking
processes. The computational aim will leverage mass transport and kinetic
modeling approaches to create a quantitative framework for predicting how
changes to protein binding and endocytosis will improve therapeutic
bioavailability and how to optimally engineer proteins. In addition, this
project will have broader impact through integrated educational programs in
which the science behind the research objectives will be disseminated to
students and teachers in multiple educational
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein-based therapeutics are becoming
increasingly common due to their exquisite biological functions and
specificities. The investigators? work will have broad implications for
enhancing therapeutic protein efficacy. Indeed, the successful engineering of
the intact reabsorption of model proteins will enable the application of this
technology to any protein-based therapeutic and create a fundamentally new
modularity for protein-based drugs. This has potential for tremendous societal
impact through enhancement of therapeutic efficacy and patient treatment
regimens, as well as reduction in the financial burden associated with
production and administration of protein-based drugs.