* 1264782
* A Brain Centered Neuroengineering Approach for Motor Recovery after Stroke: Combined rTMS and BCI Training
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 321,360.00

PI: Bin He&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 1264782&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview: The
long-term goal of the proposed project is to develop a novel brain-based
neuroengineering approach to substantially improve motor recovery after stroke.
Stroke is a sudden and devastating disease that arises from the occlusion of the
cerebral vasculature. The estimated cost of stroke in the U.S. in 2008 is 34.3
billion dollars. The chronic nature of the disease creates a lasting impact in
terms of disease burden on the health care system, and can result in decades of
lost wages affecting both patients and their families. Among the manifestations
of stroke with the highest functional impact on patient quality of life are
those resulting in motor impairment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
develop a brain-based strategy for motor recovery after stroke, rather than
motor function based, by means of a novel neuroengineering approach combining
brain-computer interface (BCI) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS). The central hypothesis is that, in comparison to traditional standard-
of-care physical therapy, subjects receiving supplementary rTMS and BCI training
will show greater functional improvement in hand motor ability over time as well
as recovery of normal motor connectivity patterns. Novel engineering methods
will be developed to accomplish the proposed goal. Aim 1. To evaluate the
effects of BCI training on the process of motor recovery after stroke. The
working hypothesis for this aim is that subjects receiving BCI training will
demonstrate greater motor improvements than control subjects receiving standard-
of-care therapy only. Aim 2. To investigate combined rTMS, applied in an
inhibitory fashion to the contralesional hemisphere, with subsequent BCI
training. The hypothesis for this aim is that subjects receiving this combined
approach will show greater improvements in motor function than both subjects
receiving BCI training alone and control subjects receiving standard-of-care
therapy only. Aim 3. To investigate the neural correlates of motor recovery
after stroke by performing EEG/fMRI neuroimaging and effective connectivity
analysis. This aim will allow for objectively and quantitatively assessing motor
recovery following BCI and BCI/rTMS protocols in addition to clinical motor
function assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The proposed
project represents a novel neuroengineering approach to improve motor recovery
after stroke by integrating neural interfacing and modulation. These proposed
aims will lead to development of novel neuroengineering techniques and a better
understanding of mechanisms associated with neural plasticity and motor
functions. In particular, the proposed research will develop a novel virtual
reality based BCI for stroke patients, novel methods for analyzing EEG spatio-
temporal distributions following rTMS, and novel methods for multimodal
identification of the neural correlates of motor recovery after stroke, rather
than relying on motor output alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: a)
Societal: The proposed research addresses a significant problem in
neuroengineering to translate basic BCI research to potential clinical
applications, aiding numerous patients with stroke. b) Enhancement of
infrastructure for research and education: The proposed project is an integral
part of the neural engineering initiative at the University of Minnesota. The
proposed project will provide unique opportunities for interdisciplinary
training of graduate students, as well as undergraduate students at the
University of Minnesota and local high school students. Special attention will
be paid to recruiting minority and female students into the project. c)
Knowledge dissemination: The findings will be disseminated widely via scholarly
publications, and to the scientific community and public.