* 1264963
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Measurement and Predictive Modeling of Adsorbate Coverage and Compositional Effects on Catalytic Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Christopher Wolverton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2017
* USD 198,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous, solid catalysts are widely used to
promote desirable chemical reactions. One very common example is the automotive
catalytic converter, which catalyzes the chemical conversion of the
environmentally hazardous components of engine exhaust into benign products. The
?active? catalysts in the catalytic converter contain expensive precious metals,
like platinum, palladium, and rhodium as the active metal sites. Other processes
critical to society, like the production of ammonia for fertilizer or of
gasoline for fuel, all depend on catalysts to promote the key chemical
reactions. In many of these cases the available catalysts are expensive, perform
less than perfectly, or seriously degrade in performance over time. Further,
there are many reactions for which good catalysts are simply unknown.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most cases, heterogeneous catalytic reactions happen at
the surface of the catalyst. This interface has traditionally been studied under
ultra-high vacuum, where it is relatively easy to tease out the various chemical
events. Quantum mechanical, density functional theory (DFT), molecular models
are well suited to studying these interfaces and processes in the high vacuum
limit. There remains however a gap between these traditional approaches and the
real conditions of catalytic interest. It is now well understood that at
operating conditions, a catalyst surface is often crowded with lots of molecules
and that these molecules can even cause the catalyst surface to change shape or
chemical form. To understand and improve heterogeneous catalysts, one must study
and model them at these more realistic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Science Foundation Catalysis &amp; Biocatalysis Program is awarding
three researchers, Professors William Schneider and Franklin Tao of Notre Dame
University and Christopher Wolverton of Northwestern University to
collaboratively tackle the high-pressure challenge through a combination of
advanced computer models and ambient pressure experiments. By combining the
expertise of Schneider at Notre Dame in molecular-level modeling of catalytic
reactions with the expertise of Wolverton at Northwestern in multi-scale cluster
expansion models, tools will be developed to predict the behavior of a metal
surface under reaction conditions. The tools will be developed and validated
initially against the ambient pressure experiments of Tao at Notre Dame. The
workers will study in particular the reactions of CO and NO at platinum and
rhodium surfaces, reactions relevant to environmental protection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will be exposed to an interdisciplinary,
multi-institutional collaborative research program which will lead to cross-
fertilization of ideas. Three graduate students advised by the principle
investigators will work together on the theory and experiments. The models will
be disseminated to the catalyst community, and have the potential to advance
both the application of existing catalysts and discovery of design principles
for new ones.