* 1264896
* Design of Catalytic Membrane Reactors for Biomass Hydrolysis and Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2017
* USD 300,062.00

PI: Qian, Xianghong and S. Ranil Wickramasinghe Institution: University of
Arkansas Proposal Number: 1264896 Title: Design of Catalytic Membrane Reactor
for Biomass Hydrolysis and Separation

The overall objective of this project is to develop a catalytic membrane reactor
for biomass conversion that results in high yields of sugar at low cost. Most
liquid phase processing technologies for production of biofuels start with
monomer sugars (glucose, fructose, xylose, etc.) from biomass fractionation. The
current paradigm uses corrosive, dilute sulfuric acid for pretreatment to
hydrolyze hemicelluloses. Relatively expensive enzymes are used to break down
cellulose. Current technology gives low sugar yields at high cost. The PIs will
overcome these problems by designing sulfuric acid and enzyme replacement
catalysts that operate at a higher conversion rate than the analogous natural
enzymes and that cost far less to produce. The PIs aim to develop reusable,
environmentally friendly catalysts for conversion of hemicelluloses and
cellulose in one step in an aqueous, mixed water and ionic liquid (IL) solvent.
Sugar yields will be improved by immediate separation of hydrolyzed monomer
sugars thus minimizing degradation. The appropriate choice of the membrane and
its pore size will allow permeation of an aqueous monomeric sugar stream and
retention of the IL for reuse.

This project is multidisciplinary in nature, encompassing catalyst synthesis via
surface modification, product separation and computational chemistry. Low cost
conversion of biomass to produce high yields of sugar will be achieved via the
following approaches: o Application of combinatorial methods to the
computational design of enzyme replacement catalysts for cellulose and
hemicellulose hydrolysis to monomer sugars. o Grafting computationally designed
nanostructures from porous inorganic membrane surfaces in order to build a
catalytic membrane reactor for simultaneous hydrolysis and sugar separation.

Intellectual Merit: Solid-acid catalysts made of two neighboring polymeric
nanostructures will be designed and synthesized. A polystyrene sulfonic acid
(PSSA)-based nanostructure will be immobilized on inorganic membrane surfaces
and used to catalyze biomass hydrolysis. A neighboring polymeric ionic liquid
(PIL) nanostructure will help solubilize cellulose and enhance the catalytic
activity. The solubilized monomer sugars will then be extracted from the
reaction media through the pores of the membrane. The acidity and binding
affinity of a PSSA polymer nanostructure can be tuned by ring substitution
and/or copolymerization. Completion of the research will result in a catalytic
membrane reactor for simultaneous hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicellulose that
maximizes sugar yields. Advances in materials science will include new surface
modification methods for grafting complex customized nanostructures from
membrane surfaces.

Broader Impacts: Development of biofuels from cellulosic biomass as a
replacement for fossil fuels could have important societal impacts: biofuels are
renewable and sustainable energy sources; using biofuels can help minimize
emissions of greenhouse gases to the environment. The research is
multidisciplinary, leading to education and training opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students. International collaboration with University
of Duisburg-Essen in Germany will provide international experiences for the
students working on this project. Outreach activities that promote science and
engineering to underrepresented minorities are an integral part of the these
activities. The research and educational results will be disseminated widely in
peer-reviewed journals. This work will result in the training of a new skilled
work force in an to meet the challenges in moving from a fossil fuel dominated
refinery industry to a future biorefinery industry.