* 1264184
* Lung Microvascular Development During Dynamic Mechanical Deformation in Matrix Bioblocks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2016
* David Gracias, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2016
* USD 326,155.00

PI: Lewis H Romer&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1264184&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Tissue morphogenesis
is directed by the interplay of mechanical and biochemical signals in the
complex weave of three-dimensional extracellular matrix. This proposal addresses
the combinatorial mechanisms of matrix mechanochemical coupling in the specific
context of a developing tissue that is essential for mammalian life--the lung
microvasculature. This project seeks to apply soft-matter microfabrication
methodologies to develop a dynamic mechanical testing platform and use it to
investigate the impact of mechanical deformation on the vital steps in matrix
assembly and vasculogenesis. i.e. bioblocks, or three-dimensional matrix
constructs of different shapes and sizes will be produced by growing lung
fibroblasts within microstructured PDMS wells and studied during static
conditions or periodic stresses, with and without fluid flow in those materials.
It is expected to systematically construct a body of knowledge on the effect of
mechanical forces such as amplitude, frequency, matrix stiffness and flow on
tissue organization and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research planned
represents a significant advance for biomedical engineering and developmental
biology by providing a platform in which the dynamic mechanical forces exerted
on three dimensional (3D) tissue-specific matrix can be accurately controlled so
that the downstream consequences of mechanical perturbations can be measured as
cell signaling and morphogenesis endpoints. The proposed research will provide
new fundamental insights into mechanisms of mechanochemical coupling during
tissue morphogenesis. In the first aim, precisely structured 3D synthetic
bioblocks will be used to engineer and study the geometry and signaling of human
fetal lung fibroblasts. Bioblocks with growing or decellularized natural
matrices will be subjected to patterns of dynamic stretch that recapitulate
fetal breathing in the second aim. The third aim will focus on endothelial
signaling and morphogenesis in this dynamic 3D matrix. Together, these
investigations will elucidate the developmental impact of mechanical deformation
on matrix and blood vessels. This project is catalyzed by interdisciplinary
synergy: PI Romer has made major contributions to the fields of matrix biology,
cytoskeletal signaling, and cell adhesion, while PI Gracias has considerable
expertise in the micropatterning of soft materials and microfluidic systems. The
transformative features of the proposal involve the study of tissue
morphogenesis in a platform that accurately mimics the 3D dynamic in vivo
environment. These features are enabled by the integration of microstructured
recesses coupled with surface modifications, patterned anisotropy, dynamic
mechanical testing and microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;Systematic dissection of the complex relationships between the
mechanical and chemical stimuli that direct tissue growth and development will
lead to a new body of knowledge in a number of fields ranging from developmental
biology to quorum sensing. This project will solidify the collaboration of two
outstanding science educators, enabling students to learn how to apply
engineering tools to important problems in biology and medicine. PI Romer's work
in graduate science education is exemplified by curriculum development and
actuation in research ethics and molecular mechanisms of pathophysiologic
processes. His website that offers free downloads of novel tools for the study
of cell traction forces demonstrates his commitment to sharing the fruits of
scientific investigation. In 2007, PI Gracias was awarded an education
accomplishment citation from the Maryland State Board of Education (given by
state senator Ulysses Currie) for K-12 outreach efforts. If this proposal is
funded, it will further our efforts to expose undergraduates, K-12 students and
the general public to frontiers of biology and engineering.