* 1264958
* Collaborative Research: Transport and Separation through Virus-Structured Nanoporous Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Matthew McCarthy, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 01/31/2017
* USD 240,301.00

McCarthy/Maroo 1264949 / 1264958

The objective of the proposed collaborative research is to investigate transport
and separation phenomena through the protein channel of the tobacco mosaic virus
(TMV) using an integrated research methodology combining molecular analysis and
simulations along with direct experimental characterization. The TMV is a rigid,
hollow, rod-shaped plant virus with a 4-nm diameter central pore defined by 2130
helical coat proteins wrapped around a single strand of RNA. It is an extremely
stable bio-molecule, withstanding temperatures of up to 60 degrees C and a pH
range of 2 to 11. The surface of the central pore is negatively charged, making
it attractive for ion exclusion. The outer surface of the TMV has been
genetically modified to facilitate near-vertical assembly and metallization onto
various materials. This feature provides a mechanism to develop virus-structured
membranes using large-scale industrially relevant manufacturing schemes. Due to
its stability, structure, surface charge, and manufacturability, the TMV can
potentially transform membrane manufacture for biological and chemical
separations. This collaborative research project will bring together the
expertise of one PI (Maroo) in molecular dynamics simulations and numerical
modeling with a second PI (McCarthy) in TMV biotemplating and nanoscale
fabrication. The project will focus on the following numerical and experimental
investigations: (1) Determination of the surfaces properties of the TMV central
pore, (2) Numerical and molecular modeling of overlapping electric double
layers, (3) Molecular dynamics simulations of transport and ionic exclusion
through the TMV central pore, (4) Fabrication of virus-structured nanoporous
membranes using the self-assembly of the TMV, (5) Experimental characterization
of transport phenomena through the TMV membranes, and (6) Experimental
characterization of separation through the TMV including size and ionic
exclusion. The synergy of these two components (numerical and experimental) will
result in a comprehensive understanding of transport and separation through the
TMV and demonstrate the potential of TMV-structured membranes for water
filtration and chemical and biological separations. The advantages of utilizing
biological building blocks in nano-engineered systems include low cost,
structural versatility, inherent self-assembly properties, and the ability to
tune structure through genetic modifications and environmental control. The
knowledge base gained in this work will act as a catalyst for future development
in the field of separations and the nanomanufacturing of bio-derived membranes.
Broader Impacts. This work will build on the PI's existing participation in
Drexel's NSF-funded GK-12 program on the NAE's Grand Challenges (focusing on
water desalination) and Syracuse University's Project Engage where the PI holds
workshops on modern engineering solutions for K-12 female students. Outreach
will extend to pre-college students, particularly those from underrepresented
groups in the Philadelphia metropolitan and Syracuse areas and will focus on
exposing undergraduates, women, and minorities to multidisciplinary research
through integrated research-education initiatives. Undergraduate students at
both Drexel and Syracuse will be recruited for research opportunities and
participation in the Workshops on Nanoscale Transport through Protein Channels
developed by the PIs in the proposed work.