* 1264504
* Collaborative Research: 3D Gaze Control for Assistive Robots
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Carl Nelson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2016
* USD 101,331.00

PI: Zhang, Xiaoli and Nelson, Carl A. Proposal Number: 1264496 & 1264504

The objective of this research is to develop a novel 3D gaze control system to
intuitively connect elderly or disabled people with robotic assistants. The
communication will take place through a 3D gaze as the robot control signal. We
will focus on basic Activities of Daily Living, including retrieving an object
to the user, and moving an object from one place to another, which enable the
individual to live independently. Tasks include: (1) a study of 3D gaze
estimation based on eye modeling and simulation with experimental data; (2)
investigation and development of a 3D gaze control framework to enable the
target selection relative to real-world, everyday objects on which assistive
tasks are performed; (3) establishment of a gaze control platform for testing
and evaluating the proposed 3D gaze control model with a wide range of assistive
robot applications.

Intellectual Merit: The project investigates a novel 3D gaze control concept for
robotic assistants with the goal of increasing the level of independence for
motor impaired people due to diseases or senescence. The research also proposes
a novel gaze control model which uses gaze-extracted features to guide a robot
for object identification and operation, achieving simple and natural human-
robot interaction. Finally, the project seeks to develop a novel 3D gaze
estimation system to ensure accuracy and reliability, which is currently not
well explored. This project seeks to provide solutions for a wide spectrum of
robotic assistive applications.

Broader Impacts: By introducing 3D gaze as the control signal into communication
between elderly or disabled people and robotic assistants, the broader impacts
of this project are to build a simple and natural control interface to motor
impaired people and increase the level of living independence. Persons with
disabilities, especially students with disabilities at Wilkes University, will
be actively involved in the development of the proposed work including feedback
in the form of interviews, surveys, and participation in testing and evaluating
the working system. Results, outcomes, software tools, benchmarks, and
educational materials will be disseminated through a project web site, as well
as through journal and conference publications. A new course on assistive
robotic technology is being developed and taught at Wilkes University.