* 1264886
* Participant Travel for Workshop on Advanced Power Plant Cooling at the ASME IMECE 2012 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Srinivas Garimella, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 03/31/2014
* USD 11,638.00

Proposal: 1264886 PI: Garimella

This workshop proposal will bring together experts in power plant cooling to
address a critical issue, that of using clean water in condensers and cooling
towers in power plants. The awareness of limited clean water supply has raised
focus on this issue since a significant fraction of the water is used in power
generation industry. This is part of the Energy-Water nexus issue that has been
brought to the forefront recently.

The workshop will include a review of the state of the art in current
technology, operating conditions and requirements, related emerging technologies
being developed for other industries, and the advances needed in these areas.
Leading experts from industry and academia will present these reviews. This will
be followed by breakout sessions in selected topics to discuss and identify high
impact directions. It is anticipated that a roadmap for future work in cooling
technology will come from this workshop.

A motivation for pursuing research in this area is "the increased concern
regarding the availability of water and the impact of the cooling water
consumption and withdrawal on the environment." The current cooling technology
uses condensers that utilize either once-through cooling (where water extracted
from a large body such as the sea or lake is used), or cooling towers, or air-
cooling to condense the steam discharge from the turbine. The workshop will help
identify technologies and challenges towards reducing water consumption in
energy generation.