* 1264289
* Engineering an Efficient Electron Pathway for Photosynthetic Hydrogen Production
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* James Swartz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1264289 &lt;br/&gt;Swartz, James R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this program is to engineer self-replicating bacterial systems to efficiently
absorb sunlight and use the energy to split water and produce hydrogen. This
crucial subproject is designed to provide fundamental insights required for the
design of electron transfer pathways generally as well as the engineering and
evolution of a specific photosynthetic hydrogen-producing pathway. The project
will develop and apply methods that enable the evolution of a fusion protein
that docks at photosystem I on a thylakoid membrane. The fusion protein will
also be engineered and evolved to efficiently transfer electrons from the
photosystem to an [FeFe] hydrogenase. The specific aims include (i)development
of a high-throughput in vitro screen for hydrogen production driven by
photosynthesis; (ii)engineering of a ferredoxin-hydrogenase fusion enzyme that
produces hydrogen by coupling to photosystem I and (iii) the characterization of
the productivity and oxygen sensitivity of the engineered photosynthetic
hydrogen production system. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are significant both
for training and technological applications. It will teach collaboration,
teamwork and communication skills to a diverse group of students including
minorities. The broader application of the principles revealed by this program
could reshape the energy and chemical industries and help to provide a
sustainable global socio-economic system.