* 1264047
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Feasibility Research and Demonstration Preparation for Third-Party Localization Toolkits
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Xinwen Fu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers have developed various ground and aerial localization toolkits for
surveillance and rescue tasks. Unlike most existing work focusing on self-
positioning or localization initialized by positioning infrastructures, these
toolkits target applications in which a third party responds to a request and
conducts an on-demand task of localizing mobile targets without (or with) the
help of existing infrastructures. The application domains include public safety,
network forensics, and network management. The toolkits can cope with various
complicated positioning environments including indoor and outdoor scenes from
ground to air and cater to emerging cyber space crime scene investigations for
law enforcement. The four third party localization toolkits include a mini
helicopter-based aerial wireless kit, a handheld locator based on SmartPhones, a
search and rescue robot and a three-dimensional localization and locking
antennae toolkit. Localization via received signal strength (RSS) time series by
a third party can be challenging due to the multipath effect and the lack of a
large scale infrastructure. Researchers are able use the portability of their
localization toolkits and make measurements at multiple locations to improve
localization accuracy. These toolkits have the potential to fill an important
gap in localization for scenes where no positioning infrastructure is
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to localize mobile targets without
the help of existing positioning infrastructures is needed by a wide variety of
search and rescue tasks performed by corporations, governments, and security
agencies. Those tasks can be law enforcement searching for missing victims or
criminals committing crimes via wireless networks, and various rescue teams
including park rangers searching for lost travelers and hikers. Network managers
can use these toolkits to pinpoint rogue access points, and malfunctioned mobile
devices. Impacts of this project may also extend to academia and education. The
market studies conducted in the project may enhance scientific and technological
understanding of the localization problems with portable devices.