* 1264039
* International Collaborative Research: Desalination for Global Water Resources Using Biofouling-Resistant Nanocomposite Membranes
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Isabel Escobar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 32,998.00

1264039 1264001 1264103 Summary of Proposal: This project is to support a
collaborative research including Dr. Isabel Escobar, University of Toledo, Dr.
Tequila Harris, Georgia Tech. and Dr. Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
in collaboration with Dr. Muna Abu-Dalo, Jordan University of Science and
Technology (JUST), and Dr. Elham El-Zanati, Egyptian National Research Center
(ENRC), Egypt. They will address the mitigation of membrane biofouling, due to
rejected chemicals and microbes, by impregnating the solutions with
nanoparticles. With the rapid growth and development of populations around the
world, and the inherent need for clean water, it is imperative to treat
brackish- and sea-water sources. The two leading desalination technologies are
thermal and membrane technologies, specifically reverse osmosis (RO).
Nanofiltration (NF) is used for the removal of other substances from water
source, and also commonly used for the desalination of water. While both RO and
NF can produce potable water, RO removes a large majority of solutes, which
leaves the permeate water void of essential nutrients (e.g. calcium, magnesium
ions) and placing the nutrient levels below that of the required World Health
Organization standards. Thus nutrients must be added (i.e. reminerailization) to
bring the water back to the standard levels for drinking water. NF methods, on
the other hand, remove fewer solutes, and may avoid the need to remineralize the
water. Thus, it is a more desirable technology for developing nations. This
collaborative research will address this process and will elucidate the
mitigation of biofouling, through comprehensive experimental analyses and
testing. Most of the research and development in the area of biofouling
prevention has focused on pretreatment of the feed water, improved cleaning
solutions and cleaning procedures. The international team will develop
biofouling-resistant (BRN) nanocomposite membranes, loaded with copper or silver
nanoparticles, from synthesis to macro scale production. Dr Abu-Dalo and Dr. El-
Zanati will characterize the water conditions, Dr. Craver and Dr. Escobar will
develop and characterize the proposed membranes, Dr. Harris will fabricate them,
and Dr. Dalo and Dr. El-Zanati will test the membranes, and conduct the
analysis, in harsh brackish water environments.

Intellectual merit: Biofouling is an important problem in water treatment when
using membranes. The PIs plan to develop novel bio-fouling resistant membranes
(BRM) loaded with copper and silver ions, and to study the mechanisms of bio-
fouling as well as those that cause defects in polymer composite membranes. They
will test harsh seawaters and study the membrane performance. The US and
international PIs have complementary experiences in membrane development or
testing, and water quality testing and analysis. There is a mechanism to move
from the lab to larger scale testing but there are a few important questions
that need to be resolved first before heading to scale-up. The PIs will develop
initial results and collaborative interactions to enable them to submit a full
proposal. This represents a "high risk-high reward" project. Broader impacts:
This activity is to develop copper and silver doped membranes to test on variety
of seawaters in Egypt and Jordan. The results from this work could have global
impact and relevance. The proposed BRM will aid in wastewater clean-up in the
US, as well as being used to treat brackish water and seawater, globally. The
project will fund 3 graduate students from the U.S. to spend up to 2 months in
Egypt and Jordan conducting research. The activity can create opportunities for
international collaborations in several areas such as research on membrane
technologies, desalination and water/wastewater treatment. The research has
potential for far outreach and to develop new information in bio-fouling
mechanisms and membrane defect mechanisms. It is likely that this project will
lead to the preparation and submission of full joint research proposals to NSF,
journal publications, and development of preliminary data for a patentable
membrane that could have significant long-term impact on water supply and the
membrane industry. The scientists, all women, developed this proposal at a NSF
sponsored meeting that was intended to foster collaboration amongst women
faculty in the sciences and engineering.