* 1264608
* Engineering Resonance Energy Transfer for Advanced Immunoassays
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Ignacy Gryczynski, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 12/31/2017
* USD 308,493.00

1264608&lt;br/&gt;Gryczynski, Ignacy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abtsract:
The goal of this proposal is to develop a method for the measurement of
intramolecular distances within a range of 100-200 Å, which is not currently
achievable with conventional optical microscopy. The overall idea is to use a
Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)with multiple acceptors. From our
simulations and preliminary measurements we determined that the proposed
multiple acceptor systems will provide energy transfer efficiencies that allow
precise estimations of site-to-site distances of well over 100 Å. Using these
systems, it was possible to reveal precise donor-to-horde of acceptors distances
for systems with a DNA-avidin. We plan to apply both steady-state and time-
resolved fluorescence techniques to further increase the accuracy of site-to-
site distance measurements. Additionally, molecular/cellular Fluorescence
Lifetime Imaging Microscopy (FLIM) and Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy(FCS) will be utilized. These methods are particularly useful in
applications using extremely low concentrations of substrates and detected
analytes. In order to predict and analyze the data for long FRET measurements,
theoretical models will be developed. First, for a quick data analysis, a simple
model will be established assuming a random distribution of acceptors on a
sphere and a single donor. This will be followed by a Monte Carlo Simulations
(MCS) based model to predict the intensity decays of the donor and acceptor for
various numbers and distributions of interacting fluorophores. As a primary
application of the long FRET strategy we propose developing an immunoassay for a
celiac disease. This bioassay requires detection of site-to-site distances
longer than 100 Å. A method allowing for easy, non invasive detection of this
sickness has the potential to eliminate significant, unnecessary pain for a
great many individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General Abstract: The goal of this
proposal is to develop more sensitive biosensors that work based on appearance
of fluorescence upon binding of the target molecules. Such biosensors are often
based on the fluorescence phenomenon where presence of two fluorophores cause
quenching of signal and separation of these fluorophores causes for signal to
come on. This proposal will develop a better fluorescence based system for
biosensor development.