* 1264927
* Collaborative Research in Biophotonics: Implantable sensor for brain blood flow mapping
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Ioannis Kymissis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 306,049.00

1264927/1264948 Kymissis/Ma

This program will develop a new platform for biophotonics using thin film
organic semiconductor materials capable of generating and detecting light in a
thin, flexible form factor. The proposed architecture overcomes both the
limitations of previously demonstrated implantable systems, as well as the
challenges (environmental stability and device cross-coupling) traditionally
associated with thin film systems. They will build a series of blood flow
monitors using flexible organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic
photodetectors (OPDs) to map both oxygenation and total hemoglobin in the brain,
increasing in size, scale, and complexity as the program progresses. They will
demonstrate the functionality and stability of the systems using both simulated
condition testing and implanted devices. This platform applies OLED technology,
which has had a significant impact in displays, to build a transformative light
source for biological research that is capable of implantation in nearly any
configuration and can be used to image reflectance and fluorescence over large
areas for extended periods of time. This thin, flexible platform can bring this
new perspective and capability to a broad class of imaging, optogenetic,
fluorescence measurement, and other biophotonic applications.

This award is co-funded by the IDBR program (Instrument Development for
Biological Research) in the BIO Directorate, and Biophotonics program in the
Engineering Directorate.