* 1264399
* Collaborative Research: Carbon-Nanotube-Coated Copper Wires for High Frequency Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2017
* USD 170,550.00

The goal of this collaborative research project is to address the grand
challenge caused by the skin and proximity effects in high-frequency
applications. The objective of this project is to develop copper wires coated
with copper-decorated carbon nanotubes to achieve reduced energy loss and
overheating in electrical and electronic devices. The research approaches
include realization of copper-decorated carbon nanotubes on textured copper
wires to reduce the inter-tube impedance of carbon-nanotube films, uniformly
aligning carbon nanotubes on copper wires using a simple mechanical wiping
method, understanding the mechanism of reduced skin and proximity effects in
carbon-nanotube-coated copper wires, and reducing the energy loss and
overheating using the carbon-nanotube-coated copper wires.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
significant outcomes, including controllable, aligned coating of carbon
nanotubes on copper wires, fabricating robust CNT films through mechanical
wiping, and carbon-nanotube-coated copper wires of high electrical and thermal
conductivities for high-frequency applications. This research will impact all
societal levels by revolutionizing the performance of copper wires in a wide
range of applications. Practically, the proposed method is expected to provide a
novel approach to reduce energy loss and heat generation in high-frequency
applications. The research results will also contribute to productivity
improvement, energy savings, and environmental protection in related industries
that rely on high-frequency electrical signals and powers. Graduate and
undergraduate students will benefit through involvement in the research and
classroom instruction. The engagement of K-12 students and teachers in this
project will also establish new partnerships between the universities and K-12
schools.