* 1264246
* Using Single-Cell Data to Decipher Mechanisms of NF-kB-chromatin-mediated HIV Transcriptional Regulation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Kathryn Miller-Jensen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 311,838.00

1264246&lt;br/&gt;Miller-Jensen, Kathryn &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetically
identical cells can display significant phenotypic heterogeneity as a result of
random fluctuations (noise) in gene expression, which is modulated by
transcription factor binding and chromatin modifications at each gene promoter.
The interaction of chromatin and transcription factors is especially evident
among mammalian retroviruses, such as the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV),
which integrate semi-randomly into the genome of their host's DNA and depend on
host regulatory factors to initiate viral gene expression and complete
replication. In the case of HIV, noisy viral gene expression results in
transcriptional delays that may be a precursor for latent infections. Latent HIV
currently prevents complete eradication of the virus in a patient, and reversing
viral latency via activation of the latent HIV reservoir is a promising
therapeutic strategy. However, an incomplete understanding of the complex
mechanisms underlying chromatin- and transcription factor-mediated regulation of
HIV hinders progress. To address this knowledge gap, the proposed project
integrates experimental and computational approaches to study how the canonical
transcription factor NF-kB and the local chromatin environment at the viral
integration site together regulate activation of the latent HIV LTR promoter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inability to target and purge latent (i.e., silent)
HIV-infected cells is currently the biggest obstacle to a cure, and this
proposal seeks to address this significant public health problem. By integrating
single-cell experiments and computational modeling, this research will improve
understanding of how protein-DNA interactions called chromatin regulate HIV-1
transcription, and will further progress towards eradication of the latent viral
reservoir. This work may also advance knowledge of mechanisms of chromatin-
mediated transcriptional regulation more broadly, with the potential to impact
immunology, development, and cancer. In addition, two educational initiatives
are proposed to broaden participation of under-represented minority engineering
students in interdisciplinary research through summer research fellowships; and
to contribute to transformative teaching approaches at the interface of the
biological and physical sciences through design of a new discussion session for
an interdisciplinary graduate course.