* 1264322
* Highly Controllable Self-cleaving Tags for Biopharmaceutical Research and Manufacturing Purification Platforms
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* David Wood, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

1264322 &lt;br/&gt;Wood, David W. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Biotechnology,
Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program award will support the development
of hyper-controllable self-cleaving inteins. Inteins are self-cleaving protein
elements with many applications in medical research and biotechnology. Most
central to this work is the use of inteins to generate self-cleaving affinity
tags, which enable rapid and simple purification platform methods for arbitrary
recombinant target proteins. The development of these inteins will employ
rational protein engineering approaches and evolutionary methods with a powerful
new genetic screen. In particular, the rational engineering approach will
involve the insertion of a designed allosteric metal binding site into the
intein structure, which will allow the intein cleaving reaction to be controlled
by low levels of metal ion. The evolutionary methods will involve a combination
of yeast surface display, rational mutant library design, and flow assisted cell
sorting to identify mutant inteins with optimized temperature and pH activity
profiles. The highly controllable cleaving inteins generated and optimized via
these methods will then be demonstrated in a variety of protein expression
systems with a range of conventional affinity purification
tags.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to rapidly and reliably purify
recombinant proteins is critical for biopharmaceutical development and
manufacturing, as well as for pure biological and medical research. One way to
approach this problem is through the use of self-cleaving affinity tags. These
tags act as 'molecular hooks' to simplify the purification of a given target
protein, and then remove themselves once the purification is complete. For a
variety of technical reasons, however, existing self-cleaving tag methods have
been largely limited to simple proteins expressed in bacterial systems. This
work will develop a next-generation self-cleaving intein, which can be applied
to the development of very simple and highly reliable protein purification
methods for any expression host. In particular, the proposed inteins will allow
self-cleaving affinity tag methods to be applied in mammalian and other
eukaryotic expression systems, where premature cleaving by existing inteins has
made this impractical in the past. Because these hosts are critical for the
production of complex human glycoproteins, these inteins are expected to
accelerate biopharmaceutical research, and may ultimately decrease the
manufacturing costs of these critical drugs. In addition, this work will provide
an excellent training opportunity for students interested in biotechnology,
biopharmaceuticals and medicine, and will be used as a platform for stimulating
interest and expertise in these areas among high school students and
undergraduates.