* 1264321
* Using Assistive Device Design to Implement Corner Stone Project Based Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Wendy Reffeor, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 135,046.00

Proposal Number: 1264321&lt;br/&gt;PI: Reffeor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop, disseminate and assess a cornerstone
design learning strategy while teaching engineering students skills in
developing specialized assistive devices for children with physical and mental
disabilities. For this project cornerstone design is defined as comprehensive,
project-based design education between the first year introduction classes and
capstone design experiences that take place in the senior year. Projects will be
implemented in the first and second semesters of the junior year as well as the
first semester of the senior year. The prototypes and design documentation
produced in previous classes will serve as design input for subsequent classes.
However, each class will be required to interview users, care givers and
physical therapists to refine the project specifications and to gain personal
experience with the problems facing the users. Students will build a prototype
of all or part of the required device in each course. Student teams in each
course will give midterm and final presentations to professors and project
stakeholders in order to solicit feedback on design alternatives under
considerations and prototypes produced. The advantages of this approach include
the delivery of a more refined and robust device to the user, student gain
experience with preparing and working with design documentation and students
will work through design iterations, a key component of complex design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Traditionally engineering
design has been taught at the beginning and end of the engineering curriculum.
First year students receive an introduction to design and senior students
participate in capstone design classes. This project endeavors to develop a
novel strategy of linking three existing courses to teach design skills to
students to better prepare them for their capstone experience and their
subsequent careers. In addition, students and faculty will work with users of
assistive technology, caregivers and physical therapists to advance the field of
assistive technology. The three course sequence allows teams to tackle difficult
problems and develop innovative solutions because the time required iterations
is built into the strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ultimate
goal of the project is to disseminate the results of the project and to
facilitate other institutions in modifying and adopting the cornerstone design
strategy to increase the pool engineers skilled in solving complex design
problems. These well prepared engineers will use their skills in companies or as
entrepreneurs to sustainably grow the economy.