* 1264306
* Collaborative Research: Establishing baselines for nearshore marine ecosystems by examining sea otter trophic variation over 5,000 years of climatic and anthropogenic change
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Nicole Misarti, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2016
* USD 268,716.00

Intellectual Merit: The PIs will utilize natural stable isotopes of carbon,
nitrogen and oxygen to define the trophic position of sea otters and how it has
varied from pre-historic (5000BP) to historic (last 300 years) times in the
Kodiak and eastern Aleutian regions of Alaska. Stable isotope data from known
prey species in each area will be analyzed to construct an isotopic food web to
compare with changes in sea otter bone isotope ratios over time. Prehistoric
data will come from faunal remains in middens. Oxygen and carbon stable isotope
data from archaeological and modern shells and paleo-proxy data from marine
sediment cores will be used to evaluate changes in environment that may have
affected nearshore ecosystems. These data will be used to evaluate mechanistic
explanations for the dramatic recent changes in sea otter trophic position and
abundance. One of the extant populations that will be studied is declining,
while the other is doing well. Understanding the mechanisms behind these
divergent modern trajectories is of fundamental ecological as well as management
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this
project are founded in interdisciplinary research, conservation and management.
This will be the first single-system, multiple-geographic, comparison of
isotopic records of a keystone species that spans thousands of years. This study
will promote interdisciplinary research, collaboration, and education across two
universities, a museum, and local schools. Included in this project is an
outreach program devised in conjunction with the local museum to provide youth
education, participation in an ongoing lecture series for adults, and
information on the project and results for the museum's library, which is
accessed by both&lt;br/&gt;locals and visitors. Lastly, results of this study
will benefit the long-term conservation and management of sea otters, nearshore
marine ecosystems, and fisheries.