* 1264506
* Understanding and Controlling Viral Membrane Fusion Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Eric Boder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2017
* USD 320,000.00

1264506 &lt;br/&gt;Boder, Eric &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enveloped viruses (those
surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane,) are covered with numerous copies of a
unique molecular machine, the envelope fusion protein, that is responsible for
targeting the virus to a specific cell, sensing the appropriate environment for
infection, and efficiently transporting the viral genetic payload across the
barrier of the target cell membrane -- the key functions in all forms of
delivery. The investigators recently discovered a novel intermolecular
communication phenomenon associated with the activity of influenza
hemagglutinin, leading to "prion-like" autocatalysis of a major conformational
change involved in driving membrane fusion. It is proposed to study the
mechanism of autocatalytic cross-talk and to apply directed evolution to gain
control over the biosensing capabilities of this prototypical viral fusion
protein, potentiating use of these engineered proteins in lipid vesicle-based
platforms for a variety of applications. Using conditions that perturb cell
membranes and in vitro reconstitution of hemagglutinin into synthetic lipid
bilayers, the hypothesis will be tested that modulation of local membrane
properties plays a role in autocatalytic communication. Both structure-directed
and random mutagenesis will be applied, the latter combined with library
screening and high-throughput sequencing, to map the mutational plasticity of
hemagglutinin. Finally, the knowledge of mutationally tolerant structural sites
in hemagglutinin will be used to design libraries in directed evolution
experiments, aiming to isolate novel mutants capable of activation and fusogenic
activity in response to novel stimuli.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance the understanding of molecular mechanisms critical to the life cycle of
many viruses, with possible implications in designing future therapeutic
interventions. In addition, new molecules to be generated in this project and
the tools and methods used to identify them may be immediately useful in
creating new components to be used in cell-specific drug or gene delivery. Other
applications for such molecular components, such as development of membrane-
based "smart" materials that respond to a variety of stimuli by fusing to mix
their contents, may be possible, as well. Finally, the student personnel
educated within this research&lt;br/&gt;project will be uniquely equipped with
interdisciplinary skills and will be poised to lead STEM education and practice
of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.