* 1264696
* Collaborative Research: Molecular basis for protein sorption in polymer-modified chromatographic media
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Igal Szleifer, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 03/31/2016
* USD 225,049.00

Lenhoff / Szleifer&lt;br/&gt;1263966 / 1264696&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the collaborative project is to quantify the functional characteristics of
polymer-derivatized media (PDM) to gain an understanding of the mechanism of
protein sorption and transport within the matrix using experimental and
computational methods. The focus is on ion exchange polymers that allow for both
partitioning and surface sorption. The research is organized around three
specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Determine comparative sorption and
transport characteristics for proteins on PDM with different
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;2) Measure microscopic characteristics of the sorption
process and the sorbed state as a guide to identification and analysis of
sorption and transport mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;3) Generalize and apply molecular
theories to describe the sorption equilibrium and kinetics of proteins in
PDM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first two aims cover generation of a wide array of
experimental data that will make possible a detailed mechanistic analysis of the
phenomena involved. These two aims differ in that the first covers
chromatographic behavior that is directly meaningful in assessing function under
normal process conditions, while the second involves more fine-grained,
primarily microscopic methods that are intended to resolve ambiguities regarding
possible mechanisms. The third aim will employ realistic, state-of-the art
molecular modeling to simulate equilibrium and kinetic behavior of proteins in
polymer-derivatized ion-exchange media and provide a rigorous basis for
resolving mechanistic uncertainties. Once completed, these studies will allow
the development of simpler relationships suitable for routine use in
chromatographic modeling, and these methods will then be applied to predicting
the efficacy of separation of a model mixture. Successful completion of the
investigation will yield structure-function relations that can facilitate
explanation of observed performance trends, optimization of materials selection
for specific separations, and design of novel adsorbents. Broader impacts. The
results of the project are expected to elucidate the mechanisms of actions of
PDM and hence benefit research and development in the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries. The work may help resolve important issues such as
slow elution that currently bedevil some applications. For stationary-phase
manufacturers, a clearer understanding of the underlying mechanisms of action
can guide development of new adsorbents; the PIs have collaborations with
relevant companies. While the findings of the research will be disseminated
mainly by publication in peer-reviewed journals, the PIs will also make the
larger output from the research available to the research community, including
software to apply the molecular theory to chromatographic processes. The impact
in student training in research will be enriched by the multidisciplinary and
multisite collaboration.