* 1264588
* Enhancing Disabilities Engineering Research and Education Through Robotics Capstone Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jeanine Skorinko, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,995.00

PI: Padir&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264588&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation The
overarching goal of this proposal is to investigate, design, implement and
validate novel robotic technologies for assisting persons with general and age-
related disabilities through undergraduate capstone design projects. The
proposed work is also aimed at educating a new cadre of engineers who are
knowledgeable about and sensitive to the needs of individuals with disabilities
and who are equipped with multidisciplinary design and analysis skills to
significantly advance the field of robotics and contribute to the fast
deployment of robots in direct collaboration with
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
significant and novel in many aspects. Utilizing recent research advances in
autonomous robots as well as the rapid development in enabling technologies, we
propose to design, develop and validate modular and hardware-software
reconfigurable assistive robots in service of persons with disabilities. In
particular, the proposed work will (i) develop user-centered designs for the
next generation of personal assistive robots, (ii) develop (semi-)autonomy
software modules for robot navigation and manipulation, (iii) design and
implement intuitive control techniques that will rely upon the robot, human and
interaction models, (iv) contribute to the design of replicable experiments in
robotics research to test and validate systems, (v) train the next generation of
robotics engineers and innovators by involving K-12 and undergraduate students
in all aspects of the project. In view of these objectives, the proposed work
will significantly advance the design of assistive robot technologies and
systems that operate in close vicinity of individuals with general and age-
related disabilities. The systems developed within the scope of the proposed
capstone design projects will potentially lead to new scientific research
directions in understanding the team dynamics in human-robot teams to advance
the field of assistive robotics. Moreover, the proposed work will establish and
enhance research and education collaborations between the Worcester Polytechnic
Institute and UMass Medical School co-located in Worcester,
Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project will
train a new generation of engineering students that can broadly address
challenges of our society through directly involving undergraduate students in
well-defined yet cutting-edge project-based implementation tasks. The highly
multidisciplinary nature of the research and educational experience will impact
undergraduate engineering and non-engineering students, as well as K-12
students. Moreover, undergraduate engineering students will receive
multidisciplinary training on disabilities engineering. Hosting summer robotics
programs in collaboration with WPI's Summer Programs Office, we offer research
and learning engagement for middle and high-school students and impact
curriculum development through participation. Because of the power of robotics-
oriented activities to break down traditional cultural barriers that prevent
students from realizing their potentials as engineers and/or as business leaders
due to gender and racial bias in upbringing, we expect our work to positively
impact the diversity of STEM disciplines. We will also continue to develop our
educational collaborations with various Worcester middle and high-schools,
Worcester Public Library as well as in the EcoTarium, Worcester's museum of
science and nature to offer learning opportunities about the science and
engineering of robots using. By introducing these educational activities
revolving around robots, this project is aimed at increasing the awareness of
STEM college and career choices along the lines advocated in the Rising Above
the Gathering Storm report, and Changing the Conversation: Messages for
Improving Public Understanding of Engineering (The National Academies Press).