* 1264298
* Photoinitiated Reactions in Covalent Adaptable Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Bowman, Christopher &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264298&lt;br/&gt;Title:Photoinitiated
Reactions in Covalent Adaptable Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crosslinked
polymer networks, also often referred to as thermosets, represent one of the
most ubiquitous polymer systems, being used in composites, biomedical devices,
dental materials, coatings, adhesives, optical components, and photolithography.
While these covalently crosslinked structures impart a number of highly
desirable features, particularly with respect to the mechanics, they largely
limit the subsequent shape and performance of the polymer system to those that
are achieved at the end of the polymerization. Here, the PI plans to work with a
distinct class of thermosetting systems that combine the necessary covalently
crosslinked structure with internal functional groups that undergo addition-
fragmentation reactions upon exposure to light that enable the network to
rearrange. This reactive ability to break and reform bonds in a controlled
manner enables these materials to demonstrate a number of unique properties not
commonly found in other thermosets, such as stress relaxation, reduced
polymerization induced stress, the ability to photolithographically define shape
and topography, to act as multistage shape memory polymers (SMPs) and to have
the ability to alleviate stress locally as a means for preventing catastrophic
material failure. Ultimately, upon application of the necessary stimulus, these
materials "adapt" or respond to their conditions and have been referred to as
Covalent Adaptable Networks (CANs). The PI plans to utilize light as one of the
most potent and capable triggers for this reactive process as light enables 4D
(temporal plus 3D spatial) control of the reactions that facilitate the network
property and behavioral changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is to advance
the development of CANs, as controllable by photoinduced radical generation. The
overall objective is to create novel, functional CAN-based materials that are
more readily formed, enable complete and repeatable adaptation, and facilitate
the achievement of new properties including the formation of arbitrary
topographical and refractive index features, photothermal SMPs, and stress-
triggered network relaxation. The research program is divided into four
principal scientific directions: (i) development of new monomers, polymers and
understanding of structure-property relationships in CANs based on systematic
molecular structural variations, (ii) the implementation of those CANs in
reactions that enable 4D lithographic control of topography, shape and
refractive index, (iii) the development of combined adaptable/non-adaptable
networks to achieve multistage SMP behavior, and (iv) use of mechanochemical
species that cleave into radicals upon application of stress to induce stress
relaxation and prevent catastrophic material failure in a "smart" manner. Each
scientific direction is coupled to education and training of a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students. Attainment will facilitate understanding of
polymer network dynamics as well as development of materials that have
significant advantages over conventional
thermosets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential breakthroughs will be achieved by
enabling dramatic changes in material shape and properties by exposure to light,
by facilitating photothermal SMPs and by developing techniques through which
thermosetting polymers could have extended service lifetimes. For example, the
ability to form multiheight features photolithographically (without solvents and
without contact to the exposed area) simply by changing the grayscale level
represents a disruptive resist technology where a single exposure during a
mechanical deformation will be used to create a complex array of heights just by
changing the intensity at each location. Similarly, forming smart thermosetting
materials that have the capacity to autonomously alleviate stress could lead to
significantly enhanced service lifetimes of these materials, particularly in
composite materials and when used with other approaches to healable
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this work should have
significant intellectual merit through understanding of how reaction dynamics
associated with bond breakage and reformation dictate the network structure, in
enhancing formation-structure-property relationships in CANs and other
thermosets, and in the creation of new monomers and classes of materials that
combine the benefits of thermosets with the ability to trigger desired property
and shape changes with light. This approach will simultaneously have significant
broader impacts associated with the launching of a new PhD degree program and
the training of diverse personnel in a unique combination of chemical reactions
and polymer networks while also enabling a critical missing element of
spatiotemporal control in this new, powerful material's paradigm. Implementation
of these newly controlled and more simply implemented reactions and materials
will benefit an array of polymer applications including SMPs, adhesives,
photolithographic resists, optical elements, composites, coatings, and
biomedical materials.