* 1264096
* GOALI: Inventory Routing in the Chemical Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Jose Pinto, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2018
* USD 332,084.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christos T. Maravelias(1), Jose Pinto(2),
Larry Megan(2)&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: (1) University of Wisconsin-Madison, (2)
Praxair Inc.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264096&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI:
Inventory Routing in the Chemical Industry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve the
efficiency of their supply chains, vendors in a wide range of manufacturing
sectors switch to vendor-managed inventory (VMI) practices, where the vendor
chooses the timing and volume of its deliveries while ensuring that his
customers will not run out of product. If implemented effectively, VMI policies
can lead to substantial improvements in the efficiency and reliability of the
supply chain, because the vendors make more efficient use of their resources.
Furthermore, since distribution costs often represent 30-50% of total operating
costs, the implementation of VMI policies can lead to substantial savings.
However, executing a VMI policy effectively, especially when the distribution
network relies on trucks and trailers, is not a trivial task. It requires the
integration of inventory control and distribution routing, two problems that
have traditionally been dealt with separately. The goal of this project is to
develop optimization-based models and solution methods for this integrated
problem, the so-called inventory routing (IR)
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the development, analysis,
assessment, and implementation of an optimization-based framework for the
modeling and solution of broad, ubiquitous classes of inventory routing
problems. In developing this framework, The PIs will focus on addressing the
following three challenges:&lt;br/&gt;1. Formulation of new mixed-integer
programming (MIP) models that account for all special characteristics and
constraints in IR problems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Development of effective solution
methods for large scale MIP models for IR problems.&lt;br/&gt;3. Assessment of
the proposed methods using real-world data, and implementation at Praxair to
assess logistics efficiency, reliability, and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformative Potential&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will result in the first general optimization-based
approach to inventory routing problems arising in chemical manufacturing supply
chains. Specifically, it will be the first approach to account for all driving
regulations as well as all customer restrictions. If implemented, it has the
potential to lead to significant improvements in the distribution networks of a
wide variety of chemical companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the research could improve the efficiency of the
industrial gas supply chain, as well as supply chains in other manufacturing
sectors, thus increasing the competitiveness of American companies. Second, it
has the potential to lead to reductions in (i) the overall energy usage in
energy intensive sectors such as industrial gases and (ii) in greenhouse gas
emissions. Third, the results of this research will be used to develop
educational material, as well as demonstrations for outreach activities.
Finally, through the REU in Chemistry and Chemical and Biological Engineering at
the University of Wisconsin - Madison, The PI will hire undergraduate students
to work on the project.