* 1264526
* Collaborative Research: Identification of Immunomodulatory Microbiota Metabolites
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Arul Jayaraman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 199,998.00

Lee/Jayaraman&lt;br/&gt;1264502/1264526 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this research is to identify bioactive metabolites generated by the gut
microbiota that impact the inflammation of adipose tissue in obesity. The human
gastrointestinal (GI) tract is colonized by hundreds of trillions bacteria
belonging to ~1,000 species that are collectively termed the microbiota.
Alterations in the microbiota composition and/or function (dysbiosis) are
correlated to a growing number of metabolic disorders, including obesity.
Chronic, low-grade inflammation of adipose tissue is robustly associated with
obesity, and also underlies the development of insulin resistance and the
metabolic syndrome. There is growing evidence that gut dysbiosis leads to
inflammation in mesenteric adipose tissue. However, the molecular mediators and
mechanisms of their actions remain poorly understood. This work hypothesizes
that microbiota-derived metabolites are important modulators of host adipose
tissue inflammation. Identifying these microbiota metabolites has been extremely
difficult, because a majority of the commensal bacteria in the gut are poorly
characterized and many of these bacteria cannot be grown in culture. As microbes
are capable of performing metabolic reactions not available to the host, and
metabolites synthesized by one species can be further modified by another
species, the biotransformation space accessible to the microbiota is vast. To
overcome these challenges, this project investigates a novel bioinformatics-
metabolomics approach enabling focused and quantitative exploration of gut
microbiota metabolites. The results of the bioinformatics and metabolomics
analyses will be used to establish a physiological basis for in vitro
experiments on the mechanisms whereby microbiota metabolites influence adipose
tissue inflammation in obesity. The expected outcome of this project is to
identify specific metabolites that can be unequivocally sourced to the gut
microbiota and are present in host adipose tissue, and to determine their
immunomodulatory properties in the context of adipose tissue inflammation in
obesity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;This research is novel in that few
studies have explored the role for microbiota metabolites in the development of
chronic body fat inflammation in obesity. The proposed work will identify and
quantify bacterial metabolites whose levels may be altered under conditions of
obesity and influence the state of inflammation. This research has
transformative potential, both methodologically as well as discovery-wise. The
proposed experiments could pave the way for a general methodology for measuring
bioactive chemicals that are naturally present in the body, but are produced by
bacteria, rather than the body. The discovery of naturally resident bacterial
metabolites with anti-inflammatory properties could lead to new, safe treatment
modalities for obesity as an inflammatory disease.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is highly interdisciplinary, and provides a unique opportunity to train
students in cutting-edge research at the interface of several different fields
in engineering and life science. To create research opportunities for
underrepresented minorities, the proposal includes a plan for a joint summer
internship program. Two minority students from Texas A&amp;M will be recruited
each year to intern in the lead investigator's laboratory at Tufts. In addition,
the investigators will integrate the proposed research into ongoing educational
and outreach efforts at their respective institutions by recruiting
undergraduate students to participate in open-ended projects from the proposed
work and incorporating the methodologies and findings into existing courses in
Metabolic Engineering and Systems Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, this award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology.