* 1264731
* CAREER: Operations Management with Strategic Consumer Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/19/2012,03/31/2015
* Xuanming Su, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 03/31/2015
* USD 322,161.00

This research will study the impact of strategic consumer behavior on operations
management. Consumers today often look for the best deals. For example, when
shopping for fashion apparel, they may wait for end-of-season sales, and when
buying household products, they may stock up during price promotions. If
unaccounted for, such behavior generates economic inefficiencies: firms lose
revenues and consumers may find their desired products unavailable. This project
aims to perform the following tasks. 1) Develop models to help firms optimize
their pricing and inventory decisions when facing strategic consumers. 2)
Provide general principles that help consumers make decisions such as when to
buy and how much to buy. 3) Understand how strategic consumer behavior will
influence contractual relationships between supply chain partners. 4) Study
consumer psychology in operational settings and explore the impact of consumer
decision errors on firms' profits and social welfare. The analysis will utilize
techniques from game theory, dynamic optimization, stochastic modeling,
statistics, as well as concepts from psychology and behavioral economics.

The research involves broader impacts beyond its contribution to the theoretical
operations research literature. First, the research will be integrated with
educational goals. Results and insights will be incorporated into teaching
materials for MBA and PhD courses. Experiential exercises (classroom games and
simulations) will be designed for students to gain first-hand experience in
related decision problems. Research opportunities will be provided for
undergraduate and graduate students. Second, this project is expected to have
substantial practical impact. Research results will help shape a new generation
of operations management software tools that explicitly measure and account for
strategic consumer behavior, and will also provide decision-aids to guide
consumer decision-making. This will enhance social welfare by creating a win-win
situation for both consumers and firms.