* 1264290
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Geodetic measurements and mechanical models of the volcano deformation cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Timothy Masterlark, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 57,394.00

Okmok volcano in Alaska appears to erupt every decade or so, most recently in
1997 and again in 2008. Its activity has been monitored using modern methods,
forming a rich observational data set. The investigators are developing a
geophysical model that should explain the timing and location of most of the
observed activity. The new information from this study will be directly relevant
to understanding time-dependent volcanic hazard posed by Okmok and other,
similar volcanoes lying beneath the heavily-used north Pacific air traffic
corridors. The same type of model should be applicable to other volcanoes
displaying cyclic activity, such as Westdahl in Alaska or Hekla in Iceland.

Okmok is an excellent natural laboratory for such an experiment because a
complete cycle of deformation has been monitored using geodetic and seismic
means. Using this rich observational data set and a formal protocol for
numerical modeling, the investigators are studying Okmok volcano to address the
following questions: (1) What is the distribution of material properties within
Okmok? (2) How does anelastic rheology modify the temporal evolution of the
deformation field? (3) How do material properties at depth influence the
deformation observed at the surface? (4) What are the uncertainties of the model
parameters that describe the magma chamber?

The impulse-response rheological experiment will improve understanding of the
volcano deformation cycle. Specifically, the research project will test four
hypotheses: (I) Deformation following the 1997 eruption did not reach a steady
state before the eruption in 2008. (II) Viscoelastic stress relaxation
contributes to the transient deformation observed during the co-and post-
eruptive time intervals. (III) The effective viscosity is several orders of
magnitude smaller in the rind of the magma chamber than in the surrounding
crust. (IV) The lava flow extruded from Cone A during the 1997 eruption produces
a stress field that favors dike propagation from the magma chamber to Cone D.

The results will be published in the international, peer-reviewed literature. A
graduate student from a group under-represented in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) will be trained for a career in geophysical
research at the intersection of three disciplines: seismology, geodesy and
volcanology. The modeling protocol and approach will be disseminated among the
scientific community at an operational level. Investigator Masterlark, a junior
faculty member from an institution funded by the Office of Experimental Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), will offer a short course on how to
apply the Finite Element Method to volcanic deformation. Applicants from
underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to participate. The
project will enhance collaboration between the investigators and scientists at
the U.S. Geological Survey