* 1264433
* RAPID:   Combined Spectroscopic/Lidar Response to the High Park Fire, Larimer County, Colorado
* BIO,EF
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Thomas Kampe, National Ecological Observatory Network, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2013
* USD 65,469.00

The High Park in Northern Colorado burned over 35,000 ha and was defined as a
worst-case scenario fire due to the extent, severity, and duration of the fire.
This RAPID award will provide funds to document the impact of the High Park fire
on the forests, soils and geomorphology of the burned area using NEON's Airborne
Observatory (AOP) remotely sensed data (visible-to-shortwave infrared imaging
spectrometer, small footprint waveform lidar, and high resolution digital
camera) over the area disturbed by the fire and adjacent unburned areas. The
remote sensing data acquisition will be coordinated with a targeted field
campaign to collect baseline information on forest composition, structure and
three-dimensional distribution, soil biota, and rates of erosion and
sedimentation. This is an unprecedented opportunity to use this new research
tool to quantify an ecological episodic event of this magnitude. Because this is
a rapid response proposal, the focus is on essential data collection to
characterize post-fire conditions, but data collection efforts are designed in
the context of two broad categories of science questions for future research: 1.
How did conditions prior to the fire affect fire behavior and impacts? and 2.
How does fire severity and pattern affect post-fire trajectories? This RAPID
award provides funds to gather data in response to this natural disaster; its
urgency derives from the high probability that conditions on the ground will
change rapidly after the fire. Summer rains will initiate post-fire erosion and
sedimentation; management activities will alter the landscape characteristics,
and vegetation will begin to regenerate. The intellectual merit derives from
both the science questions but also the ability gather topographic, geomorphic,
biological, and chemical information on unprecedented scales (cm to km) with the
AOP. Combining the field and remote sensing datasets will allow an unprecedented
assessment of the impact of the fire, provide data products useful to the
scientific and management communities, and support future research on post-fire
trajectories. Findings from this research will be of significant interest to
multiple stakeholders in the region, including the US and State Forest Service
and the Cities of Fort Collins and Greeley, who both have water supplies that
will be affected by post-fire erosion. A workshop will be held to coordinate
research results with stakeholders and transfer data products and knowledge
gained in addressing complex feedbacks between drought, fire, and water supply.