* 1264517
* Shear Force Effects on Superficial Cartilage Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2016
* USD 309,771.00

PI: John P Fisher&lt;br/&gt;Award ID: 1264517&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Musculoskeletal disease and injury can commonly
result in damage to articular cartilage. These cartilage defects have little
inherent ability to repair. Current clinical treatments are inadequate as they
often lead to fibrocartilage formation and joint pain. The goal of this proposal
is to develop chondrocytes specifically for superficial zone cartilage
regeneration. The premise of this strategy is to provide clinicians with an
early stage intervention approach, and one that would also prevent the formation
of more debilitating defects. This group has recently demonstrated the ability
to derive osteochondroprogentior cells (OPCs) from primary mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) and shown these OPCs to be responsive to insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), an anabolic growth factor associated with functional articular
cartilage. It has been shown that hyaluronic acid (HA) can lead to up-regulate
chondrocytic expression of superficial zone protein (SZP), a key phenotypic
marker for superficial zone chondrocytes. These results led to the development
of the following hypotheses. It is hypothesized that the dynamic culture of
human mesenchymal stem cells within chondrogenic media will provide an
environment conducive for rapid chondrocytic differentiation. Specifically,
enhanced oxygen and nutrient transport, provided by the dynamic culture
conditions, will promote hMSC viability and proliferation, while TGF-beta3
delivery and shear forces imparted the by perfusing chondrogenic media will
promote chondrocytic differentiation. To examine this hypothesis, dynamic
culture parameters will be developed so as to direct MSC differentiation into
OPCs. Second, it is hypothesized that controlled delivery of IGF-1 to
osteochondroprogenitor cells will encourage their maturation to differentiated
superficial zone chondrocytes, as demonstrated by up-regulated PRG4 and type II
collagen expression. In addition, it is hypothesized that engineered superficial
zone cartilage can effectively treat superficial articular cartilage defects in
a rat model. To examine these hypotheses, delivery exogenous IGF-1 to
osteochondroprogenitor cells within the TPS bioreactor environment will be
performed and their maturation into superficial zone chondrocytes will be
assessed as well, as indicated by PRG4 and type II collagen production, and then
utilize this engineered construct to regenerate superficial zone cartilage in a
rat model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include the development of an engineered tissue and the elucidation
of new strategies and technologies within regenerative medicine. In addition,
enhancing biomedical engineering research at multiple education levels is a key
aspect of the work's impact. The key activity related to this proposal will be
the development and execution of a new series of projects associated with the
Engineering World Health (EWH) chapter at the University of Maryland. EWH aims
to create and distribute readily implementable biomedical technologies to
developing countries. The PI has worked with the EWH chapter at Maryland during
it inaugural year in 2011-2012 to realize these goals. The PI will also continue
many activities that impact undergraduate and graduate education. For example,
the PI currently instructs an undergraduate Modeling Physiological Systems and
Laboratory course, and an undergraduate / graduate Tissue Engineering course.
Since 2007, the PI has directed the Molecular &amp; Cellular Bioengineering
Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site. To date, the Molecular &amp;
Cellular Bioengineering REU site has brought approximately 60 students from
around the country to work in the laboratories of faculty associated with the
Fischell Department of Bioengineering. Finally, the PI currently acts as the
Associate Chair and Director of Undergraduate Studies in the Fischell Department
of Bioengineering. In this position, the PI has a direct influence in fostering
undergraduate bioengineering education at the curriculum, program, and research
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly funded by Biomedical Engineering (CBET) and
Instrument Development for Biological Research (BIO Directorate)