* 1264555
* Morphology and Mobility Control for Functional Robust Flexible Electronics and Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Martha Grover, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,162.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Elsa Reichmanis and Martha
Grover&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia Tech Research
Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264555&lt;br/&gt;Title: Morphology and
Mobility Control for Functional Robust Flexible Electronics and Photovoltaics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to understand and
predict the morphology of conjugated polymer materials applicable to flexible
electronics, photovoltaics and sensors. The results of this research will enable
the design and optimization of robust materials chemistries and the required,
associated large-area, large-scale device fabrication process recipes. To
exploit the unique capabilities of organic electronics in flexible devices and
economical roll-to-roll high throughput printing, high charge carrier mobility
is a prerequisite. However, mobility is highly dependent on the final morphology
of the thin semiconducting film that serves as the device active layer. Organic
semiconductors exhibit domains of crystalline-like order interspersed with
amorphous regions, and the size and extent of order within each type of domain
influences the molecular packing and subsequent electronic behavior. The
morphology in all regions evolves as the film is deposited and processed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Semiconductor morphology in polymer
based organic electronics is highly sensitive to the chemistry of a given
material, including monomer selection, polymer molecular weight and
regioregularity, the solvent, and the substrate. The time-varying process
history also impacts the resulting morphology, including temperature,
evaporation rate, and the choice of processing method. Understanding the impact
of chemistry and processing on the active layer morphology is very limited and
is dominated by tedious, observational approaches. A coherent understanding of
how &amp;#960;-conjugated semiconductor chains interact, associate and align to
form the inter-connected nanocrystallite structures that are essential for
charge carrier transport is lacking, and there are far too many design variables
to effectively explore this vast design space using a purely empirical approach.
In this research program, the PIs will do a synergistic experimental and
modeling study based on two specific chemical systems and focusing on three
distinct processing modes. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is the most
characterized material to date, and will be used to aid in the initial model-
building efforts. They will then build upon the results and extend the studies
to promising alternative high mobility systems, such as poly(benzothiazole-
sexithiophene) (PBT6), recently designed and developed in the Reichmanis lab.
The close coupling of experiments and morphology modeling is unique and will
enable a mechanistic understanding of the dynamics of morphology evolution,
which will further enable the rational design of robust, organic electronics
manufacturing methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Cheap
ubiquitous electronics could transform the world, from solar energy to
biosensors to food safety monitoring. The PIs participation in the Georgia Tech
Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics (COPE) will amplify the impact of
this research, through interactions with COPE industrial associates. The PIs
will explore opportunities to directly expose graduate students to industrial
research in organic electronics through internships as well as regular research
discussions. The graduate students will also benefit from participation (as
IGERT affiliates) in the curriculum of the NSF IGERT program on Nanostructured
Materials for Energy Storage and Conversion, for which Reichmanis is the PI, and
Grover is a thrust leader. As part of this program, the PI and co-PI will
initiate a new program aimed at educating female graduate students about paths
to faculty positions.