* 1264432
* Collaborative research: Optimal stimulus waveform design for Parkinson's disease
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Theoden Netoff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2017
* USD 271,876.00

PI: Netoff, Theoden I. and Moehlis, Jeffrey M.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1264432 &amp; 1264535&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Populations of
neurons must dynamically synchronize and desynchronize for transmission of
information within the brain. The disruption of this dynamic synchronization is
thought to underlie the symptomatology of several neurological disorders. Deep
Brain Stimulation (DBS) therapy is being used to treat many of these
neurological disorders, such as Parkinsons disease (PD). It is generally
believed that DBS leads are placed in regions of brain that are pathologically
synchronous, and periodic DBS pulses then "over pace" these areas, blocking the
pathological activity. The PIs have recently developed an alternative hypothesis
for the mechanism of DBS which focuses on DBS's modulation of the firing times
of neurons. Stimulation at certain frequencies can induce a chaotic response
that desynchronizes a population; we term this chaotic desynchronization. The
response of a neuron to a DBS pulse is characterized by its phase response curve
(PRC), a measure of how the stimulus advances the phase depending on the phase
the stimulus is applied at. The PRC can then be used to determine if two neurons
in the population starting at nearly the same phase will entrain to the stimulus
pulses, or will diverge and effectively become desynchronized. In this grant the
PIS propose to use PRCs to determine the optimal stimuli to desynchronize
population oscillations. Preliminary experiments show that small periodic
stimulus pulses at certain frequencies can desynchronize populations; the
frequency and amplitude that desynchronize can be predicted from the PRC of the
neurons to the stimulus. Moreover, continuous stimulus waveforms can be designed
that desynchronize populations with much less energy than the pulsatile stimuli.
The aims of this grant are to further the theoretical work in designing these
waveforms from measured PRCs, and then to test chaotic de-synchronization in
physical and biological systems. Specific Aim 1 will use measured phase response
curves and control theory to determine the optimal stimulus waveforms to
maximize desynchronization of neuronal ensembles. Specific Aim 2 will be to
apply this theory to desynchronize oscillations in a chemical oscillator model,
the photosensitive Belousov-Zhabotinsky (pBZ) reaction, through pulsatile and
continuous waveform photo stimulation. Specific Aim 3 will test the theory in
neurons in vitro basal ganglia preparation. Neurons will be recorded and
stimulated using a dynamic clamp experimental protocol. The PRCs from single
neurons will be measured in response to DBS pulses, and we will test for chaotic
behavior in their stimulus response patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The motivation of this research is to 1) understand how behaviors
relate to oscillatory synchronization in and between the basal ganglia and motor
cortex, and 2) improve DBS treatment of PD, for which the selection of stimulus
electrodes, frequency, and amplitudes are currently tuned manually by a
clinician. The goal of this research is to determine the optimal stimulus
properties based on simple physiological measures of the neurophysiological
response to DBS. This approach will enable faster and more robust programming of
neurostimulators and will decrease the amount of required injected current,
which will reduce side effects and battery power consumption. This approach has
high potential for closed loop control algorithms where DBS parameters are
automatically tuned to maintain maximal efficacy. This approach may also be
applied to seizure suppression and other neurological diseases. These studies
leverage a recently funded IGERT training plan at UMN for neuromodulation. To
maximize our clinical impact, we have discussed with Dwight Nelson
(Neuromodulation department at Medtronic) what basic research will enable the
next steps in developing new DBS stimulus parameters and the yet unmet clinical
needs (letter of support included). The results from this research will be
disseminated to the public through various education programs including ones
focused on underrepresented undergraduate students, high school educators, high
school students and junior-high school students. Finally, this award will train
graduate students and undergraduates in interdisciplinary research activities,
and enhance the education of other graduate students through results that will
be incorporated into courses taught by the PI and co-PI.