* 1264348
* Production of the Building-Block 2-Pyrrolidone Using a Model-Guided Platform for De Novo Biosynthetic Pathway Integration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* David Bevan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 398,394.00

1264348 &lt;br/&gt;Senger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to produce new
technologies that will enable the synthesis of valuable commodity chemicals and
pharmaceuticals from microbes. These engineered microbes are commonly called
?microbial chemical factories,? and they are now enabling the biological
production of valuable chemicals that have traditionally been obtained through
oil refining. The emerging field of synthetic biology is enabling the
construction of new metabolic pathways, and this is rapidly broadening the scope
of chemicals that can be produced by microbial cell factories. In this research,
a novel de novo pathway to 2-pyrrolidone will be produced and optimized. This
valuable target chemical is used to produce over 700 differently substituted
pyrrolidones that have uses ranging from ?green? solvents to pharmaceuticals.
The new de novo pathway to 2-pyrrolidone will be constructed using a model-
guided platform involving molecular docking and dynamics simulations in order to
engineer existing enzymes to work with non-native substrates to ultimately
produce 2-pyrrolidone. This research will also develop a model-guided platform
for installing this de novo pathway in a microbial host and ensure the pathway
is highly utilized. In this case, the bacterium Clostridium cellulolyticum H10
will be used as the host. This organism is of interest due to its ability to
consume cellulosic plant material as a substrate, ensuring the resulting
production of 2-pyrrolidone will be renewable and ultimately cost-efficient. To
ensure high usage of the 2-pyrrolidone de novo pathway, metabolic engineering
strategies will be developed through a new technique involving an established
method of ?genome-scale metabolic flux modeling.? While this project will
engineer a strain of C. cellulolyticum H10 to produce 2-pyrrolidone from
cellulose, the tools developed in this project will apply broadly. Ultimately,
this toolset will help enable the production of any targeted chemical from any
host cell. These developments will have profound impacts by (i) transitioning
the origin of many vital commodity chemicals and pharmaceuticals from non-
renewable oil refining to renewable production from sources such as plant
material and sunlight, (ii) dramatically increasing the role of the
biotechnology industry in the commodity chemicals market, and (iii) stimulating
new startup ventures related to commodity chemicals and pharmaceutical
production through synthetic biology.