* 1264874
* Metal Organic Framework Materials for Efficient Separations of Liquid Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* David Sholl, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 01/31/2017
* USD 316,711.00

1264874 Sholl

Metal-organic framework (MOF) materials are at an emerging stage in their
development as a large class of nanoporous materials for new applications
especially in separations and catalysis. The central theme of this project is to
create a systematic computational and experimental framework for understanding
the interactions of MOF materials with hydrogen-bonding (polar) molecules. The
PIs propose a synergistic experimental and modeling effort to quantitatively
measure the adsorption and diffusion properties of water and alcohols (methanol
and ethanol) in MOFs. Molecular adsorption and diffusion will be measured
directly using state-of-the-art vapor phase gravimetry and high-gradient-
strength pulsed field gradient nuclear magnetic resonance (PFG-NMR) methods with
a series of MOFs chosen to systematically vary pore size and functionality.
These measurements will significantly expand the scope of quantitative
experimental information that is available about hydrogen-bonding molecule
transport and adsorption in MOFs. By directly comparing our experimental results
with a careful series of molecular simulations, the PIs expect to understand the
key features of hydrogen-bonded adsorption and diffusion in MOFs and assess the
capability of force fields for describing such species. In addition to extensive
proposed work with established MOFs, the PIs will also study the performance of
hybrid zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIFs), a class of MOF materials developed
recently at Georgia Tech. Hybrid ZIFs can be made with continuously tunable pore
characteristics and create new opportunities for optimizing material performance
in separations. The PIs will examine the possibility of using this fine tuning
property to develop high performance membranes for water-alcohol separations.
Broader Impacts. The emergence of a rational framework for evaluating MOFs in
liquid-phase separations will have long-term impact in the pursuit of
applications for MOFs in biofuel processing and biorefinery operations. A
nearer-term technological impact could be in the successful selection and use of
robust MOFs/ZIFs to create high-performance membranes for water-alcohol
separations relevant in biofuel processing. At a more fundamental level, this
work will advance the shared goals of the separations, porous materials, and
computational chemical engineering communities in overcoming basic challenges
inherent in high-throughput discovery of advanced materials for separations.
This works is potentially transformative in helping to enhance the role of
porous materials in chemical separations through rational design methods. The
PIs will pursue these desired impacts by creating a positive and measurable
impact on the careers of young and prospective engineers and scientists. The PIs
will mentor a diverse group of 6-8 researchers at graduate, undergraduate, and
high school levels via carefully designed and assessed learning experiences over
periods of 1-3 years. This will encompass PhD thesis projects, undergraduate
research projects, and extended high-school student internships in collaboration
with a STEM-focused charter school. The transfer of research findings into the
PIs? elective courses on nanoscale chemical engineering and molecular modeling
will have a significant educational impact.