* 1264275
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: What Makes Politics Interesting?
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Randolph Stevenson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 20,862.00

Intellectual Merit

This dissertation project extends appraisal models of interest developed in
psychology to understand individual differences in political interest and
knowledge. It is a first step in a larger collaborative effort to develop a
comparative theory of political interest that explains why political interest
and knowledge vary so dramatically across the Western Democracies.

Theoretically, this research takes the view that long-term interests are
developed in a series of discrete emotional experiences in which individuals
learn what does and does not interest them. For the development of political
interests, the sequence of relevant experiences is the reception of political
messages, almost always (directly or indirectly) generated by the mass media.
Thus, to answer the question of why some individuals are interested in politics
and some are not, one must first answer the question of why an individual is (or
is not) interested in particular political messages. This study argues that this
is a function of an interaction between characteristics of the individual and of
the message, and that we can understand the nature of that interaction by
applying appraisal theories of interest that have been developed in psychology.

Appraisal models of emotions assert that individuals experience an emotion only
after they (consciously or subconsciously) appraise events as matching a
particular abstract structure. Upon making the appropriate set of appraisals,
the corresponding emotion "fires." Thus, appraisal theorists are principally
concerned with defining the appraisal structure associated with a specific
emotion, and designing experiments to test whether all the elements of the
proposed structure are necessary and sufficient to provoke the relevant
emotional response. For interest, the leading model of the appraisal structure
of interest (due to Silvia) posits two appraisal dimensions that determine
whether the event or object is interesting: a collative dimension (the appraised
novelty, complexity, uncertainty, and conflictualness of the event) and a coping
potential or comprehensibility dimension, which is an individual's appraisal of
her ability to understand the event. These dimensions indicate how a person may
orient herself to an event or object both cognitively and emotionally.

The main contribution of the dissertation is to explore whether this appraisal
structure of interest applies to political interest, as well as to propose and
explore one important extension of it that is more useful in politics (where it
is often costly to get information): an explicit incorporation of information
short-cuts or heuristics into the theory.

Empirically, the dissertation proposes a new experimental platform for
evaluating the appraisal structure of interest that should be both more powerful
(more efficiently generates relevant observations) than previous designs and
more applicable to a wider set of substantive domains. These experiments will
allow us to rigorously test hypotheses drawn from the theory and understand if
the appraisal theory of interest will be useful in better understanding
individual variation in political interest.

Broader Impacts

This study will not only contribute the literature in political science on
political interest, but also to those studying appraisal models of emotion more
generally, via the inclusion of heuristics. Beyond academia, the results should
be of interest to political campaigns and other civic programs that seek to
understand how to activate politically interest.