* 1264708
* Mechanistic Study of Cellulosome Through Reprogramming Its Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Jiantao Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 312,541.00

1264708 &lt;br/&gt;Guo, Jiantao &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
study the self-assembly process of cellulosomes, a group of natural protein
complexes secreted by microorganisms for the highly efficient degradation of
plant cell walls into fermentable sugars. A cellulosome consists of a core
scaffoldin protein of structural function and several hydrolytic proteins of
catalytic function. Assembly of the cellulosome occurs via interactions between
cohesin domains of the scaffoldin protein and matching dockerin domains of
catalytic modules. Due to the non-discriminatory nature of cohesin-dockerin
recognition in a single microorganism, the assembled cellulosomes have diverse
structural and molecular composition. The proposed research seeks to achieve
regio- and stoichiometric controlled assembly of designer cellulosomes through
engineering orthogonal cohesin-dockerin protein pairs with minimal crosstalking
recognition. The engineered cohesin domains with altered specificity will be
assembled at pre-arranged positions to form recombinant scaffoldin protein,
which enables templated attachment of catalytic modules through matching
dockerin domains to form designer cellulosomes. Their structure-activity
relationships will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is expected to lead to synthetic cellulosomes that can outperform their natural
counterparts in the process of plant cellulosic material degradation. It will
contribute to the generation of biomass-derived feedstocks for biofuel and
bioenergy production, which has potential to resolve many long-term economic and
environmental concerns. Furthermore, a deeper understanding of the speed and
precision of cellulosome self-assembly could lead to new strategies for the
synthesis of self-assembled protein complexes with broad impact on the fields of
biocatalysis, metabolic engineering, synthetic biology, and
nanosciences.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research represents an outstanding training
opportunity for students at all levels of development. Students will be exposed
in depth to a large array of research problems in chemistry and biology at the
University of Nebraska. Some specific outreach activities include development of
a summer research program for undergraduate students from four-year colleges and
of chemistry lab kits for high school students. These activities will attract
college and high school students, including specifically women and
underrepresented students, to pursue studies and academic careers in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems Division, by the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, and by the
Office of the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).