* 1264210
* RIG: Effect of gender differentiation on cortical signaling responses to estradiol
* BIO,IOS
* 06/21/2012,07/31/2014
* Damani Bryant, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2014
* USD 92,360.00

One of the most overlooked aspects of Neuroscience is gender and its impacts on
the brain. Historically, gender specificity has been ignored in order to avoid
experimental variability. However, it is becoming clear in recent years that
biological impacts of gender profoundly alters the way the brain responds to its
environment. Therefore, the long range goal of this project is to understand how
gender alters the brain?s response to estradiol. This goal is important because
it challenges some of the current assumptions about how the brain responds to
hormones. There is an extensive literature that documents the beneficial effects
of estrogen on the brain. It is also known that both female and male brains are
exposed to estradiol, from the ovaries and/or via the conversion of testosterone
to estrogen by the enzyme aromatase. However, less is known about how gender
alters the brain?s response to estrogen. To address this issue, male and female
rat neurons are cultured separately and used as an experimental model system to
examine biochemical responses to estradiol. Based on preliminary data, it is
predicted that male neurons are less responsive to estradiol than female
neurons. The current project will confirm or reject this prediction and future
work will determine whether this gender difference is genetic or a consequence
of in utero hormone exposure. This project is consistent with the goals of the
National Science Foundation: ?To promote the progress of science; advance the
national health, prosperity and welfare?? Given that gender differences are
central to understanding the human condition, a better understanding of its role
will serve to advance national health, prosperity and welfare. The project will
offer unique training opportunities for undergraduate students who will work on
this project.