* 1264186
* Analysis of DNA Transport in Electrotransfected Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Fan Yuan, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 389,999.00

PI: Yuan, Fan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1264186&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Electrotransfection, also
known as electroporation or electric field-mediated DNA delivery, is a
technology that has been widely used for introducing specific genes into cells.
Its applications cover both basic research and clinical treatment and prevention
of diseases. However, the technology has two obstacles that are currently
limiting its further development. One is the lack of design principles for
guiding development of optimal electrotransfection protocols; and the other is
the poor understanding of mechanisms of plasmid DNA (pDNA) transport into cells
during electrotransfection. As a result, most investigators in previous studies
have to rely on the trial and error approach to protocol development, which
requires measurement of electrotransfection efficiency (eTE) under different
experimental conditions, in terms of electric pulse sequences and
electrotransfection buffers, to identify an optimal set of conditions for each
type of cells. This process is inefficient and can be expensive. Furthermore,
some recent studies suggest that eTE is only partially dependent on electric
pulse parameters. Other parameters, such as properties of cell membrane and
pathways for intracellular transport, may be more crucial for determination of
eTE. To this end, the goal of the proposed study is to investigate novel
mechanisms of pDNA transport during electrotransfection. The central hypothesis
is that adsorptive endocytosis is a key mechanism of electrotransfection for
cellular uptake and intracellular transport of pDNA. To test the hypothesis,
different types of mammalian cells will be treated with molecular inhibitors or
enhancers, either prior to or post their exposure to pulsed electric fields. The
treatments will alter electric field-induced binding between pDNA and cell
membrane, or change activities in endocytic pathways. After each treatment,
kinetics of cellular uptake and pDNA transport will be measured with confocal
and electron microscopy techniques, and the kinetic data will be analyzed
quantitatively using various mathematical models to determine mechanisms of
cellular uptake and intracellular transport of pDNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Improvement in electrotransfection
technology can broadly impact basic biomedical research since the technology has
been widely used for gene transfer into target cells. It may also impact
clinical applications of gene therapy and DNA vaccination, which will lead to
improvement in healthcare in both developed and developing countries because
electrotransfection systems can be constructed inexpensively. The proposed study
will show that the efficiency of gene/vaccine delivery can be improved through
optimization of DNA attachment to cell membrane and enhancement of DNA transport
via endocytic pathways. The research findings are crucial for development of
novel design principles and strategies for improving the electrotransfection
technology in future studies. In terms of education, results from the research
project will be used to improve an existing biomedical engineering (BME) course
on drug and gene delivery, currently taught by the PI at Duke University, and to
develop a new elective course on intracellular transport of molecules and
nanoparticles. In addition, the project will be used to train individual
students to do research. Graduate students, including at least one minority
student, will use the project as the basis of their thesis/dissertation.
Undergraduate students will be recruited to the project through the independent
studies and the Pratt Research Fellow program at Duke University. Furthermore,
the PI will mentor underrepresented students in an outreach program. These
students will be paired with graduate students to do summer research related to
the proposed study.