* 1264090
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Open Trade for Sale: Lobbying by Productive Exporting Firms
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* In Song Kim, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/28/2015
* USD 22,540.00

Existing theories in international political economy predict conflicting
political interests with respect to trade policy at the industry level: import-
competing industries want protection from foreign competition whereas exporting
industries demand open trade. However, in most countries some firms export while
others, facing competition from imported products, provide goods only to their
domestic markets even within the same industry. Who are the political actors
supporting trade liberalization, and who are the supporters of protection when
the distinction between import-competing industries versus export industries has
become unclear? To explain this, the proposed project considers manufacturing
firms as important political actors unlike other studies that consider them
mainly as economic agents. A detailed study of such political behavior would
underscore a new source of pressure faced by governments when setting trade
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This is one of the first
projects in the field of international political economy that tests whether
there is an effect of lobbying by exporting firms on trade liberalization. The
project aims to identify the political mechanism by creating a new lobbying
dataset that automatically extracts and updates detailed lobbying activities of
all manufacturing firms, which became available under the Lobbying Disclosure
Act of 1995. Any firm that lobbied at least once will then be matched with firms
in multiple finance databases in order to identify the trade policies in which
they have a direct economic interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Firms produce
different products even when they belong to a same industry. For example, some
textile firms produce shirts made of wool while others make them with linen.
Consequently, it is hard to assume that these firms would have same preference
over trade policy. This project shows that the incentives of exporting firms to
lobby can be stronger than those of their import-competing counterparts when
products are sufficiently different. Product differentiation implies that
lobbying will benefit only a small number of firms that actually produce the
different products in question. As a result, the theory predicts that exporting
firms are more likely to lobby overcoming their collective problems. The dataset
would be used to test whether a high degree of product differentiation within an
industry is associated with 1) active lobbying by exporting firms and 2) trade
liberalization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the era of
globalization, multinational corporations that control the movements of goods,
services and people have become important political agents in setting trade,
immigration, environment, and security policies. With the new insights offered
by this project, social scientists and policy makers will be able to understand
under what condition producers of goods and services can actively influence
decisions made by governments around the world. The entire dataset would be
updated quarterly and will be publicly available. The lobbying dataset, a panel
of any foreign and domestic entities who have lobbied the U.S. government since
1999, would allow social scientists to explore research topics related to
lobbying such as defense, health, and energy.