* 1264698
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Separation of Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

Pfefferle/Frey&lt;br/&gt;1264698 / 1264698&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose
a novel approach to the scalable, chiral separation of SWNT in which chirality-
determined surface charge is introduced onto the SWNT; subsequently, liquid
chromatography techniques are employed to resolve individual SWNT subtypes. The
chemical processing procedures which prepare the SWNT for subsequent separation
involve the application of functional groups to the nanotubes in a way that
exploits differential chiral reactivity. This in turn leads to differential
surface acidity/basicity for the functionalized nanotube subtypes as reflected
in their different point of zero charge (PZC) values. Professor Pfefferle is an
expert in SWNT synthesis and in producing narrow distributions of SWNT
identities and functionalizing and characterizing them. She is also developing
the concept of using SWNT surface charge as a chirality marker. Functionalized
SWNT will be separated on the basis of their surface charge using high-
resolution, high-throughput methods involving chromatofocusing that exploit
electrostatic interactions. Methods of this type have been under development
over the last several years by Dr. Frey at the UMBC for biotechnology
applications and will be further adapted here so that they apply specifically to
the case of SWNT separations. To accomplish this, the PIs will investigate the
use of column packing materials that are likely to enhance the adsorption
capacity for SWNT, such as tentacle-type column packings, where the ion-exchange
functional groups are located on linear polymer chains extending outward from
the particle surface. The PIs will also investigate the use of innovative
elution strategies involving chromatofocusing focusing in combination with
mobile phase modifiers that optimize the balance between electrostatic and
hydrophobic forces during elution. Another line of investigation will be to
evaluate novel methods to affect the behavior of SWNT during chromatography,
such as the use of microwave radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts:
The expected result of the proposed research will be a flexible method that can
produce subtypes of purified SWNT from the laboratory scale to the industrial
scale. The ability to take a mixed batch of SWNT and, in a scalable manner,
obtain a highly selective separation of each component is an important goal in
the carbon nanotube field. The current unavailability of inexpensive high purity
SWNT is the major reason why SWNT-based electronics have not been practical to-
date. By solving this key technical challenge, this project has the potential to
be truly transformative. Despite their far-reaching potential, the methods to be
investigated here are simple in concept and lend themselves well to projects
involving both undergraduate and high school students. Many such students have
participated in the past in the PIs? research both at Yale and UMBC. The PIs
will expand this effort and include interactions between our groups, and thereby
present an exceptional opportunity for students at all levels to participate in
an interdisciplinary research program that exploits the complementary
capabilities of the PIs.