* 1264562
* Configuration of Microprinted Stem Cell Colonies in Heterocellular Niches Regulates Neural Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Rebecca Willits, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 310,000.00

PI: Hossein Tavana&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID
1264562&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stem
cells hold a great promise for replacing damaged cells and recovering lost
tissue function in patients. Realizing this potential requires the ability to
engineer well-defined microenvironments and determine the factors that induce
differentiation of stem cells toward specific lineages. This proposal stems from
PI's recent works in which it was found that size and interspacing of stem cell
colonies in heterocellular stem cell-support cell microenvironments
synergistically regulate neural differentiation phenotypes. A major challenge to
investigating this phenomenon is the difficulty of creating stem cell colonies
of defined size and interspacing directly on a support cell layer. The proposed
work will tackle this problem using a new high throughput cell printing
microtechnology that enables spatial and temporal control over direct and
contact-free positioning of stem cells on support cells. The central hypothesis
of the proposed work is that size and spatial organization of stem cell colonies
creates gradients of endogenous differentiation-inducing signaling molecules
that regulate neural differentiation efficiency. This hypothesis will be tested
by engineering the size and interspacing of colonies and thus, systematically
manipulating signaling thresholds of cell-secreted endogenous factors. The main
objectives are to gain a mechanistic understanding of molecular events that
govern this event and propose an approach for enhanced neural differentiation of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). This
will be a marked improvement for iPSCs that differentiate with low efficiency in
traditional cultures. Success of this proposal will be a step towards realizing
transition of stem cell-generated neural cells for treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases. This project is transformative as the methodology
developed here will be broadly applicable to high throughput screening of fate
commitment of stem cells to various lineages in homo- and hetero-cellular
niches. The ease of implementing this microtechnology, which only requires
inexpensive materials and off-the-shelf equipment, makes it fully accessible to
the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new cell replacement therapy approaches based
on the use of embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells will have significant
public health benefits for treating a wide range of disorders including
neurodegenerative diseases that currently lack effective treatment. The proposed
microtechnological approach to engineering stem cell niches will identify
specific factors that enhance differentiation to neural cells beyond that
currently achievable, and therefore will have significant societal impact. The
approach to niche engineering will also broadly benefit the research community
by offering a useful technology to investigate stem cell differentiation to
various cell types in heterocellular niches with long-term impact in tissue
repair and regenerative medicine. In addition to the potential medical impacts,
the proposed project will improve undergraduate STEM education through several
mechanisms. First, undergraduates will be integral to the project, performing,
analyzing, and presenting research. It is the PIs' experience that undergraduate
students, including women and minorities, who perform research continue on into
STEM graduate fields (35/51 undergraduates performing research were females or
underrepresented minorities and 22/32 who have graduated continue on to graduate
school in STEM fields (primarily BME)). Second, this work will be integrated
several aspects of a sophomore level undergraduate computing course. Students
will be exposed to the fundamental equations for modeling diffusion as well as
an explanation of the problem. They will then investigate solutions for the
model in the class using MATLAB®. Finally, this project will increase
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM by development of
a module for middle and high school students in summer camps at The University
of Akron. This module will allow the students to work with the postdoctoral
fellow and the graduate student, learn basics of easy-to-use microtechnology,
and design and create a print of cells. Therefore, these students will be
exposed to advanced technology and research in biomedical engineering.