* 1264503
* Photocrosslinked Hydroxide Exchange Membranes for Alkaline Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Christopher Kloxin, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/29/2016
* USD 242,034.00

1264503 Kloxin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need to create more
effective hydroxide exchange membranes to enable a new generation of alkaline
fuel cells. Membranes must exhibit acceptable conductivity, alkaline stability,
and easy fabrication to make the relatively inexpensive hydroxide exchange fuel
cell (HEFC) a viable energy option. Although proton exchange fuel cells (PEFCs)
have garnered much of the recent attention, the reaction of hydrogen to protons
commonly requires expensive precious metal catalysts, such as platinum, which is
both uneconomical and unsustainable for large-scale applications. By changing
the operation of the fuel cell such that hydroxide is produced at the cathode
and passed through the membrane, the PIs can employ cheaper catalysts, such as
nickel alloy. The focus of this project is a synergistic collaboration between
two PIs, having complementary skills in fuel cells and polymer networks.
Together they plan to create a novel photo-cured, alkaline-stable, and
inexpensive membrane material with high hydroxide conductivity. Specifically,
the aims of the project are fourfold: 1) synthesize, crosslink, and characterize
monomers and polymers having quaternary phosphonium pendant functional groups as
well as photo-induced crosslinking capability using novel chemical schemes; 2)
formulate these novel monomer and polymer compositions to optimize their
membrane properties, such as swelling, mechanical strength, alkaline degradation
resistance, and hydroxide conductivity for each of the three hydroxide exchange
fuel-cell membrane layers: cathode, membrane, and anode; 3) create a membrane
electrode assembly with the optimized materials, exploiting their spatiotemporal
crosslinking control to fabricate complex HEFC designs as well as demonstrate
the capability of these materials in device miniaturization and cell fabrication
multiplexing; and 4) train a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemical synthesis, polymer chemistry, and membrane separations.
Photo-mediated crosslinking will not only provide a dimensionally stable
membrane, which is critical in HEFCs, but also enable a new method for
fabricating complex membrane electrode assemblies. The results of this project
will increase the understanding of how molecular composition influences membrane
performance and properties. The proposed synthetic strategy allows the geometric
configuration and membrane structure to be precisely tuned, which will provide
insight into the complex interplay between hydroxide conductivity, gas exchange,
and transport within a dimensionally stable membrane. Broader Impacts. Diverse
personnel will be involved in a unique combination of chemical reactions and
engineering, polymer engineering, and next-generation energy applications. The
lead PIs are involved in outreach activities such as the University of Delaware
Engineering Discovery Program, which targets K-12 students and parents. The PIs
will develop a demonstration module to explain membranes to K-12 student and
parents. The potential transformational aspect of the project is the fabrication
of materials that will play a significant role in the realization of lower cost
membranes for alkaline fuel cells, leading to an energy source with a low-carbon
footprint.