* 1264776
* Nonlinear Optical Based Flow Cytometry for Purifying Stem Cell Derived Cardiomyocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 11/30/2017
* USD 371,381.00

1264776 - Chan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a growing interest in
developing label-free flow cytometry based on nonlinear optical (NLO)
phenomenon. The translation of such biophotonic techniques, which thus far have
been primarily used in microscopy, to a flow cytometry platform requires the
development of novel optical schemes appropriate for the excitation of NLO
signals from cells in flow. This project proposes to study the design and
development of a prototype label-free flow cytometer based on a NLO process ?
second harmonic generation (SHG) ? by the novel integration of a Bessel beam
lightsheet geometry with multichannel microfluidic systems. In addition, the
importance of this SHG flow sorter will be illustrated by addressing a specific
problem, the purification of pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes. This
project proposes to study a new approach for flow cytometry that can sort cells
without genetic modification or exogenous labeling. Although a few groups have
demonstrated the feasibility of implementing NLO processes to flow cytometry,
those studies did not address major issues related to the consistent sampling of
NLO signals from individual cells as they flow through the microfluidic system.
This proposal will provide new advancements in the optical design of the NLO
excitation scheme appropriate for integration into a flow cytometric
configuration to achieve reproducible cellular analysis.