* 1264543
* A Workshop on the Molecular Design of Commercial Chemicals for Minimal Unintended Biological Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Julie Zimmerman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 10/31/2014
* USD 90,953.00

This workshop, supported by the Division of Chemistry, aims to identify
knowledge gaps and develop an action plan to fill these gaps in order to address
one of the grand challenges in chemical sustainability: design of chemical
products with minimal unintended biological activity. As such, the workshop will
define the required advances and synergistic collaborations to meet this
challenge starting from existing tools, knowledge, data and infrastructure.
Furthermore, the workshop will help identify specific areas where incentives for
innovation are necessary to address the goals of safer chemical
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will explore interdisciplinary
approaches and articulate a systems-level view of design of chemical products
with minimal unintended biological activity. This will require collaborative
efforts from representatives in chemistry, chemical and environmental
engineering, toxicology, public health, environmental health sciences and public
policy. A structured approach to the complex and multidisciplinary nature of the
underlying science will provide educational benefits to the community, enabling
the development of unique curriculum and outreach materials. A peer-reviewed
consensus publication written by workshop participants will raise awareness of
the current state of the science and future needs to achieve the goal of
designing safer chemicals from first principles.