* 1264498
* A combined TERS and functional cellular imaging approach to explore receptor function
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Timothy Gilbertson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1264498&lt;br/&gt;Zhou, Anhong &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how the body recognizes and responds to dietary fat is of critical importance to
the control of fat intake and treatment of obesity. Our knowledge of the
pathways underlying the chemoreception of fatty acids, the prototypical fat
stimuli, in fat-responsive tissues has greatly increased in recent years, but
the nature of the cognate receptors and their role in this process remains
controversial. To explore the role of two receptors (GPR120 and CD36) in fatty
acid signaling, the two PIs have developed a novel collaborative approach that
encompasses both biophysical and cellular biological approaches to test the
hypothesis that CD36 and GPR120 are functionally linked in the initial
recognition of fatty acids in chemosensory cells. A combined TERS and calcium
imaging system will be developed that for the first time will allow the ability
to map the distribution of these receptors at nanoscale resolution
and&lt;br/&gt;their function in a single system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General
description:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will develop novel tools for imaging how
particles of fat interact with cells via specific cell-surface receptors. The
novel technology will allow to quantify receptors and to monitor how receptors
rearrange and co-localize on surfaces of cells. Presence of fatty acids bound to
receptors will be determined by a novel tool enabling chemical analysis of the
cell surface.