* 1264153
* Advancing the Molecular Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases through Bayesian Phylogenetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Marc Suchard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,530,985.00

This project targets the design, development and distribution of Bayesian
statistical algorithms and software for analysis of massive amounts of sequence
and phenotype data to study the emergence and spread of rapidly evolving
pathogens. To this end, the project will foster novel phylogeographic models to
explore mechanisms of disease spread and ecological barriers, and will invent
and implement data integration techniques for genotypic and phenotypic evolution
to study, for example, antigenic competition between the host and pathogen.
Finally, the project will develop high-performance statistical tools to learn
from such Big Data in molecular epidemiology. Statistical computing techniques
will include massive parallelization extensions for existing parametric models
at the genome-scale and original non-parametric inference tools.

Combating pathogen spread and their associated disease burden is a tremendous
challenge requiring sustained research effort and decided public health
measures, and the availability of genomic data provides a major asset in
characterizing these pathogens. What remains lacking is a marriage of
statistical thinking and evolutionary biology to integrate these data through
phylogenetic reconstructions with geographic sampling information and pathogen
phenotypic and epidemiological dynamics. As one of the most pressing problems in
statistical phylogenetics, this project fills this gap. Statistical advances
will be widely disseminated through timely upgrades to currently popular
software and new low-level libraries. The massively parallel algorithms and
resulting software from this project will enable their deployment across a
rapidly expanding range of large-scale problems in statistics and medicine.
Results will also be provided in accessible, peer-reviewed articles that
describe these advances with reference to genomics and, more generally, to other
Big Data problems in medicine. Finally, the research will also provide training
to graduate, undergraduate, and high school students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences.