* 1264188
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Framing of Collective Action in Groups
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Jeffrey Lucas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 9,348.00

Jeffrey Lucas&lt;br/&gt;Marek Nathan Posard&lt;br/&gt;University of
Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key assumption for theories of social exchange
is that actors prefer to maximize their own valued rewards in exchange
relationships. One common definition of value is the accumulation of some
material reward (e.g. profit chips or money). The affect theory of social
exchange broadens this definition to include emotional benefits. In other words,
individuals also prefer to maximize their level of positive feelings during
exchange relationships. These feelings can generate trust and cohesion between
exchange partners. The research studies whether framing group contributions as a
decision about others, rather than about one's self-interest, can generate
certain pro-social outcomes. Social theorists have proposed that both monetary
and emotional rewards can motivate individuals to engage in collective action.
The result of this generosity is trust, affective commitment, and cohesion
between individual group members. This research investigates if framing
collective action in different ways can also affect these pro-social outcomes
within competitive and cooperative group contexts. The central hypothesis of
this project is that presenting group tasks as a decision about others can
promote collective action irrespective of whether group members perceive each
other as collaborators or competitors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research could help us better understand how framing
collective actions with reference to the group produces social outcomes within
competitive and cooperative group contexts. Findings have implications for a
variety of social organizations that function by promoting collective behavior
in groups. Corporate work teams, for example, that function within a competitive
economic context may benefit by framing collective action of their employees
from the perspective of groups rather than as an individual contribution from
each employee. Cohesion within a social support group may increase by framing
member contributions as starting from the collective instead of individuals.
This research also has a training component with at least five to seven
undergraduate students participating in data collection to learn the practice of
social and behavioral science research.