* 1264329
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Mechanistic Design of Aggregation Resistance in Multi-Domain Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher Roberts, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Roberts/Robinson&lt;br/&gt;1264329/1264554&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-native
aggregation denotes a set of molecular processes by which a folded, biologically
active protein becomes effectively locked into a ?misfolded? assembly or
aggregate of proteins. Formation of these aggregates is a ubiquitous hurdle to
successful over-expression, purification, and storage of recombinant proteins
throughout the biotechnology and biopharmaceutical industries. This is
particularly the case for multi-domain proteins, such as natural and designed
antibodies, as well as for other predominantly-beta proteins. Predictive design
of these more complex proteins is handicapped by limitations in the mechanistic
understanding of key features of sequence and structure that control aggregation
of multi-domain proteins. This project seeks to improve fundamental
understanding of the mechanism(s) of multi-domain protein aggregation, so as to
provide general design rules to engineer aggregation resistance into therapeutic
proteins and other biotechnology products. This is a partnership between Amgen,
Tulane University, and the University of Delaware through the National Science
Foundation?s industry-university GOALI program. The work will focus on
computational design of new antibody molecules that retain their known function
(e.g., ligand binding) while greatly reducing their aggregation rates, and then
experimentally characterizing the aggregation pathways to assure that the design
predictions worked properly at a molecular level. &lt;br/&gt;From a broader
perspective, the project focuses on creating new experimental and computational
tools to better predict and control or even eliminate aggregates in protein
pharmaceuticals and other biotechnology products. Doing so will decrease the
cost of development for industrial scientists and engineers, and also decrease
the time to market and any safety risks associated with protein aggregates in
medical applications. The biopharmaceutical industry is one the fastest growing
and attractive industries for growth of the U.S. job market requiring a highly
trained workforce that will maintain international competitiveness. An indirect
but equally important outcome of this project is the training of the next
generation of industrial scientists and potential leaders for the industry, as
well as development of new educational tools for more broad use throughout the
technical community, and potentially for direct use in demonstrations in high
school science courses such as chemistry, biochemistry, biology, and physics.