* 1264440
* Using Network Dynamic fMRI for Pre-surgical Localization of Epileptogenic Foci
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Lilianne Mujica-Parodi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 534,156.00

PI: Mujica-Parodi, Lilianne&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1264440&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: For this proposal, we will
develop a neurobiologically-based instrument to identify seizure foci in
epilepsy. Seizures gradually destroy the brain; therefore, early intervention is
critical to maximize chances of full recovery. For the roughly one third of all
patients whose seizures cannot be managed through medication, the most common
treatment option is surgical removal of the brain areas thought to be seizure
foci. However, the procedure assumes that foci can be identified with
precision.&lt;br/&gt;When they cannot be identified through standard techniques
in neuroimaging, as in about half of all patients with medication-resistant
focal epilepsy, the options are either no treatment or surgical trial and error,
both of which can lead to neurodegeneration as severe as the disease itself.
Entropic methods adapted from dynamical systems and statistical physics have
been applied to EEG to identify seizures, and most recently have been applied to
the identification of seizure foci, with some success. However, clinical
adoption of these techniques has failed due to EEG's poor spatial resolution and
inability to access sub-cortical regions commonly implicated in seizures. FMRI
has the three-dimensional whole brain coverage and spatial resolution required
for identifying neurosurgical targets. Unfortunately, hemodynamic time-series
are typically too short and sparse to permit application of most standard
information theoretic methods, and the degree to which fMRI acquisition and
processing techniques preserve signal dynamics is a fundamental engineering
question that remains unaddressed. The proposed three-year research plan
provides for comprehensive optimization, including innovations in acquisition,
hardware, software, and analytical techniques, and is comprised of four parts.
First, we will assess and improve the fidelity of fMRI dynamics. This includes
both instrumentation development of a Dynamic Phantom for fMRI, for the first
time permitting quantitative comparison/correction between known "hemodynamic"
inputs and signal outputs at each stage of the image processing pipeline, as
well as between time-series acquired from the same spatial coordinates using
intracranial EEG (the "gold standard"), scalp EEG, and fMRI. Second, in order to
aid in identification of network abnormalities, we will derive normative masks
to control for stimulus or default-network activation patterns. Third, we will
investigate the relationship between abnormalities of signal complexity and
network connectivity, the latter of which has critical implications for
understanding the etiology of seizure vulnerability at the synaptic level.
Finally, we will use support vector machine to develop automated algorithms for
identification of putative seizure foci, as confirmed by intracranial electrodes
and/or seizure freedom following surgical resection. If successful, our proposed
direction would culminate in providing neurosurgeons with a potentially
revolutionary advance in surgical treatment of intractable cryptogenic epilepsy,
and thus satisfies the mission of the NSF funding mechanism, designed to support
"significant advancement of fundamental engineering and scientific knowledge"
rather than incremental improvements. This proposal integrates development of
computational techniques and instrumentation with direct clinical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;In 2007, the
National Academy of Science, National Academy of Engineering,
and&lt;br/&gt;Institute of Medicine were charged by Congress to form a committee
to address the challenges associated with maintaining scientific innovation and
economic competitiveness within an increasingly global economy. For this
proposal, we will focus on addressing specific recommendations. an action item
was to strengthen children's K-12 preparation in science and technology by
enhancing the science and engineering education of the science teachers
themselves. The action item will be addressed through the development of a
hands-on engineering design and innovation curriculum for grades 1-6. This
curriculum will be iteratively tested and refined in a socioeconomically-diverse
school, disseminated through our website, and will include follow-up NWEA
individualized assessment to measure efficacy in improving student STEM
performance. By training students in the lab to develop engineering design and
innovation in their own research, and then training them to teach teachers and
elementary school students the same conceptual tools at a more basic level, we
are able to integrate our research and educational goals to the fullest extent
possible.