* 1264902
* Development of a novel predictive controller synthesis method for complex reaction systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Antonios Armaou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Armaou, Antonios Institutions: Pennsylvania State University Proposal
Number: 1264902 Title: Development of a novel predictive controller synthesis
method for complex reaction systems

Intellectual Merit:

Continuous pressure on profit margins and ever stringent environmental limits
have led to a need to develop advanced control structures that force optimal
process behavior and simultaneously satisfy strict process and product quality
constraints. Over the past twenty years model predictive control (MPC) has
become a powerful tool that is extensively used by the chemical industry. The
control action in MPC is calculated by repeatedly solving online a finite-
horizon open-loop optimization problem. As the control action is computed during
process evolution, MPC has the capability to suppress the external disturbances
and tolerate model inaccuracies during the course of forcing the system to
follow a certain optimal path that respects the process constraints. Issues that
significantly limit the practical implementation of MPCs is their computational
requirements, the need for development of specialized search algorithms and
performance degradation due to model uncertainty.

Motivated by the above, this work aims to extend the applicability of MPC
designs to complex processes and address their computational requirements which
have so far prevented their implementation to fast evolving and unstable
processes. The intellectual objective is to develop a general and systematic MPC
synthesis methodology that is specifically tailored for processes in the
chemical and energy fields. The work will resolve fundamental computational
issues associated with a) the dynamic nature of optimal control problems, and b)
spatial variations due to the interplay of transport phenomena and reaction.
Individual project aims include: o Development of a computationally efficient
algorithm to derive nonlinear low-order, approximate algebraic models that
describe the dynamic process behavior. o Characterization of error and
enforcement of user-defined error bounds. o Construction of practically
implementable MPC designs via reformulation of the underlying dynamic
optimization problem as an algebraic one that is amenable to standard search
algorithms. o Computational acceleration of the MPC designs. Characterization of
model nonlinearity and uncertainty effects on MPC results. o Integration of the
research results into the graduate curriculum and dissemination of software
tools; involvement of undergraduate students into selected parts of the research
and revision of undergraduate curriculum.

Broader Impact:

A wide range of complex industrial processes could benefit from the results of
this research. Examples include both batch reactors and reactive distillation
columns for the production of unsaturated polyesters, and microelectronics
manufacturing processes (e.g. vapor phase epitaxy, chemical vapor deposition,
etching & electrodeposition). The latter processes are extensively used for the
production of both organic and inorganic photovoltaic systems. The PI aims to
implement the research results in real-life industrial processes focusing on
economic operation and tight control of key process and product characteristics.
The predictive controllers will be used in collaborative efforts with NTUA and
PSU experimentalists to design more efficient experiments, discover crucial
process parameters and identify optimal time dependent operating conditions. In
return, the developed methodologies will be evaluated in real-life experimental
reactors; relevant weaknesses will be identified and addressed.

To transfer the results and insight of the research to the industrial sector,
the PI will also actively seek collaborations with industry and will develop and
disseminate software tools with a transparent user-machine interaction
interface. In addition, The PI plans a number of activities to integrate the
research with education including incorporation of research results in
optimization and control courses, undergraduate student participation in
research through the honors program, and the development of educational tools.
Finally, the PI will employ current available venues to efficiently disseminate
the software to other research groups within Penn State, other educational
institutions and industries.