* 1264772
* Implantable Three-dimensional Opto-uECoG Interface for Neuroprotection and Restoration of Vision in Glaucoma
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Arthur Weber, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 370,000.00

PI: Li Proposal No: 1264772

Technical Description and Intellectual Merit: Optic nerve injuries due to
diseases (e.g. glaucoma) or trauma often result in lifelong disabilities, and at
present most are incurable. Retrograde degeneration of ganglion cells following
optic nerve injuries is believed to result primarily from a reduction in the
transport of neurotrophic materials these neurons obtain from their target
neurons in the visual thalamus. Current neurotrophic factor-based treatments are
inadequate to provide long-term neuroprotection and can produce abnormal
dendritic morphology in both transduced and non-transduced nerve cells. The
objective of this proposed research is to investigate an innovative strategy for
treatment of optic nerve injuries, combining neurotrophic therapy of the eye
with optical stimulation of the visual cortex to promote endogenous
neuroprotection and preservation of retinal ganglion cells (RGC) and retinal
function. It is hypothesized that combined treatment of both the eye and visual
cortex provides a more significant and sustained level of neuroprotection as
compared to treating the eye alone. Specifically, optical stimulation of
cortical neurons across different layers will be achieved via a novel three-
dimensional (3-D) Opto-µECoG (electrocorticography) interface, which consists of
multiple micro light emitting diode (µ-LED) light sources, out-of-plane
microscale polymer waveguides, and transparent µECoG electrodes on a single
flexible polymer platform. Integration of individually addressable µ-LED chips
with waveguides will help minimize the LED light scattering within brain tissue
to achieve high-spatial resolution and precise light delivery to the target
neurons. The transparent epidural ECoG electrodes will permit real-time
monitoring of light-induced neural activity in visual cortex. The functionality
and reliability of the engineered Opto-µECoG interface will be evaluated using
both in-vitro primary cortical slices and in vivo rat models. Light-induced
activation of the visual thalamus will be assessed, as indicated by enhanced
electrical activity of neurons in the visual thalamus as well as up-regulated
levels of BDN Fandits associated anti-apoptotic proteins (ERK 1,2, PI3K/Akt, and
CREB).Enhanced neuroprotection and preservation of vision following the combined
treatment will also be investigated ina rat model with optic nerve trauma, by
comparing electroretinographic responses from animal eyes and vision-evoked
potentials from visual cortex. The ultimate goal is the development of
optogenetics-based treatment strategies not only for optic neuropathies, but
also for other brain injuries in general. The PIs have established
collaborations and complementary research expertise in the areas of biomedical
microelectrome chanical systems (BioMEMS), neural engineering, and
neurophysiology, which make this project viable in its execution.

Broader Impacts: The scientific impacts of this research include: 1)
investigation of a transformative treatment strategy for neural protection and
restoration in eyes with glaucoma, 2) development of optogenetics-based
engineering tools for seamless communication with neurons, and 3) in-depth
understanding of the mechanisms of trauma-induced cellular degeneration and
neuroprotection. While it is specifically tailored for glaucoma treatment, the
proposed treatment strategy can also be used to treat trauma-induced optic nerve
injuries and other brain injuries such as sensory deficits, Parkinson's disease,
and depression. The most pronounced long-term benefits of this work to society
include a reduction of healthcare cost and quality of life improvement for a
sizeable, and growing, population affected by the above conditions. In addition
to its scientific impacts, this work will offer unique research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students to understand technical details of different
disciplines and develop multiple, translational, biomedical skills. To reach
larger audiences, the results will be shared with students through science
fairs, with scientific communities through conference presentations and journal
publications, and with the public through exhibits. The integrated outreach
program will be very effective due to the visually appealing nature of
microscale devices and systems. The curriculum development and improvement will
provide tremendous opportunities to introduce interdisciplinary topics and
hands-on experimental experiences to students at multiple levels. The results of
the educational programs will be assessed through internal and external
evaluators and disseminated through conferences (e.g. ASEE, FIE and MEMS) and
in-house programs, such as Frontiers in Science, at MSU. These efforts will
encourage more students to pursue careers in research and ultimately produce
skilled and knowledgeable workforces for biomedical, neural science, and
engineering.