* 1264021
* Polyglutamine Folding and Aggregation - Molecular Structure and Pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/29/2016
* USD 355,000.00

Polyglutamine (or polyQ), a polymer consisting of glutamine repeat units, has
been implicated in as many as&lt;br/&gt;nine neurodegenerative illnesses,
including Huntington's disease (HD). An intriguing feature of the so-
called&lt;br/&gt;expanded-polyQ-track diseases is that they only become manifest
when the corresponding polyQ chains&lt;br/&gt;exceed a certain critical length.
Several hypotheses have been put forth to explain the onset of
expandedpolyQ&lt;br/&gt;diseases. One hypothesis posits that, beyond a critical
length, a polyQ molecule can adopt a folded&lt;br/&gt;structure that serves as a
nucleus for the subsequent polymerization of additional molecules, thereby
forming a&lt;br/&gt;fibril. A more recent, alternative view proposes that
several polyQ molecules can form a disordered aggregate&lt;br/&gt;that, over
time, gradually converts into a protofibril rich in ..-helical
content.&lt;br/&gt; In this work, the PIs propose to use atomistic models of
polyQ in aqueous solution to determine the &lt;br/&gt;structure of the nucleus
and early aggregates, and to identify the molecular pathways
through&lt;br/&gt;which they form. More importantly, the PIs also propose to
compare the results of simulations to 2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;infrared (2D IR)
spectroscopic measurements. To that end, the PIs will develop advanced
simulation methods that&lt;br/&gt;will enable a thorough exploration of phase-
space, as well as the pathways connecting different
metastable&lt;br/&gt;conformational states, and they will develop tools that
will permit prediction of 2D IR spectra directly from the&lt;br/&gt;results of
atomistic simulations. By engaging in a synergistic cycle of prediction and
experimentation, they will&lt;br/&gt;arrive at a fundamental understanding of
early-stage polyQ aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Theoretical and computational studies of the folding and aggregation of large
PolyQ&lt;br/&gt;molecules in explicit water have been scarce. Studies of that
nature, however, would provide much needed&lt;br/&gt;insights into the genesis
of a number of diseases. The research proposed will examine at an
unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;level of detail the ensembles of folded states adopted
by polyQ, and will help determine how such states are&lt;br/&gt;interconnected
in the formation of small aggregates. The existence of such states and their
dynamics will be&lt;br/&gt;assessed directly through 2D IR measurements, which
will be interpreted in terms of the molecular models&lt;br/&gt;proposed in this
work. The knowledge gained through this effort will not only provide insights
into the onset of&lt;br/&gt;HD, but will also yield important clues about the
process of amyloid fibril formation by oligopeptides in&lt;br/&gt;general. The
computational challenges associated with our proposed research are staggering. A
promising&lt;br/&gt;array of novel molecular modeling methods will be developed
to meet those challenges. Such methods will&lt;br/&gt;advance the state of the
art in molecular simulation and will find applications in systems ranging
from&lt;br/&gt;biomolecules to complex fluids. The PIs anticipate that the
combined 2D IR-computational approach to be&lt;br/&gt;developed in this work
will grow into a widely used technique for characterization of
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Huntington's
disease currently afflicts 1 in 10,000 individuals. The toxic species are
the&lt;br/&gt;small PolyQ aggregates of interest to this work; understanding the
molecular origins of PolyQ folding and&lt;br/&gt;aggregation could provide new
insights for development of therapeutic strategies. Beyond the
beneficial&lt;br/&gt;impact to society that would come with that understanding,
the research proposed here offers a particularly&lt;br/&gt;relevant context in
which to engage high-school children in science. The PIs propose to capitalize
on that&lt;br/&gt;opportunity by developing a workshop on protein aggregation
and neurodegenerative disorders aimed at high&lt;br/&gt;school students from
under-represented minority backgrounds. By taking advantage of the computer
expertise&lt;br/&gt;of students involved in our proposed research, they will
also propose to develop a strategy aimed at introducing&lt;br/&gt;middle-school
and high-school students to computer programming early in their careers.