* 1264315
* Paths to Bronze Age Complexity: Monitoring the Rise of Pecica "Santul Mare"
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 377,920.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. John O'Shea and an international
team of colleagues from the United States, Romania, Hungary, and Italy will
renew archaeological excavations at the site of Pecica "ªanþul Mare" in
southwestern Romania. The great tell of Pecica "ªanþul Mare" is among the most
important Bronze Age sites in Europe, and was a major center for the production
and trade of bronze tools, ornaments and weapons. Previous National Science
Foundation supported research has shown that Pecica was a complex polity with
centralized public architecture, craft specialists, and segregated social
strata. The research also demonstrated that Pecica was deeply involved in the
spread of domestic horses, and possibly also chariots, into Europe. While this
prior work presented a picture of Pecica at its peak, and of its rapid collapse,
the present research effort is concerned with understanding how Pecica rose to
prominence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remaining archaeological layers at Pecica
hold a unique record of the internal and external factors which brought the
Pecica society into existence. The excavations will provide a detailed view of
the emergence of Pecica as a major regional center and clarify the context of
this development, both among the contemporary local communities and within the
larger regional networks of the European Bronze Age. The research will
contribute to our understanding of how social inequality and complexity develop,
and highlight a form of societal organization that is central to cultural
developments in the European Bronze Age but which may differ from the complex
chiefdom type organization seen in other parts of the World. The excavation will
generate important new information relating to the development and organization
of metallurgy and craft production, and provide critical evidence relating to
the Bronze Age subsistence and productive economies, and particularly to the
transformative spread of the domestic horse and associated transport
technologies into Europe. Finally, the excavations will provide a complete
record of not only the material culture of this important EU Cultural Heritage
site, but also of the Bronze Age climate and environment, and particularly the
cultural impacts of Pecica's development on the local and regional environment
that may be linked to significant environmental deteriorations at the end of the
Middle Bronze Age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from understanding the settlement
of Pecica, itself, the research promises a number of broader benefits. The work
at Pecica will contribute to the larger research effort in the Carpathian Basin
Bronze Age. Concurrent research projects in Hungary, Romania, and Serbia are
combining to provide a macro-regional dataset for archaeological research that
is unique in Europe and may rival places such as the Valley of Mexico or Oaxaca
as a laboratory for the study of culture change. The research provides
international research experience for American graduate and undergraduate
students, and provides training opportunities for beginning and advanced
Romanian students. The collaborative and interdisciplinary effort provides
training benefits to all participants, senior and junior alike, and is
supporting innovations in research design and excavation strategies within
Romania. The project is also contributing to the infrastructure of
archaeological research by providing improved curation and access for the
archaeological collections from this important site.