* 1264719
* Collaborative Proposal: Engineering Bacterial Outer Membrane Vesicles for New Biotechnology Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

CBET 1264701/1264719&lt;br/&gt;DeLisa/Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outer membrane
vesicles (OMVs) are nanoscale proteoliposomes derived from Gram-negative
bacteria such as Escherichia coli. It is now firmly established that bacteria
can be engineered to produce recombinant proteins in the different micro-
compartments (i.e., lumen, membrane, outer surface) of an OMV. This capability
has been widely exploited for vaccine development; however, very little else has
been done to harness the full potential of OMVs. This project seeks to extend
OMVs for other untapped applications typically performed by synthetic polymer-
based vesicles. This will be achieved by expanding the range and complexity of
biomolecular structures that can be functionally produced in the lumens, in the
membranes, and on the surfaces of OMVs. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is the development of a versatile array of tools to independently or
simultaneously embed functions into the different compartments of OMVs using
standard molecular biology techniques rather than the tedious and multiple-step
syntheses and conjugations associated with polymer-based vesicle
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will leverage their combined expertise to
create synthetic OMVs with the potential to impact many scientific areas,
ranging from cell-specific targeting, gene/protein delivery, vaccine
development, cascading enzyme reactions, biosensing and bioremediation. The
proposed research is also highly interdisciplinary in nature. Graduate students
participating in this project will gain an integrated perspective of the
important interfaces and synergies connecting biochemistry, microbiology, modern
genetics, synthetic biology and bioengineering. These students will also gain an
appreciation for translating fundamental discoveries into practical
technologies. The broader impacts of the project include an extended outreach
program for disadvantaged students from New York City who face significant
economic disadvantages and a Homeschoolers Day Program that seeks to work with
local homeschool families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary
nature of the project, this award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.