* 1264466
* RAPID: Understanding Sudden Hydro-Climatic Changes and Exploring Sustainable Solutions in the Enriquillo Closed Water Basin (Southwest Hispaniola)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Reza Khanbilvardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2013
* USD 199,746.00

1264466 (Gonzalez). The two largest lakes in Haiti and the Dominican Republic
are, respectively, the Saumatre and Enriquillo lakes, both of which are salt
water lakes. Lake Enriquillo is at the lowest point in the Caribbean, and is
within several miles of Lake Saumatre. Both lakes have been growing drastically
in size over the past several years. The socio-economic impact of this growth of
the lakes has been very dramatic. Since the lakes began their recent rapid
growth, more than 15,000 hectares of agricultural and grass land around the
lakes have been flooded, having a strong negative impact on 2,500 farms in 16
communities with total estimates of 10,000 individuals affected. Urgency to
address this growth problem has risen sharply over the past few months due to
the unprecedented water levels reached. Further, the Caribbean is in the midst
of its tropical depression/hurricane season, a unique time for embarking on a
research effort as the Lakes are responding to these extreme events in a unique
fashion. The window is relatively short and if missed would require waiting an
entire year to possibly get a similar weather pattern passing through the lakes
region again. Meanwhile, the emergency resulting from floods will have worsened.
The research plan integrates observations, integrated earth-system modeling and
community engagement and is designed to lead to accelerated documentation of the
causes of the growth and to support policy formulation for handling the
consequences. The urgent questions in need of answers are: Through rapid
monitoring and modeling, can the hypothesis be supported that a warming climate
is impacting the overall hydro-balance of the lakes? How is this hydro-balance
reflected in terms of lake volume and surface area? What may be the response of
informed communities to the emergency presented by continuously expanding flood
lands?