* 1264579
* Role of Cell Volume Changes in Mechanotransduction of Hydrostatic Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jiro Nagatomi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Nagatomi Proposal ID: 1264579

The goal of this research is to advance the understanding of a novel mechanism
by which cells detect hydrostatic pressure as part of biological events.
Although pressure, such as arterial and intracranial pressure, is experienced
and regulated throughout the body, conventional thinking is that cells cannot
directly sense pressure changes. However, numerous in vitro studies have
demonstrated that when cells were subjected to elevated pressures, they
exhibited an increase in cell proliferation, cytoskeletal reorganization, and a
number of other cellular-/molecular-level changes. Because cells are assumed to
be incompressible under physiological-levels of pressure, cell deformation as a
mechanism for pressure sensing by cells has generally been ruled out. A novel
experiment was devised to probe this conventional tenet, and volume changes in
bladder urothelial cells exposed to pressure were quantified. Notably,
application of pressure as low as 10 cmH2O caused rapid cell volume increases.
Moreover, exposure to this level of pressure resulted in increased release of
ATP from these cells.

Based on these preliminary findings, it is hypothesized that elevated pressure
activates membrane-bound sodium channels, which increases intracellular sodium
concentration and influx of water to induce cell swelling. This can lead to
further activation of stretch-sensitive calcium channels, which has been shown
to trigger downstream events, such as release of ATP.

The objective of this research is to test the novel hypothesis that sensing of
hydrostatic pressure occurs via cell-swelling. In the proposed 3-year project, a
custom perfusion chamber and optical imaging techniques will be used to quantify
changes in cell volume and ATP release by bladder urothelial cells exposed to
hydrostatic pressure. By altering the ion composition of perfusion media and
blocking select ion channels during pressure application, potential mechanisms
for this phenomenon will be determined. The three research aims are as follows.
1) To elucidate the role of Na+ in pressure-induced cell swelling of urothelial
cells 2) To elucidate the role of pressure-induced cell swelling in ATP release
by urothelial cells 3) To determine if cell-swelling is a common mechanism for
pressure sensing in multiple cell types

This research will be conducted by a graduate student as part of his/her
doctoral thesis under supervision of the PI; the student will also enroll in
"BIOE 850: Mentoring undergraduate teams." Aspects of the research activity will
be designated as 10-week-projects for summer interns to be recruited from
minority-serving South Carolina colleges.

Intellectual Merit: An understanding of the mechanism for cell swelling under
pressure, a fairly counterintuitive event, and investigation of the parallels in
reaction to pressure in cells of many different organs could completely
transform our understanding of pressure-sensing and regulation in the body. When
the hypothesized pressure-sensing mechanism is accurately described, it may be
applied to other areas of engineering research, such as bio-inspired sensors and
tissue regeneration. Moreover, the research findings are expected to provide
explanations for previous observations that various types of cells respond to
pressure and facilitate further research in the field of cell mechanics and
mechanobiology.

Broader Impacts: Deficiency in the body's innate ability to regulate pressure in
the arteries, veins, eyes, and cranial cavity can lead to a number of life-
threatening complications that affect millions of people. Looking beyond the
traditional baroreceptor theory and identifying the actual cellular pressure-
sensing mechanism can help develop treatment and preventative measures for
various pressure-related diseases. The proposed research will provide graduate
and undergraduate students an opportunity to make discoveries while mastering
research skills including communication and dissemination of data. The summer
internship will increase participation of SC students from underrepresented
groups in STEM research. The findings will be disseminated to broad audiences
through publications and outreach to the local community.