* 1264560
* Quantifying Rare Earth (REE) and High Field Strength (HFSE) Element Mobility in Fluids at Conditions Appropriate for Forearc to Subarc Cold and Hot Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Adam Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2016
* USD 379,393.00

Intellectual Merit: Ocean lithosphere and overlying sediments undergo
metamorphic dehydration as these materials are subducted (i.e., increasing
pressure and temperature). This process has been hypothesized to account for
distinctive geochemical signatures in arc magmas as opposed to those from mid-
ocean ridges (MORB) and ocean islands (OIB). The underlying process involves the
ability of exsolved fluids to selectively fractionate elements during fluid-rock
reactions. The fluid is proposed to enrich arc magmas in the large ion
lithophile elements (LILE: K, Rb, Cs, Sr, Ba) relative to high field strength
elements (HFSE: Nb, Zr, Ta, Hf, Ti), as well as enriching the magmas in light-
REE (LREE) relative to the middle- and heavy-REE (MREE, HREE). At present, data
needed to quantify such processes are mostly available for pure or dilute
aqueous solutions and cover a relatively small area in the P-T space wherein
prograde metamorphic dehydration occurs in the forearc and subarc environments.
Experimental studies are proposed to expand significantly our knowledge of the
behavior of the REE and HFSE in aqueous fluid as a function of fluid chemistry,
pressure and temperature at subduction zone conditions. For example, the
partitioning of Nb between rutile and fluid, La and Ce between monazite and
fluid, and Y between xenotime and fluid will be determined for a range of fluid
bulk compositions, including H2O-NaCl and H2O-NaF systems, with quartz used to
ensure the fluid contains sufficient Si relative to that expected in nature.
This work will thus allow assessment of the effects of dissolved Cl, F and Si on
trace element solubilities in realistic aqueous fluids. Two complementary
experimental techniques will be used: 1) a hydrothermal diamond anvil cell
(HDAC) at 1 - 3 GPa and 300-600°C, wherein Nb, La, Ce and Y concentrations will
be measured in situ by using synchrotron X-ray fluorescence (SXRF); and 2) a
piston-cylinder apparatus at 1 and 1.8 GPa and 700-900°C, wherein trace element
concentrations in fluid will be measured by using the mass-loss technique
combined with LA-ICP-MS analysis of recovered crystals to assess the nature of
congruent dissolution of the solid phases. Successful development and
calibration of the experimental technique was demonstrated (and described in
this proposal) by measuring xenotime solubility, hence Y abundance, in a HCl-H2O
fluid to 5 GPa. New results will add significantly to the limited mineral-fluid
partitioning data base over pressure-temperature regime of interest, and allow
geologists to model more accurately the effects of fluid-present metamorphism
and magmatism in the subduction zone environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project involves collaboration between three UNLV faculty members
who combine their expertise to mentor one female PhD student, Ms. Elizabeth
Tanis, and at least two UNLV undergraduate students per year. The PhD student is
already working on this project and has presented data at two AGU meetings as
well as one submitted manuscript that is accepted pending revision. All students
will be trained in cutting-edge synchrotron-based experimental techniques,
piston-cylinder mass loss experiments, analytical chemistry and interpretation
of geochemical data sets, and, importantly, will develop research relationships
with a diverse group of scientists through collaboration with faculty at UNLV,
Memorial University of Newfoundland and beamline scientists at the Advanced
Photon Source. The PIs participate regularly in community outreach, presenting
lectures and hands-on geology demonstrations to K-12 students. Simon and Burnley
regularly visit K-12 classes, and Simon is the Geoscience member of a UNLV-Clark
County School District "summer institute" that brings 60 K-5 teachers to UNLV
each summer for intensive science-curriculum education as well as the Geoscience
content mentor for the Clark Magnate High School science Olympiad team in
2011-2012. Results will be incorporated directly into courses taught by the PIs,
and results will presented at appropriate science meetings and published in
peer-reviewed journals.