* 1264487
* Synthesis and Processing of Electroactive Polymers in Nanostructured Energy Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2017
* USD 325,975.00

PI: Lau, Kenneth K.S.&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Drexel
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264487&lt;br/&gt;Title: Synthesis and
Processing of Electroactive Polymers in Nanostructured Energy
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage is a key component in the energy
conservation equation, especially when considering&lt;br/&gt;sustainable
energies like solar and wind, which are more variable and intermittent in nature
depending on&lt;br/&gt;the time of day, season of the year, and geographical
location. Similarly, the ability to store energy and&lt;br/&gt;use it when
demanded will provide a more seamless operation of electric vehicles whether
during&lt;br/&gt;acceleration/deceleration or in cruise mode. Among different
energy storage technologies, supercapacitors&lt;br/&gt;or electrochemical
capacitors are emerging as an attractive option for delivering much higher power
(rate&lt;br/&gt;of energy transfer) than alternative options like the lithium
ion battery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercapacitors that store charge through electrochemical
double layers possess higher power density but&lt;br/&gt;lack sufficient energy
density. By incorporating electroactive polymers, which undergo relatively
fast&lt;br/&gt;redox reactions, further pseudocapacitance can be added to
enhance energy density. However, as the&lt;br/&gt;supercapacitor electrodes are
typically highly porous nanostructures, there remains significant
synthesis&lt;br/&gt;and processing challenges in adding the electroactive
polymers onto the surfaces of pores inside these&lt;br/&gt;nanostructures
without sacrificing surface area or pore access. The PI plans an
oxidative&lt;br/&gt;chemical vapor deposition (oCVD) approach that will address
many of the challenges by enabling the&lt;br/&gt;conformal, uniform growth of
thin films of electroactive polymers inside porous nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis is that the liquid-free, vapor-to-
solid polymerization reactions will lead to surface&lt;br/&gt;confined polymer
growth and ultrathin films that do not significantly alter the underlying pore
structure&lt;br/&gt;while adding appreciable pseudocapacitance. This work will
involve (1) synthesis of&lt;br/&gt;electroactive polymer thin films in porous
nanostructures, (2) understanding the effect of processing on&lt;br/&gt;polymer
structure and properties, and (3) assembly and electrochemical analysis of
pseudocapacitors that&lt;br/&gt;make use of oCVD to incorporate the
electroactive polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected to deliver enhanced supercapacitors
with significantly&lt;br/&gt;higher specific capacitance, energy density, power
density and cycle stability, making them viable for use&lt;br/&gt;in electric
and hybrid vehicles as well as in the development of greener energy systems that
include solar&lt;br/&gt;cells and fuel cells. Fundamentally, the work is
expected to provide an effective synthesis and&lt;br/&gt;processing methodology
for conformally coating porous nanostructures that will have broader utility
in&lt;br/&gt;other nanoscale devices, including electronics, sensors, solar
cells, fuel cells, transistors and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).
Integrated with the research is an education program, which aims to train
graduate and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students as well as to engage high school
students in polymers for energy. Minority and
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;students will be actively recruited to participate in
the project. In addition, outreach will be&lt;br/&gt;made to schools in
Philadelphia and inner city Camden, NJ to promote STEM involvement and
learning&lt;br/&gt;early on.