* 1264453
* Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of biomass upgrading to fuels and chemicals over catalytic bimetallic nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Adeniyi Lawal, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2017
* USD 211,985.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1264453&lt;br/&gt;Simon G.
Podkolzin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promising new technologies for biomass conversion
into fuels and chemical feedstocks rely on production of bio-oils, which need to
be upgraded in order to remove oxygen from oxygen-containing organic molecules
such as organic acids and phenols. A high oxygen concentration makes bio-oils
acidic and corrosive, unstable during storage, and less energetically valuable
per unit weight than petroleum-derived hydrocarbons. Although there are
effective commercializable processes for the production of bio-oils, there are
no efficient catalytic commercializable technologies for their upgrading.
Current research and development technologies have started with traditional
petroleum refining catalysts, which are not optimized for biomass processing,
and as a result, are not very effective. New catalytic upgrading technologies
are, therefore, urgently needed for the successful development of sustainable
energy resources. Parallels may be sought with petroleum refining processes,
where catalyst advances, such as using bimetallic or multimetallic catalysts,
have led to very efficient delivery of low contaminant fuels. Development of
such new catalytic technologies for bio-oils, however, is severely hindered by a
lack of fundamental understanding of how oxygen-containing hydrocarbons derived
from biomass interact with promising bimetallic
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation Catalysis &amp;
Biocatalysis Program will make an award to fund a collaborative effort between
Professors Simon Podkolzin and Adeniyi Lawal of Stevens Institute of Technology,
Hoboken, NJ, and Professor Bruce Koel of Princeton University to advance the
molecular-level understanding of how oxygen-containing molecules from bio-oils
adsorb and react on catalytic bimetallic nanoparticles. The obtained
fundamentals will be used to identify: (a) preferred chemistries for bio-oil
upgrading, (b) improved catalyst formulations, and (c) optimized reaction
conditions. The program will synergistically combine single-crystal surface
science experiments, characterization and testing of supported metal catalysts,
and quantum-chemical calculations with vibrational analyses for interpretation
of experimental vibrational spectra and transition state calculations for
reaction mechanisms studies. Recognizing that many studies are being funded in
this area, research will be conducted in close cooperation with Department of
Energy biomass conversion programs at the Institute for Integrated Catalysis
operating within the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. This should result
in reduced duplication of efforts and synergy in moving to successful
achievement of biomass conversion efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will establish one basis for the transformative
development of new efficient and environmentally friendly technologies for the
production of renewable energy and chemical industry feedstocks. The fundamental
and applied knowledge from this research will advance the rational design of
catalytic nanomaterials and, more widely, will benefit highly diverse and
rapidly developing technologies that vitally rely on the interaction between
oxygen-containing organic molecules and metal nanoparticles, ranging from
sensors to medical diagnostics, and from drug delivery to fuel cells. The
researchers will be engaged in several undergraduate and K-12 educational
outreach programs. For example, the investigators will develop teaching modules
on metal nanoparticles for green chemistry and sustainability which they will
use in a summer camp for more than 300 high school students from across the U.S.