* 1264509
* An integrated approach, using biofabrication and chemical synthesis, to study cell signaling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

1264509 &lt;br/&gt;Sintim, Herman O.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supporting the research of Professors Herman O. Sintim, William Bentley and Gary
Rubloff of the University of Maryland at College Park. The team will develop
multimodal and multifunctional microfluidic systems for studying cell signaling
by integrating stimuli-responsive biofabrication with device-imposed, complex
gradient generation of bacterial signaling molecules. This device will then be
used to systematically investigate the response of bacterial cells to quorum
sensing molecules and environmental cues. Additionally, the device will be used
to identify new molecules that inhibit bacterial
chemotaxis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the central role that bacterial cell
signaling plays in bacterial physiology, there is a high interest in
understanding or unraveling the various factors that control bacterial response
to signaling molecules. Transformative technologies that can aid the screening
of molecules that inhibit bacterial communication would have potential
applications in medicine, agriculture and industry. The broader impact of this
project includes development of a new technological platform to study how
bacteria interact with each other and the environment. This project is highly
multidisciplinary, involving chemical biologists, bioengineers and biosystems
engineers. Therefore, the students who will be involved with the project will be
trained to solve scientific problems using diverse
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical,
and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.