* 1264988
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: The Role of Cell-Cell Forces in the Cadherin Switch Model
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Amy Wagoner Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2014
* USD 85,972.00

The research objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) is to establish the link between the changing cadherin expression, or
the cadherin switch model, and the evolving mechanical microenvironment that
differentiating mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) encounter during bone formation.
MSCs experience both cell-matrix, or integrin-mediated, and cell-cell, or
cadherin-mediated, forces during differentiation. However, the role of cell-cell
forces through cadherins has been largely neglected despite that cadherin
regulation is essential to normal bone formation. The "cadherin switch"
specifies that as MSCs differentiate in to bone forming cells, one cadherin is
up regulated and another is down regulated. The switch parallels the changing
mechanical environment during bone formation: MSCs begin in soft marrow (~1kPa)
and differentiate into bone matrix-producing cells in stiff, unmineralized
matrix (10s of kPa). This work aims to relate the cadherin switch to the
changing mechanical microenvironment for MSCs. The approach uses a combination
of two tools: Electrohydrodynamic (E-Jet) and 3D, full-field traction force
microscopy (3D TFM). E-Jet will pattern both proteins and stiffness on
polyacrylamide substrates and enable manipulation cell-cell and cell-substrate
forces. 3D TFM will measure the forces thus quantitatively establishing the
relationship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of cell-cell forces in
differentiation and bone formation has largely been neglected. Results from this
work could lead to new treatments for bone diseases and a more complete
understanding of tissue development both for bone and for other tissues. Through
the work the relatively new techniques, 3D TFM and E-Jet patterning of cell
culture substrates, will be made more accessible to a broader scientific
community. The educational component focuses on graduate student training and
research experiences through interactions between institutions and across
disciplines. The research will also be used to highlight the breadth of the
field of Mechanical Engineering (ME) specifically for the Campus Middle School
(CMS) for Girls, with the goal of making ME more accessible to these and other
K-12 students who otherwise may not be interested in ME based on preconceptions
of the field.