* 1264752
* Integrative Capstone Experiences for Engineering and Nursing Students to Enable Independence for Older Adults
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Sundar Krishnamurty, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 124,457.00

PI: Sup IV&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264752&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
creates a new collaborative opportunity for undergraduate mechanical engineering
and nursing students to partner in their senior capstone courses. The focus of
their capstone design projects will be to develop assistive devices for older
adults that will help them maintain quality of life and retain independence. In
this collaborative approach, teams of students will work with an older adult
client from a retirement community to identify challenges they are having with
Instrumental Activities of Daily Life (IADLs), which are as essential for
independent living. Teams will develop solutions using engineering principles
and nursing practices to create usable, economical, and reliable devices that
fit into the daily life of the older adults. The collaborative process with
older adults as clients will enable the students to gain insight into the user's
needs and requirements and develop solutions that are customized for their use.
This proposal is motivated by the impending rise in the number of older adults
in the United States and their desire to remain independent and lead a
fulfilling life. Without assistance with IADLs, they will require increasing
levels of support from family or institutions. The capstone design focus will be
on developing economical assistive devices that can both help older adults
maintain independence and quality of life. The proposal creates a stimulating
and collaborative environment for the proposed projects through the synergistic
partnership between the faculty and students in the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and School of Nursing and the older adults and staff at Mason Wright
Retirement Community (Springfield, MA) and the Jewish Geriatric Services
(Longmeadow, MA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This innovative
collaboration provides a unique and essential opportunity to train the next
generation of engineers and nurses to work collaboratively developing solutions
for real challenges. The nursing students will bring clinical knowledge, as well
as a unique client-centered perspective crucial for successful engagement during
the design process and adaptation when completed. With a balanced perspective,
the engineers on the team will be able to develop realistic design
specifications that capture the requirements and constraints of the challenges
faced by older adults with age-related
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The technology developed for
these projects will have significant effects for the older adult clients who
volunteer. The partner retirement communities serve the needs of low-income
older adults and are situated in an area of Springfield with a large minority
population. The assistive devices created for these individuals will give them
opportunity to maintain their independence that they may not have had for
economic reasons. Many older adults have similar challenges that our clients
will have. The solutions developed from the course may have commercial viability
and offer the chance to affect the lives of millions of older Americans by
supporting their independence and quality of life. The collaboration of
engineering and nursing will demonstrate to the students how other professionals
approach and solve a problem. This experience will benefit their future by
teaching them methods for interdisciplinary work and giving the opportunity to
realize its advantages first-hand.