* 1264622
* GOALI: EB Polymerization: Advanced Characterization of Curing Processes and Polymer Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Stephen Lapin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 03/31/2020
* USD 405,828.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1264622&lt;br/&gt;University
participant: Julie L. P. Jessop, Ph.D., University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
&lt;br/&gt;Industry participant: Stephen C. Lapin, Ph.D., PCT Engineered
Systems, LLC, Davenport, IA &lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI: EB Polymerization: Advanced
Characterization of Curing Processes and Polymer Materials
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Electron-beam (EB) curing offers a
fast, low-energy, and solvent-free means of polymerizing inks, films, and
coatings compared to thermal polymerization. No initiator is required to form
the free-radical active centers, making this technique especially appealing for
packaging applications where molecular migration would be problematic. In
addition, unlike photopolymerization, additives such as pigments, fillers,
fibers, and nanomaterials do not prevent penetration of the ionizing radiation,
resulting in excellent product consistency. In spite of these advantages, less
than 500 low-energy (100 to 300 kV) accelerators are installed worldwide for
curing applications. In order to increase use of EB technology, improvements are
needed in both the curing process and performance properties of the resulting
polymers. While some development has occurred among private companies, there is
need for a more fundamental study of process parameters and their effects;
however, academic research on EB curing has been limited in part by the high
expense of and limited access to EB accelerators. This GOALI will facilitate
collaboration between industrial and academic partners (with over 40 years
combined experience in radiation chemistry and characterization of polymer
kinetics and physical properties) to address these critical needs in EB
technology. PCT Engineered Systems develops and manufactures BroadBeam low
energy EB accelerators and is located less than an hour?s drive from the
University of Iowa (UI) campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to advance EB technologies by increasing the fundamental understanding of the
effects of energy deposition and process conditions on kinetics and material
properties. To meet this goal, the following four key topics will be pursued
collaboratively: (1) compare conversion of EB-cured and UV-cured materials; (2)
compare physical properties of EB-cured, UV-cured, and thermally cured
materials; (3) develop EB-cured resin formulations requiring little or no
nitrogen inerting; and (4) correlate monomer structure with EB dose rate.
Conversions as a function of depth will be measured using Raman confocal
microscopy to demonstrate the effects of radiation penetration and nitrogen
inerting. Molecular weight distributions (for linear polymers), cross-linking
density (for polymer networks), and polymer modulus will be measured using gel
permeation chromatography and dynamic mechanical analysis to demonstrate the
impact of initiation mechanism, monomer structures, and process parameters on
polymer physical properties. Epoxide/acrylate and thiol/acrylate systems will be
explored to mitigate oxygen inhibition. The results of these studies will
provide an improved understanding of both the EB-curing process and the
properties of the resulting polymers. This understanding will facilitate the
extension of EB technologies to a wider range of applications, including high-
performance materials and three-dimensional parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This advanced characterization of the EB-curing process and the
resulting polymer materials will provide a level of understanding of EB-cured
systems significantly beyond what is currently available. This knowledge will
provide a basis for expanding the applications of EB technologies, especially in
the film, coating, adhesives, and composites industries. Results of this
research will facilitate establishment of the US at the forefront of EB
technologies, increase export opportunities for equipment and products, and
provide new jobs as the EB industry expands. This research program will also
have a direct impact on the educational experience of students at various
levels. Students in engineering and science will benefit from a polymer science
course series that will incorporate research results from this project. Several
undergraduate and high-school students will be invited to participate in
portions of this research, and two graduate students will focus their efforts on
investigating these EB-curing systems. Furthermore, through established
recruitment and outreach strategies, underrepresented females and minorities
will be encouraged to participate in this research. Seminars on EB technology
advancements will be held at the UI and PCT, and EB-related symposia will be
organized at RadTech 2016, Photopolymerization Fundamentals 2014, and ACS
national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurable Industrial Collaboration.
PCT will provide EB training, access to its EB pilot line for curing studies,
and internship opportunities. PCT will also advise UI researchers on industry
needs, help set project milestones and deliverables, and monitor the progress of
the studies. Dr. Lapin will serve as a co-advisor for the graduate student
committees and will assist in organizing local and national symposia relating to
EB technology and its use.