* 1264808
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Rare Cell Capturing in Microfluidic Devices via Multiscale Surface Design
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Xuanhong Cheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2017
* USD 277,799.00

Proposal: 1264808/1263940 PI: Liu/Yang

The goal of this proposal is to design a novel surface that could significantly
enhance rare cell capture efficacy and selectivity through synergistic research
activities between Lehigh University and University of Pennsylvania, including a
novel multi-scale computational model, fabrication of a 3D hierarchical surface,
and a microfluidic testing platform. Specifically, we will design and fabricate
a hierarchical surface consisting of patterned structures at two difference
length scales: a micro-scale surface of ripples or herringbone structure and an
array of nanoparticles or nanopillars. The micro-scale sinusoidal ripples and
herringbone structures will generate micro-vortices to enhance cell-wall
collision, provide larger adhesion area, avoid non-specific cell adhesion and
possible cell damage, and enable accurate cell counting; the nanostructures will
complement microvilli on cell membranes, thus, improve both interaction
specificity and cell capturing efficiency.

Through a combined computational and experimental approach we expect that the
proposed study will provide important insights for clinical isolation of rare
cells from a blood sample. The multiscale computational modeling will be applied
for the first time to guide the study of cell capture on various 3D surfaces
with consideration of both hydrodynamics and adhesion dynamics. Various unique
hierarchical surface designs will be integrated into a microfluidic device to
validate the computational prediction and significantly improve rare cell
capture performance. Specifically, we plan to: (1) Develop a multi-scale
transport and adhesion dynamics model for cell capture process and perform cell
capture analysis on surfaces of various designs. Characterize how various
surface designs influence cell capture efficiency, throughput, and selectivity.
(2) Fabricate a library of 3D hierarchical surface consisting of microscale wavy
patterns (1D ripples and 2D herringbone structures) and an array of nanopillars
or nanoparticles. (3) Perform microfluidic test on particle and cell capture
using the fabricated hierarchical surface. Benchmark various surface designs in
terms of capture efficiency, throughput, and selectively (Cheng and Liu). (4)
Compare the experimental results with the computational model; optimize the
model and re-engineer the hierarchical surface and the rare cell capture device.

The synergistic approach across diverse disciplines, including bioengineering,
materials science, nanofabrication, and BioMEMS brings about a novel biomimetic
approach to construct a lab-on-the-chip device for early cancer detection, thus
making the project transformative. The research outcome will create a
significant opportunity to excite the general public in bio-nanotechnology,
thereby provoking and engaging their interest Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM). In addition, this work will offer an effective tool to
recruit and train students at all levels in a highly-integrated research and
educational environment. The research outcome will be disseminated through a
dedicated website and tool sharing at nanoHub for posting new discoveries in
cell science, materials fabrication, and computational modeling frameworks
developed from this project, as well as outreach to K-12 students.