* 1264630
* Microreaction Engineering of Aqueous Phase Metal Catalyzed Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Kevin Shaughnessy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 353,830.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hartman, Ryan L.&lt;br/&gt;Institutions:
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1264630&lt;br/&gt;Title: Microreaction Engineering of Aqueous Phase Metal
Catalyzed Reactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of water as a reaction solvent has the potential
to impact the sustainable, continuous flow manufacturing of specialty chemicals.
Successfully engineering such processes require the ability to overcome some
challenges, including 1) management of the formation of solids as non-covalently
bonded materials on reactor surfaces (e.g., scale deposition), 2) design of
efficient catalysts using understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that
govern synthetic transformations, 3) innovation of novel reactors that
efficiently couple the aromatics that make-up intermediates in fine chemical
production, and 4) integration of analytics with laboratory synthesis tools for
online reaction discovery and optimization. This research will address each of
these four challenges. The PIs plan the engineering and integration of
microreactors with confocal Raman microscopy, where the intrinsic kinetic and
mechanistic knowledge of palladium-catalyzed C-H functionalization reactions
with hydrophilic ligands will be made available in the absence of transport
limitations. The use of hydrophilic ligands, and hence water as a reaction
solvent, in fine chemical manufacturing presents the opportunity for greener
pathways to useful compounds. The PIs will combine reactor design principles,
analytical chemistry, and synthetic methodologies aimed at developing a
platform, which can be used to continuously synthesize fine chemical
intermediates with water as a reaction solvent. The enabling technology will
combine concepts of (i) microreactor technology, (ii) the design of hydrophilic
ligands for synthetic organic reactions, (iii) non-invasive analytical
techniques for reaction monitoring, and (iv) multi-step microchemical synthesis
involving reactions and separations. If successful, the knowledge generated will
foster a new paradigm of sustainable chemical process design: the use of water
as a solvent to manufacture fine chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to establish fundamental understanding
of reactor and process design of synthetic pathways that utilize water as a
solvent. This understanding will advance chemical processes that synthesize
specialty chemicals, in a sustainable way. Undergraduate and graduate students
will benefit from this work through the evolution of the reaction engineering
curricula and undergraduate research opportunities for underrepresented groups.
Furthermore, students K-12+ will be engaged by the creation of online YouTube
videos through an undergraduate competition between the University of Southern
California and the University of Alabama aimed at the interfacing of advanced
chemistry and reactor design concepts, real world engineering problems, and pop
culture. The work will also expose graduate students to international research
experiences through collaboration with the Institute of Condensed Matter
Chemistry Bordeaux (ICMCB). These educational components will strengthen the
undergraduate engineering education at the University of Alabama, foster early
interest in engineering careers from K-12 students, and provide unique
opportunities for graduate students to gain international exposure.