* 1264276
* Nanoimprinting Ultrafiltration Membranes for Non-Chemical Fouling Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Yifu Ding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 320,000.00

1264276 Ding

The performance of ultrafiltration (UF) membranes used for liquid separations is
often degraded by membrane fouling. The foulants can be partially removed by
harsh chemical treatment, causing more energy consumption, loss of productivity,
and shortened membrane lifetime. Thus, mitigation of membrane fouling remains a
grand challenge for most liquid separation applications. While most antifouling
strategies focus on modifying the surface chemistry of the UF membrane, this
project aims to use micro and nanoscale patterns on UF membranes as a non-
chemical approach to mitigate fouling during active filtration. To achieve this
goal, the two specific objectives are: (1) to understand the processing ?
structure ? performance relationships for creating patterns onto asymmetric
porous UF membranes using nanoimprint lithography (NIL), without sacrificing the
permselectivity of the membrane; and (2) to understand the mechanism of how
these surface patterns affect fouling of the membranes during filtration. The
PIs expect to advance current understanding of how surface topography affects
fouling during active filtration. NIL will be applied to create patterns on the
surface of the asymmetric UF membrane without sacrificing its permselectivity.
Membranes with micro or nanopatterned surface have not been previously been
fabricated. The NIL approach is applicable to all UF membranes, thus offering a
platform for quantitative physico-chemical insights into the interplay between
chemistry and topography on colloidal interactions in complex systems. The
comparison of fouling between patterned and flat membranes with identical
chemistry will shed light on the explicit role of surface topography on membrane
fouling. The integration of lithographic patterns with the filtration membranes
will allow the PIs to control the thermodynamic and hydrodynamic interactions
between the membrane surface and the feed solution during active filtration.
Broader impacts. Results of the project may guide a flexible non-chemical
approach to produce UF membranes with reduced fouling and improved energy
efficiency with benefits for a broad range of separation technologies. Results
of the project will advance our current knowledge on how surface topography
affects the membrane fouling during active filtration, which in turn will guide
the design of surface patterns for targeting specific separation applications.
The proposed educational impact will leverage the exceptional infrastructures
for innovation in education and outreach at the University of Colorado to
provide new, inspirational educational experiences, with a focus on membrane
technology, for students at all levels. Other activities will enhance
professional development of graduate students, promote diversity in science and
engineering disciplines, and enhance K-12 outreach. The ultimate educational
outcome of this proposal is to provide the essential membrane-science focused
education to students at all levels, and encourage them to pursue careers in
scientific disciplines.