* 1264052
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Exploiting microbial hyperthermophilicity to produce an industrial chemical
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Robert Kelly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2018
* USD 257,000.00

1264052/1264053 &lt;br/&gt;Kelly/Adams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
microbial metabolic engineering has largely been based on a limited number of
recombinant hosts (e.g., Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) because of
the substantial knowledge of the physiology of these microorganisms and
availability&lt;br/&gt;of associated molecular genetic tools. However, as
metabolic engineering is directed at more and more innovative bioprocessing
objectives, there is a pressing need to expand the range of potential microbial
hosts. Because extremophiles are already endowed with properties that are
amenable to the harsh conditions characteristic of industrial processes, it
makes sense to develop metabolic engineering capabilities for this group of
microorganisms. This direction would have been implausible until very recently,
but newly developed molecular genetic tools and genomics studies have opened up
the prospects for metabolic engineering of extremophiles. As such, this proposed
project will demonstrate the efficacy of metabolically engineering the
hyperthermophilic archaeon, Pyrococcus furiosus, which grows optimally at 100°C.
To demonstrate that this microorganism can, indeed, be metabolically engineered,
the work will build upon recent success in temperature-dependent biochemical
processing and will now produce a specialty chemical, succinate, from cellobiose
and maltose. Genes encoding transporters and metabolic enzymes identified from
less thermophilic organisms with optimum temperature values near 70°C will be
imported into a recombinant P. furiosus strain. Novel approaches for gene
regulation and product formation that strategically exploit hyperthermophilicity
will be utilized to optimize yields and efficiencies for bioproduct formation
near 70°C. Providing a paradigm for metabolically engineering a
hyperthermophilic host to produce a non-physiological product will pave the way
for thermally-based, bioprocessing opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts will result from the interdisciplinary training of students in molecular
biochemistry, functional genomics and biomolecular engineering for studying
extremophile biology and biotechnology. Two undergraduate researchers will be
recruited during each fall semester and be supported subsequently for a summer
research experience in the PI's laboratories (one biochemist at UGA and one
chemical engineer at NCSU). These students will spend two weeks during the
summer at the other collaborating lab to foster interdisciplinary training. All
students on this and related projects at NCSU and UGA will participate in an
annual extended 'Hyperthermophile Group Meeting' during the summer to be hosted
at NSCU and UGA on an alternating basis. This will foster interdisciplinary
training and collegiality, as well as provide a mechanism for exchange of
research ideas and methodologies.