* 1264429
* Engineered protein nanocompartments for in vivo and in vitro multi-step enzyme catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Claudia Schmidt-Dannert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 380,186.00

Intellectual Merit: Spatial organization is central to the function of all
biological systems. Consequently, application of similar principles to the
organization of engineered metabolic pathways in recombinant microbial organisms
has become an emerging strategy to increase the efficiencies of such designed
systems for bioproduction. The investigator has shown inprevious work that
proteins that make up the shells of Eut compartments from Salmonella enterica
can form polyhedral compartments also when expressed in Escherichia coli. It was
also discovered that only one of the shell proteins is necessary and sufficient
for forming compartments, and also for targeting proteins into these structures.
These criteria offer a potentially straightforward strategy for the engineering
and production of nanocompartments with encapsulated cargo proteins. This
project will take these finding to the next level and engineer nanocompartments
as a versatile platform for a wide range of biotechnological applications.
Specific objectives of this research are 1) investigation and optimization of
nanocompartment formation in E. coli, 2) design of a universal system for cargo
protein loading into compartments and 3) a proof-of-concept demonstration of a
multi-step enzymatic process functioning in such engineered compartments in E.
coli and in solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Engineered protein-
based nanocompartments would be highly desirable bio-nanostructures for
applications as biosensors and for chemical manufacturing using environmentally
benign and sustainable bioprocesses, as well as drug targeting. In addition, the
proposed research will provide cross-disciplinary training in engineering and
biological sciences for one postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student and
several undergraduate students. Research from this project will be integrated in
a course in Synthetic Biology directed by the PI. Undergraduate students from
different disciplines as well as students from local high-schools participate in
lectures and guided research, and at the end of the semester develop a summer
research project for the iGEM competition in the fall. In fact, some of the
initial results for this project were generated as part of an iGEM summer
project.