* 1264064
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documentation of Diidxa za (ZAI) spatial language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2018
* David Mark, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2018
* USD 14,903.00

Doctoral student Randi Tucker will conduct an in-depth study of landscape
features in the endangered language Diidxa za (also known as Isthmus Zapotec), a
language spoken in Oaxaca, Mexico. Tucker's study will result in a database of
land and water form terminology and a documentation of linguistic and cognitive
practices of reference to geographic-scale and small-scale space. Tucker's study
develops a new approach in studying the intersection of geography and culture,
called 'ethnophysiography'. This approach seeks to document terms of reference
for landscape forms and features, and the role of landscape in culture. This
type of documentation can tell us more about how humans interact with their
surroundings with respect to factors like agricultural sustainability. The
project involves data collection in five communities to discover how the local
landscape is represented in the lexicon; how route descriptions are used to
explore the use of landscape entities as anchors of reference frames, and
linguistic and recall data on reference frames in small-scale space. The
proposed activity will test the relative efficacy of language and the non-
linguistic factors of local topography, urbanization, education, bilingualism,
and literacy in shaping linguistic and non-linguistic practices of spatial
reference. The resulting linguistic documentation will help with the emerging
language revitalization efforts for the region.