* 1264802
* Post-Translational Engineering to Improve Biotherapeutic Quality from CHO Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-1264802 Michael Betenbaugh

There is a significant need to develop new medical treatments against nerve
poisoning caused by organophosphorous (OP) toxins present in pesticides and
biological warfare agents such as sarin or VX. A promising treatment option is
the protein bioscavenger, human butyrylcholinesterase, (huBChE), which will bind
and inhibit these nerve agents. The enzyme can prevent intoxication of humans
exposed to OP compounds by binding to the nerve agents and sequestering them
from acting on the nerve agent?s principal target of acetylcholinesterase in
humans. HuBChE derived from human plasma has shown promising results in limiting
OP agent poisoning in animal models, exhibiting a long circulatory half-life
(mean residence time) extended over days. Unfortunately, since the supply of
human plasma is limited, recombinant protein sources of huBChE are urgently
needed to meet the need. Unfortunately, recombinant human BChE (rhuBChE) has not
been as effective as plasma-derived natural huBChE, predominantly because the
circulatory half-life of rhuBChE can be 10 fold lower due to rapid removal of
the protein from the patient?s blood stream. A major reason that rhuBChE is not
effective is because current recombinant expression systems do not have the
biosynthetic capabilities needed for generating a recombinant product with
similar physical and chemical properties as native huBChE. Therefore, the goal
of this project is to apply metabolic engineering strategies to modify the
production platform of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells in order to enhance
these cells? post-translational processing capabilities and produce long-lived
rhuBChE products. Previous studies with huBChE have shown that two of the
critical factors limiting circulatory half-lives are sialic acid content and
multimeric protein assembly. In order to increase circulatory half-life of
rhuBChE and other therapeutics, CHO cells will be modified to synthesize a
recombinant protein that contains increased levels of sialic acid and a greater
fraction of assembled tetramers. In order to accomplish these goals,
sialyltransferases will be overexpressed, biochemical pathways responsible for
generating sialic acid precursors will be enhanced, and the PRAD chaperone
facilitating huBChE tetramer assembly will be engineered into CHO cells. The
resulting rhuBChE will be purified and its tetrameric assembly status and sialic
acid content compared to plasma derived natural huBChE to determine if the
physical and chemical properties are similar.

Chinese hamster ovary cells are the most widely used production organism in
biotechnology, applied for the production of nearly half of the biotherapeutic
proteins available today. This project will transform this important production
platform by enabling CHO to generate products with increased circulatory
lifetimes. Increased circulatory lifetimes will result in lower dosages for
patients taking these drugs and make these biopharma products more affordable in
the US and around the world. The enclosed project will demonstrate this
capability for the production of the clinically relevant bioscavenger, huBChE,
used in treating poisoning by nerve agents present in pesticides and chemical
weapons. Furthermore, this new platform will be equally applicable for improving
the circulatory lifetimes of many other biopharmaceuticals in the market or
clinic. In addition, the project will serve to educate graduate students in
critical biotechnology skill sets needed for industry and excite local Baltimore
high school students from diverse backgrounds in biotechnology education and
careers through hands-on learning modules.