* 1264018
* CDS&amp;E: Development and applications of electronic structure methods for non-linear spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Anna Krylov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 490,532.00

Anna Krylov of the University of Southern California is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Chemistry program in the
Chemistry Division to develop theoretical methods and robust computational tools
for modeling non-linear optical (NLO) properties. The CISE/ACI CIF21 Venture
Fund for Software Reuse and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering (CDS&amp;E) have also contributed to funding this award. Krylov and
her research group are developing formalisms and implementing computational
methods to compute electronic factors for two-photon absorption (2PA) within the
coupled-cluster (CC) and equation-of-motion (EOM) family of methods. These
developments extend the robust and accurate EOM-CC methodology to describe EOM
properties. To enable applications to realistic systems (20-30 atoms, ~1000
basis functions), they capitalize on recent methodological, computational and
software developments. To include the effect of the environment (e.g., protein,
solvent, molecular solid) on NLO properties, they employ the Effective Fragment
Potential. Krylov and coworkers are applying these new computational tools to
interrogate factors determining 2PA brightness of chromophores of fluorescent
proteins used for in vivo imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research promotes
fundamental understanding of non-linear processes that are exploited in novel
spectroscopic approaches and technology. The computer codes developed in the
framework of this research, which will be widely available to the research
community, can used to design better fluorescent labels for using in bioimaging
to study cellular processes in live systems, photodynamic therapy, and
biosensors. These tools can also be used for developing NLO materials for micro-
fabrication, 3D optical data storage and nanolithography, ultra-fast electro-
optic modulation and switching, and a variety of other novel nano-bio-photonics
applications.