* 1264027
* Collaborative Research:  Geomorphic Control of the Lowland Tropical Forest Nitrogen Cycle
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Gregory Asner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 756,114.00

Tropical forests are one of Earth?s most important and threatened biomes. They
house a large fraction of the planet?s biodiversity, and they exchange more
carbon and energy with the atmosphere each year than any other major terrestrial
ecosystem type. This carbon and energy exchange is strongly regulated by the
nature and strength of nutrient limitation, typically due to shortages of
nitrogen, phosphorus or a combination of both elements. Tropical forests also
contain enormous heterogeneity at every scale in the factors that control key
aspects of nitrogen and phosphorus cycling, rendering large-scale predictions of
nutrient limitation very difficult. This work will target a largely unexplored
but potentially important driver of the lowland tropical forest nitrogen cycle:
The role of geomorphology. The investigators will combine techniques from
ecosystem ecology, biogeochemistry, geomorphology and remote sensing to assess
variations in both nitrogen and phosphorus cycling across a regional scale, with
a focus on how changes in landform topography and evolution affect nutrient
limitation. The project also includes a first-of-its-kind partnership that
combines on-the-ground techniques in biogeochemistry with the use and
interpretation of airborne remote sensing data derived from a platform that
includes both laser and optical sensors. The ultimate goal of the research is to
produce better predictive models of tropical ecosystem function.

The project results will contribute to an improved ability to predict how one of
Earth?s most critical but least-understood biomes may change in the future, thus
aiding a variety of management and conservation goals. This project will also
help extend a long record of outreach and public communication by the PI's. It
will include a new partnership with the University of Colorado Center for
Environmental Journalism (CEJ) and its Scripps Environmental Fellowship Program,
where a Scripps Fellow (a visiting professional journalist) will be ?embedded?
with the project. The CEJ team will also include a Masters student in
journalism. The CEJ will provide access to multiple communication platforms to
enhance this partnership; these include an award-winning video podcast (CU
Science Update), and The Boulder Stand, a student-run multi-media magazine. A
suite of communication strategies, ranging from traditional magazine-style
articles, to video podcasts, to live blogging and the use of social media, will
be assessed via formal surveys of classes at each participating institution, as
well as of members of the Aldo Leopold Leadership and Google Science
Communication networks. Finally, the AToMS remote sensing system used in this
project led directly to those to be used in the new NEON Airborne Observing
Platforms (AOP), and the work done in this project will help inform NEON goals
of integrating AOP data with a suite of ground- and modeling-based approaches to
resolving ecological dynamics at continental scales.