* 1264816
* An Optoelectronics Device to Write-In and Read-Out Activity in Brain Circuits
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Arto Nurmikko, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2016
* USD 310,000.00

1264816 Nurmikko, Arto

The proposed research aims to contribute to the emerging field of
neurotechnology by providing a new class of brain "write-in"/ "read-out" devices
with unique attributes for bidirectional communication with neural circuits. The
project aims to have an impact on both basic neuroscience while providing an
important technology piece to future prospects for treating severely
neurologically impaired individuals via electronic communications with brain
circuits. This is a development project that lies at the very intersection of
biomedical engineering and health sciences. More specifically, its aim is to
create a new generation of devices that enables the combination of spatially and
temporally specific stimulation of and recording from brain circuits in vivo
mobile animal models, to advance the understanding of brain function at a
fundamental level on one hand, while extrapolating squarely at possible
applications e.g. to cases of neurological injury on the other. Extracting
information about functional connectivity and performance of neural circuits by
electrical recording by arrays of sensing microelectrodes is a well-established
and powerful technique. For example, by acquiring resolution at a single neuron
level from cortical circuits by implanted multielectrode arrays with real-time
decoding the intention of a brain to execute motor action has recently enabled a
human tetraplegic patient, with neural signal pathways from the brain to spinal
cord inoperative, to control a robotic arm and hand by "thought". Supported
further by several powerful demonstrations in non-human primates of brain
control, a grand challenge to future neural prostheses is to "close-the-loop"
for cortical control of assistive devices, for instance by providing a proxy by
brain stimulation for lost sensory capability such as touch. Stimulation by
electrical means has been traditionally used to excite the brain across multiple
spatial scales for both research and has today specific therapeutic use.
Importantly, however, the ability to specifically access well-targeted neural
circuits for both excitation and inhibition has been now opened by techniques of
"optogenetics", a pioneering new approach in basic and applied brain science and
neurotechnology. The optical method offers a much more direct and less ambiguous
stimulation of brain circuits to inform brain circuits. To reach this goal, a
multielement biomedical implant device is proposed where up to 100 microscale
elements are integrally arrayed for dual use - in simultaneously delivering
light to and electrically reading out neural circuit dynamics ("100 points of
light"). Meeting both fundamental physical and practical physiological
challenges, a specific class of so-called wide bandgap crystalline
semiconductors is exploited - which have the unusual combinatorial attributes of
optical transparency and high electrical conductivity. The proposed device-
driven research program leverages directly from expertise in the PIs laboratory
where work on development of new neural recording methods (such as by wireless
implants) intersects with other research strands where wide-bandgap
semiconductors are studied and microfabricated to different types of light-
emitting devices. In culmination of the research, the new optical
stimulation/electrical read-out capability will be tested and employed in vivo
in mobile animal models for fundamental brain science and neurotechnology
development purposes.