* 1265983
* Characterizing Paste Microstructure during Setting with Combined Raman Spectroscopy and Confocal Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Zhihui Sun, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The research goal of this project is to enhance our knowledge of cement setting
on microstructural level by exploring the dispersion, agglomeration and
percolation mechanism of cement particles with advanced physical and chemical
imaging methods. To achieve this goal, Raman spectroscopy combined with confocal
microscopy will be conducted in real-time on fresh cement pastes. Raman
spectroscopy will firstly be applied to both dry cement powder and fresh paste
to trace changes in the chemical compositions during early hydration. A Raman
library of clinker phases and hydration products will be developed. Then, the
Raman spectroscopy will be combined with confocal microscopy to conduct real-
time observation on the physical dispersion of particles together with chemical
dispersion (chemical mapping) in order to investigate the influence of chemical
ingredients and surface chemistry of the particle flocculation. The physical and
chemical microstructural parameters will be correlated to the setting time and
hydration heat signature using a moving window modeling approach.

The setting and hardening process is considered to be the most critical time
period for a concrete structure, during which chemical, physical and mechanical
properties of the concrete undergo rapid changes. Remixing, recasting, or
replacing cannot be implemented after setting. Thus having solid knowledge about
the setting behavior of concrete is essential to guarantee the quality and
performance of the material. Concrete setting is governed by paste setting that
is caused by the distribution, movement, and connection of cement particles. An
in-situ observation of the particle flocculation, agglomeration and percolation
processes during the initial hydration period will provide fundamental
understanding of paste setting behavior, so that the concrete construction
process can be controlled. By combining Raman spectroscopy and confocal
microscopy, this proposed work will build up a database on early-age hydration
that will be useful to the concrete industry, specifically chemical admixture
companies. This database will also be useful for hydration/microstructural
development models. Educational plan focuses on training undergraduate and
graduate students with better critical thinking and research skills. Outreach
activities, such as INSPIRE and E-Expo, are also planned for diverse groups of
K-12 students, including minority and female students.