* 1265991
* Probing metal catalyst-support interactions using small cluster models:  Gas-phase reactivity studies, anion photoelectron spectroscopy, and DFT calculations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Caroline Jarrold, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 462,500.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Caroline C.
Jarrold from Indiana University to study the interplay between electronic and
structural properties of well-defined cluster models used to study the
inherently local phenomenon of catalyst-support and catalyst-support-substrate
interactions. A three-pronged approach is used to characterize cluster models of
new catalysts that have been identified as particularly active toward the
industrially-important water-gas shift reaction. (The water gas shift reaction
catalytically combines water and carbon monoxide to produce dihydrogen and
carbon dioxide.) Anion photoelectron (PE) spectroscopy measurements on model
clusters provide a mass-specific electronic profile of the clusters as a
function of both metal composition and oxygen content. Cluster structures are
determined by reconciling experimental PE spectra with computational results and
gas-phase reactivity studies on the clusters allow for the correlation between
cluster reactivity and cluster molecular and electronic structures. The first
series of studies focus on platinum-containing cluster systems inspired by
recent literature. Alternative and less expensive cluster models rationalized to
have similar (and possibly improved) attributes are also explored and compared
to known industrial catalysts. The broader impacts of these studies include the
generation of knowledge that can inform the design of improved, lower-cost and
more energy-efficient catalysts for water gas shift reactions and the evaluation
of new computational approaches used to study metal oxides in non-traditional
oxidation states. In addition, a new generation of scientists are trained to
understand industrially-relevant catalysis reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal
oxides are often used as industrial catalysts. Their composition is often
optimized so that the catalysts operate at lower temperatures or with cheaper
and more readily available materials. This research project is designed to
determine the essential molecular-scale features that govern catalysts used in
the water gas shift reaction. The water gas shift reaction combines water and
carbon monoxide to make dihydrogen and carbon dioxide. Experimental and
computational tools are used to create and study the properties of well-defined
nano- and sub-nanometer scale bits of metal oxides used in this industrially
important reaction. The technical broader implications of this project include a
reduced energy consumption for this industrial process. A more immediate and
direct outcome of this project is the training of young women and men in the
scientific method using computational and experimental platforms centered on a
project that motivated by practical industrial concerns.