* 1265785
* Detection of Distributed Static and Dynamic Loads with Electrolyte-Enabled Distributed Transducers in a Polymer-Based Microfluidic Device
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Ali Beskok, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2018
* USD 334,999.00

This objective of this award is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
performance of a polymer-based microfluidic device with Electrolyte-Enabled
Distributed Transducers (EEDTs) that can detect distributed loads. The novelty
of this EEDT device lies in its configuration, a single deformable polymer
microstructure integrated with EEDTs, which can be built with great simplicity
and allows the distributed-load detection using one single device. A standard
polymer-based micro-fabrication process will be employed to ensure its
disposability and affordability. The technical approach includes 1) experimental
investigation of the device performance as a function of its geometry and
electrolyte properties; 2) development of a theoretical framework for
quantification of the device performance; 3) its optimization for ultra-high
spatial resolution and ultra-high load resolution; and 4) its adaptation for
biomaterial and biological tissue investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will enable the development of miniaturized
distributed-load sensors for biomedical, surgical, robotics, and manufacturing
applications. Disposable, affordable, high-performance EEDT devices will
revolutionize the intelligent systems and instruments, manufacturing equipment,
and robots that rely on the functionality of distributed-load detection.
Consequently, systems incorporating EEDT devices will be used to diagnose
diseases at early stages, improve surgical outcomes, shorten development time,
increase the manufacturing quality of viscoelastic materials and biomaterials,
allow industrial automation, and save lives by enabling robotic operations in
hazardous environments.