* 1265032
* DESIGN:   Innovative Assistive Devices and Technologies for Enhanced Independence
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Don Malzahn, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2019
* USD 120,764.00

PI: Hakansson, Nils&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1265032&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background: Wichita State University is a
metropolitan university with a commitment to providing a comprehensive education
to its students by utilizing the human diversity of the surrounding community.
Within this context, the university's College of Engineering is committed to
preparing students to i) conduct research that supports and contributes to the
well- being of persons in the local and larger community and ii) foster and
value diversity of ideas and people. The proposed project will create additional
opportunities to educate students, cultivate relationships with the community,
increase diversity, and expose younger students with disabilities to
opportunities to pursue an engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal:
Develop and execute senior design projects focused on developing assistive
technology and devices for persons with general and age-related disabilities and
to expose and recruit young students with disabilities to the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields through participation in
these projects as clients or designers. To accomplish these goals, the following
objectives are proposed: 1) train students in the total product development
cycle (identification of need, design, prototyping, testing, building and
manufacture); 2) promote and develop multi-disciplinary senior design teams that
pursue projects directed towards the development of assistive technology and
devices to aid persons with general and age-related disabilities; 3) establish
relationships between the College of Engineering and community organizations
that serve persons with disabilities; 4) identify, recruit, and integrate
persons with disabilities from the university and larger community as team
members in the execution/fulfillment of design projects to aid persons with
general and age-related disabilities or serve as clients; 5) disseminate
information and increase awareness of age and disability-related issues through
the presentation of projects at university outreach events; 6) recruit students
with disabilities into the College of Engineering through presentations and
demonstrations at university and community events; and 7) establish website to
share for product development cases and best practices with the engineering
education community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed project will generate custom engineered devices to increase
independence and quality of life for persons with general and age-related
disabilities. The project will create partnerships between engineering student
designers and the community of persons with disabilities who, in all likelihood,
will move, communicate, and think in ways that are different than typical
engineering students are accustomed. Through the direct contact with
underrepresented populations and the training associated with this project, the
engineering students will obtain an understanding that design should not operate
on the premise that "one size fits all". Additionally, the students will apply
their classroom knowledge to the development of their design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed design projects
will advance the education of the participating students by exposing them to
challenges that members of the disability community face on a daily basis. The
interactions between the students and clients will create new and strengthen
existing relationships between the university and the surrounding community. The
inclusion of K-12 youth with disabilities into the program as clients and design
team members will serve as a means to expose and recruit the next generation of
capable engineers to the field.