* 1265893
* GOALI: One Step Direct Deposition of Durable Cathode for High Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Armand Halter, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2018
* USD 423,204.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will
enable scientific inquiry and realization of innovative manufacturing methods to
deposit new catalyst and electrode structures onto high temperature proton
exchange membranes. The approach taken in this work will allow for independent
control over compositional and structural parameters in a single flame-based
reactive spray deposition step, significantly reducing the number of
manufacturing steps that are required with traditional processes. This will
enable high performing proton exchange membrane fuel cells to be produced at low
manufacturing cost. In this work, the team will quantify the impact of
processing conditions on the catalyst and electrode structure, and will use this
information to discover the fundamental limits to which processing can push
activity. To accomplish this, the team will study the influence of processing
parameters on particle formation, catalyst utilization and morphology.
Additionally, the influence of the support and electrode layer thickness on
catalyst utilization and durability will be studied. Electrochemical
characterization of the high surface area catalysts will be performed on three
levels: catalyst, ex-situ electrodes, and in-situ electrodes. This information
will be used to study the electrochemical Thiele modulus as a design tool for
oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. Educationally, this grant will provide high
school students and teachers as well as undergraduate and graduate students with
hands-on experience and training in the fields of sustainable energy,
manufacturing and electrochemical engineering. The grant will also provide
opportunities for student internships in industry with the industrial partner
Sonalysts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to improvements in the electrochemical activity and catalyst
utilization of commercial-scale electrodes. This research will also provide
critical structure-property information for the rational design of next-
generation structures. This research will also focus on bridging laboratory-
scale discovery and large scale catalyst nanomanufacturing, allowing for rapid
implementation by our industrial partner, Sonalysts. Implementation and scale-up
of the structure-property information will further reduce the cost and improve
the performance stability of electroactive materials in several platforms.
Immediate commercial derivatives of the proposed project include: a novel,
scalable catalyst synthesis process; formulations for high temperature proton
exchange membrane fuel cells; and hybrid fuel-cell battery submersibles.
Although this project is focused on fuel cells, the results can be implemented
toward batteries, sensors and catalysts in general.