* 1265738
* SusChEM: Development and Applications of Ligand Donor Parameters for High Valent Transition Metal Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Aaron Odom, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 435,000.00

Professor Aaron L. Odom of Michigan State University is supported by the
Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry to discover and
develop Ligand Donor Parameters (LDPs) for sustainable, high oxidation state,
transition-metal based catalysts. These parameters express how the donor ligands
interact with the electrophilic metal centers and expedite catalyst development
with underexplored, inexpensive, earth-abundant, and very reactive metal
centers. The system being developed for the evaluation of ligand donor ability
involves synthetically versatile chromium(VI) nitridos of the family NCr(N-i-
Pr2)X (where X is the ligand under evaluation). This research expands the
analysis of organometallic ligands used in the structure and determines if
changing multiple ligands on the metal leads to predictable changes. The LDP
method is applied to titanium-catalyzed hydroamination reactions and, as a
benchmark for other high oxidation state transition metal catalysts, to
molybdenum-based Schrock metathesis reactions and zirconium complexes used in
hydroaminoalkylation reactions of olefins.

As applied to titanium catalyst development, the ligand parameterization shows
promise as a multi-component, one-pot method for the generation of a variety of
important heterocyclic systems commonly employed in products like
pharmaceuticals. Titanium is the second most abundant transition metal and is
non-toxic, so that the development of efficient catalysts of this type offers
chemically interesting and sustainable opportunities. In addition, the
applicability of the chromium-based parameterization is explored in molybdenum-
and zirconium-based catalysts - these are also earth-abundant, non-precious
metal catalysts that are sustainable and environmentally-friendly. Graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates involved in this research
receive excellent training in chemical catalysis and synthesis appropriate to
employment in academics, government laboratories, or industry. The development
of ligand donor parameters may be generalizable to many types of high valent
catalysts thus impacting the greater scientific community by establishing
predictive capabilities for new sustainable catalyst systems.