* 1265635
* SusChEM: Metal Nanoclusters as Effective Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Shaowei Chen at the University of California -
Santa Cruz to investigate the electrocatalytic activity of non-platinum metal
nanoclusters for oxygen reduction, a reaction that is important to fuel cell
technology. The proposed research is built upon preliminary studies
demonstrating that (i) (sub)nanometer-sized gold clusters exhibit much enhanced
electrocatalytic activity and (ii) gold nanocatalysts on oxide supports may
facilitate oxygen adsorption and eventual reduction. The project focuses on the
following two aspects: (i) preparation and characterization of functional
nanocomposites based on Au/Cu nanoclusters and oxide nanostructures, and (ii)
interfacial engineering of nanocatalysts for the preparation of surface alloy
nanoparticles. Ultimately, an unambiguous correlation between the nanocomposite
structures and electrocatalytic activity will be established, which will help to
improve electrocatalytic performance. Professor Chen and coworkers will also be
actively involved in various outreach activities targeting minority, women, and
disadvantaged undergraduate students (e.g., the UC LEADS, ACCESS, and SURF
programs) and qualified high-school students (e.g., COSMOS, and Summer
Internship Program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To render fuel cell technology
commercially viable, it is imperative to develop effective catalysts for both
the anodic and cathodic reactions so as to achieve the current density that is
needed for practical applications. Whereas platinum-based nanoparticles have
been traditionally used as the catalysts of choice, the efforts have been
hampered by the high costs and limited reserves of platinum. Therefore, this
project focuses on catalysts based on more abundant and/or less expensive non-
platinum metals such as gold and copper, and may lead to a new class of
platinum-free catalysts for fuel cells.