* 1265973
* RUI:  Operators on Hilbert space
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Stephan Garcia, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,017.00

This project will study complex symmetric operators and truncated Toeplitz
operators, aiming to clarify the intriguing relationship between these two
interrelated classes of Hilbert space operators. Complex symmetric operators are
a broad class of operators that has not been adequately studied in generality
until recently. The study of truncated Toeplitz operators, a rapidly growing
branch of function-theoretic operator theory, has undergone spirited development
stemming from a seminal 2007 paper of Sarason. A recent series of articles by
the principal investigator and his growing list of collaborators have unearthed
surprising links between these two classes. Research on this subject has the
potential to be transformative, having relevance to a number of fields. For
instance, connections to function theory and matrix analysis have already
engaged researchers from both large institutions and small colleges. Moreover,
the study of complex symmetric and truncated Toeplitz operators has already
proven to be fertile ground for undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of linear operators on Hilbert space has its modern roots in the seminal
work of von Neumann, who in the early twentieth century developed a rigorous
framework in which to describe quantum mechanics. Since then, operator theory
has found applications in electrical engineering, quantum physics, image
processing, and statistics, to name a few areas outside of pure mathematics.
This project will study two novel, but surprisingly ubiquitous, classes of
operators, while also considering several specific questions that interface with
other researchers in the mathematical sciences. To do this, the principal
investigator will collaborate with colleagues old and new, as well as sponsor
undergraduate research. Indeed, many questions stemming from this project are
suitable for undergraduate research and the principal investigator will recruit
a diverse array of students to work on them. These students will be equipped
with the skills, expertise, confidence, and passion necessary to pursue careers
in the mathematical sciences. This project will create not only new mathematics,
but also the new mathematicians necessary to enhance and enrich the nation's
infrastructure for research and education.