* 1265462
* Mauka to Makai: Mapping for Sustainable Learning
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Brian Yamamoto, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,776.00

KCC will institute a new STEM multidisciplinary academic Certificate of
Achievement in GIS technology. The program will combine hands-on, field
experience and observation with applied computer mapping, using local mapping
sites to teach skills that can be applied to many different applications. The
coursework will incorporate traditional Hawaiian observations for data selection
and analysis, along with other information needed for projects on Kaua'i. The
courses in this program will be transferrable to four-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project comes through
offering students a new suite of courses in Geography and Geographical
Information Systems (GIS) in an integrated STEM approach that combines
traditional teaching methods with digital field data collection and analyses
that will be beneficial to the community, while providing the student with a set
of skills that are in great demand in the workplace, and in rapidly expanding
fields. This group approach, with hands-on projects using local examples for
teaching larger principles, incorporates learning directly into community
stewardship. The new program brings together many aspects of several STEM
courses, while offering visual, spatial and computer tools that support research
in a wide range of applications such as mapping oceans, biological resources,
agricultural production, charting ocean currents, reef protection, native plant
species locations, mapping archeological and cultural sites, cultural access to
resources, and others. The broader impacts of the Mauka to Makai Project support
a recent State law enacted to restore traditional Hawaiian resource approaches
to decision-making and management at the state and local level. The KCC campus
and the Niumalu ahupua'a offer a rich teaching environment for integrating STEM
studies with other academic areas such as Hawaiian Studies, Botany, Agriculture,
Health Sciences and Marine Science. Once established, the program can help
support community mapping projects, provide trained GIS specialists, and provide
invaluable materials for managing Hawaii's land and oceans from the Native
Hawaiian perspective using Western technology.