* 1265608
* SusChEM: Catalytic Element-Element Bond Formation: Selectivity and New Catalysis with a Movement Toward Sustainability
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Rory Waterman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2016
* USD 405,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Rory Waterman of the University of Vermont in the
discovery and understanding of catalytic reactions that form bonds between main
group elements. Efforts under this award focus on new or improved catalytic
reactivity for transformations that form bonds to phosphorus (P). Catalytic
dehydrocoupling of phosphines is applied toward the synthesis of novel materials
featuring P-P sigma-bonds. Hydrophosphination catalysts, particularly those with
primary phosphine substrates, are applied in the preparation of new transition-
metal ligands for other catalytic reactions. The unique phosphaalkene synthesis
discovered by Prof. Waterman is used in the catalytic preparation of unsaturated
phosphorus products. An expansion of alpha elimination catalysis using
phosphines as substrates is sought as well. Investigation of these
transformations is geared toward expansion to other elements, and provides a
venue to train university students as well as outreach opportunities to include
high school students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic syntheses of
molecules containing heavier main group elements such as phosphorus or silicon
continue to lag substantially behind organic analogs. The disparity in the ease
of transformations has slowed the development of main group materials and
resulted in high costs for current main group-containing products in terms of
both the energy required and the waste produced. These main group-containing
molecules are essential components to industrial and consumer products. Some
evidence for this comes from the &gt;$13 billion silicone industry alone.
Research under this award seeks to provide new feedstocks, synthetic methods,
materials, or more efficient syntheses that could improve such enterprises.
Phosphorus is a finite resource. The discovery of efficient syntheses may help
to preserve phosphorus resources. This research is identified as part of a
sustainability chemical portfolio because it is identifying transition metal
catalysts that can replace phosphorus in certain applications, to protect our
phosphorus-containing resources. Students involved in this research are training
to contribute to chemical industry and are also learning to use catalysis for
sustainability.