* 1265444
* Workshop:   Variation and syntax: Where are we now, and where do we go next? Ann Arbor, MI, July 6-7, 2013
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2015
* Alan Munn, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2015
* USD 11,330.00

This workshop responds to the growing interest in reconciling the study of
sociolinguistic variation with syntactic theory. These vital subfields of
scientific inquiry into human language have been estranged virtually since their
inception, with longstanding disputes centered on fundamental methodological and
theoretical issues. However, recent work has demonstrated that variationist
empirical methods are indeed well suited for investigating variable phenomena of
relevance to syntactic theorizing, and furthermore that independently motivated
models of syntax and morphology have become sufficiently articulated that
plausible formal mechanisms of intra- and inter-speaker variation can be
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has dual objectives. The first is to
develop explicit strategies for evaluating competing theories of variation and
syntax, which requires synthesizing current knowledge and identifying areas of
consensus. For example, one influential approach holds that syntactic variation
should be analyzed as "multiple grammars", while other accounts have located
variable mechanisms in the grammatical architecture itself. The second objective
is to stimulate collaborative research beyond the conventional domains of either
variationist sociolinguistics or theoretical syntax, for instance second- or
first-language acquisition, multi-lingualism/dialectalism, the emergence of new
dialects/idiolects, language/dialect attrition or death, heritage
languages/dialects, or language processing. The application of refined
theoretical concepts and modified empirical methods to these and other exciting
topics raises prospects for unification of a greater
scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To such ends, this workshop brings some of the most
prominent scholars on syntactic variation from Europe and North America together
with students and young researchers at the 2013 Linguistic Society of America
Linguistic Institute at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, an ideal venue
for intense cross-disciplinary interaction. In addition to invited speakers, the
workshop will feature 30-minute talks, panel commentary, and plenty of time
allotted for general discussion.