* 1265700
* CDS&amp;E: Correlated Wavefunction Methods for Gas and Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Emily Carter, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Emily Carter of Princeton University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program to pursue development of
accurate and efficient ab initio electronic structure methods for predicting the
behavior of large molecules and condensed matter. The Condensed Matter and
Materials Theory and the Computational and Data Driven Materials Research
programs in the Division of Materials Research and the Computational and Data-
Enabled Science and Engineering Program are co-funding this proposal. Carter and
coworkers are providing the means to address two grand challenges in science and
engineering: (i) accurate evaluation of chemical bond dissociation energies and
reaction energetics for large molecules and (ii) accurate description of charge
transfer and electronic excited states in condensed phases. Carter's fast
correlated wavefunction (CW) methods are being taken to the next level in terms
of speed (exploiting scarcity and via parallelization) and functionality (via
gradients, nonadiabatic couplings, and transition dipole moments). Her
potential-functional-based embedding theory then incorporates her fast CW
methods so that, e.g., complex photo-excitation and charge transfer at electrode
surfaces can be accurately described. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods that the
Carter and her multidisciplinary research group are developing can be used to
predict the mostly unexplored thermochemical kinetics of combustion reactions
involving very large molecules such as biodiesel fuels. This foundational
information is critical to determining how to optimize the energy efficiency of
renewable fuels. Other methods being developed by this group will furnish
fundamental understanding of the chemistry and physics of fuel cells and solar
cells, with an eye to improving their energy conversion efficiency as well.
Women and under-represented minorities are involved in her research program.