* 1265881
* Collaborative Research: Wavelet Analysis of Periodic Error for Improved Displacement Metrology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Joshua Tarbutton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 07/31/2015
* USD 84,007.00

This grant will enable new fundamental research into displacement measuring
interferometry. In the heterodyne, or two-frequency, systems to be studied here,
the phase shift in laser light of one frequency reflected from a moving target
relative to laser light of a second frequency reflected from a fixed target is
used to determine displacement in applications requiring sub-nanometer
positioning accuracy. The objective of the research is to apply wavelet analysis
techniques to characterize periodic error, which is caused by mixing of the two
light frequencies and leads to non-cumulative positioning errors on the order of
several nanometers. Wavelets provide a new approach to signal analysis for
periodic error; they have previously been used in image compression, voice
recognition, and medical applications. The use of wavelets, rather than the more
traditional Fourier transform approach, is required because periodic error
varies with time under non-constant velocity conditions. Additionally, the error
amplitude is time-varying when polarization-maintaining fibers are used to
deliver the laser light to the interferometer optics. This is a common
occurrence because it is generally desired to isolate the heat-generating laser
source from the measurement platform.

If successful, this research will enable improved metrology capabilities and,
subsequently, new technological advancements in the nano-science field. This
research promises to improve the measurement technique (displacement measuring
interferometry) that offers the highest performance in terms of accuracy,
resolution, and range. This transducer is critical to the semiconductor
manufacturing industry, for example, where it is used in a feedback control
system to position the silicon wafer relative to the lithographic optics. One
limitation on the achievable linewidth (and, ultimately, the chip processing
speed) is the stage positioning accuracy. Other applications include transducer
calibration and machines for material removal.