* 1265511
* Performance-based Multi-Hazard Engineering for Seismic and Wind Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The overall objective of the project is to explore and advance the state-of-the-
art in performance-based engineering in the context of multi-hazard analysis for
earthquakes and windstorms. Performance-based engineering is a maturing concept
requiring structures to meet specified objectives depending on the intensity of
earthquake/windstorm loads. Practical implementation of this concept is not
possible without the availability of efficient methods for quantifying the
uncertainty in structural loads and propagating this uncertainty into response
statistics. The last two decades have seen significant developments in both the
quantification of load uncertainty and its propagation through structural
systems. However, research is needed to describe earthquake/wind loads
probabilistically, quantify material/structural uncertainties, and calculate
response statistics. The proposed research will enhance preliminary work done by
the Principal Investigator under a previous NSF grant.

The project will address uncertainty quantification and propagation and
integrate them in a practical methodology for multi-hazard analysis. Task 1 will
develop novel probabilistic models for seismic/wind hazards and loads that are
based on all available information and are capable of capturing with increased
accuracy the essential features of these loads. Hazards and loads will be
characterized probabilistically by two parameters: moment magnitude and source-
to-site distance for seismic loads and speed and direction for wind loads. Task
2 will develop conceptually simple, accurate, non-intrusive, and computationally
efficient methods for calculating response statistics, fragility and
damage/cost/downtime probability distributions, for structural systems in the
linear/nonlinear regime under Gaussian/non-Gaussian loads. The method is based
on stochastic reduced order models, and can be viewed as a smart Monte Carlo
simulation. Task 3 will use results from previous two tasks to implement a
practical methodology for performance-based multi-hazard engineering for seismic
and wind loads. The task will calculate probability distributions for damage,
cost, downtime, robustness, recovery, and other performance/resilience metrics.
Robustness and recovery characterize the ability of structural/non-structural
systems to withstand extreme events with limited loss of function and the time
needed to restore the functionality of these systems to their pre-event level.
Probability distributions, rather than expectations, will be used since they
provide refined tools for decision making.