* 1265622
* CAREER:  Collective Innovation - Transforming the Realization of Complex Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Jitesh Panchal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 09/30/2016
* USD 302,437.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to establish the foundations for the realization of complex systems through
collective innovation, which is characterized by the self-organization of
individuals into decentralized, non-hierarchical communities. The research
objective will be achieved by using principles from biological evolution and
network dynamics to understand the bottom-up evolution of systems and the self-
organization of communities. The research approach will combine mathematical
theories and computational approaches, including the theory of network
evolution, social network analysis, and agent-based modeling. Knowledge
pertaining to the evolutionary dynamics of systems and communities that will be
gained from this research, will be used to develop cyberinfrastructure for
collective innovation. The educational objective is to prepare a new generation
of engineers for collective systems innovation. The educational objective will
be achieved by providing collective innovation experiences to students within an
ecosystem of design projects that spans across graduate courses, undergraduate
courses, and student design competitions.

If successful, the results of this research will enable engineering enterprises
to use a significant but underutilized mode of innovation by communities of
employees within organizations, and of enthusiasts outside the organizations.
The cyberinfrastructure (based on a bottom-up combination of systems and
communities) will complement the current product lifecycle management platforms
by fostering community-centered innovation strategies. The educational approach
centered on an ecosystem of design projects will provide a unique workforce
prepared for collective innovation. The educational activities are designed to
impact undergraduate and graduate students through collective innovation
experiences, and high school students through design competitions and summer
camps. The outreach efforts are designed to increase public awareness through
local science centers, to support local communities through design-oriented
service-learning projects, and to increase the participation of women and
minorities through undergraduate research. The results will be disseminated to
industry through data exchange, collaboration on research tasks, student
internships, and regular meetings.