* 1265974
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Electrochemical Processes and Technology (CEProTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Gerardine Botte, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,956.00

1265974 Ohio University; Gerardine Botte &lt;br/&gt;1266092 Washington
University; Venkat Subramanian &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will be
will be dedicated to the improvement of chemical and biological processes
utilizing novel, electrochemically-focused approaches. Ohio University and
Washington are collaborating to establish the proposed Center, with Ohio
University as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center
(CEProTech) will focus both on the classical electrochemical engineering
applications (chloro-alkali and aluminum processes, batteries, hydrogen
production, etc.), as well as the development of more radical and transformative
applications: utilizing electrochemical systems and approaches for conventional
processes that typically forego electrochemical methods (remediation, advanced
synthesis, production of specialty gases &amp; chemicals, and hemodialysis,
among others). CEProTech envisions that through the diverse applicability of the
electrochemical science, the comprehensive collection of resources assembled for
the Center, and the aid of its strong assortment of industry supporters, the
Center will have significant impact across a variety of market sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research conducted at CEProTech has the
potential to increase national economic security through improved energy
independence, environmental protection, and job creation. With the support of
our diverse assortment of industry members, the Center hopes to sustain a
holistic portfolio of novel, advanced and industrially applicable research.
CEProTech intends to have an experienced multi-disciplinary team, including a
significant percent of underrepresented groups of faculty, research scientists,
and numerous undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post-docs. The
proposed Center also plans to expand an already strong platform of educational
activities (graduate courses, topical workshops, and outreach programs) to
provide interdisciplinary education and training in the field of electrochemical
engineering, through specialized workshops, international conferences (with
selected papers published in the Journal of Applied Electrochemistry), industry
oriented seminars and conferences, webinars, long-distance education and
workforce development for manufacturing electrochemical devices. The Center will
encourage a broad dissemination of learning through its continuing education
activities to assist engineers in industry, as well as engineering students, in
acquiring knowledge of electrochemical processes and systems to better prepare
them for careers and career advancements in the industry.