* 1265362
* CAREER: Control of Vibratory Energy Harvesting and Energy Constrained Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Jeffrey Scruggs, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2014
* USD 185,465.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research program will use
concepts from modern control theory to answer fundamental questions regarding
the optimal transduction and management of energy in a broad class of
electromechanical vibratory systems, including (i) Floating structures to
harvest utility-scale power from ocean waves, (ii) Civil structures with self-
powered actuation networks to redistribute and dissipate vibration energy during
seismic events, and (iii) Distributed piezoelectric transducers to scavenge
ambient vibration energy for wireless sensing applications. These systems
exhibit certain core similarities which permit their analysis in a unified
control-theoretic framework. They are all distributed control problems in which
harvested energy, structural deformation, and power flow must be balanced in a
stochastic setting. This research will characterize the manner in which the
nonlinear power flow constraints inherent in the electronics of such systems
restrict their ability to be controlled. This characterization of control
feasibility will in turn be used to create a generalized multi-objective optimal
control synthesis for these systems, which is analytically tractable, yet
versatile enough to handle the variety of design goals and circumstances which
may arise in different applications. The research conducted here will encompass
both linear and nonlinear controller design methods, and will also investigate
the concurrent optimization of the control, electronic, and structural
subsystems. Experimental validation these concepts will be conducted, in the
context of the three examples listed above, in conjunction with collaborators at
Duke and UCSD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will have
implications in a wide array of control applications where energy is important,
and the experimental focus is aimed at problems of great relevance to
contemporary society. Ocean wave energy is a valuable, untapped, renewable
resource, and the technology for its conversion is still emerging. This research
will determine the manner in which to control power generation from a floating
wave energy converter, to optimize its ability to produce useful energy.
Meanwhile, the research conducted in self-powered systems for seismic risk
reduction and wireless damage detection address two of the ?grand challenges?
facing modern structural engineers. Most of the recent innovation in these areas
has focused on device design, and results from this research will be used to
determine the optimal control of these devices to maximize their ability to
extract useful energy from a vibrating structure. Through coordination with a
new Energy Certificate being implemented at Duke, the wave energy experimental
program will serve as the focal point for multidisciplinary interaction between
undergraduate students in Mechanical, Civil, and Electrical Engineering, as well
as the School of the Environment. Additionally, this project will leverage the
success of Duke?s outreach programs to provide research opportunities not only
to students at Duke, but also to undergraduates from underrepresented
demographics, studying elsewhere in the greater North Carolina
region.&lt;br/&gt;