* 1265883
* Dynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Leonid Bunimovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 182,999.00

The proposed research addresses some fundamental problems in the theory of
dynamical systems and develops further a new promising direction, pioneered by
the PI, which is concerned with a finite time properties of dynamics. A
classical approach to studies of chaotic dynamics deals only with the asymptotic
in time properties. A new approach to the design of hyperbolic (chaotic) elastic
impact systems will be developed which will allow to essentially extend this
class. It is based on a new general characterization of absolutely focusing
mirrors in terms of continued fractions. A 40-years old problem on smoothening
of stadium elastic impact systems will be resolved, which will allow to advance
in understanding dynamics of Hamiltonian systems with divided into regular
islands and chaotic seas phase spaces. Dynamics of a finite size particles in
nonconvex polygons will be shown to be chaotic on contrary to a general view
that impact systems with point and finite size particles have similar dynamics.
This will be applied to classical Ehrenfest's wind-tree model in statistical
mechanics to demonstrate that this model may even surpass the richness of
dynamics in the Lorentz gas. A new area of finite time qualitative properties of
dynamical and stochastic systems will be advanced into studies of open systems
and multidimensional systems.

The proposed research will make an essential impact in science and technology. A
new area of finite time qualitative properties of chaotic and of complex
systems, pioneered by the PI, opens new promising avenues in the studies of
transport in chaotic systems and dynamical networks. It can be, in particular,
directly applied to real world networks in order to detect e.g. the most
efficient receptors and transmitters among the elements nodes) and among the
links of networks as well as to analysis and design of networks. A new approach
to study closed systems by making "holes" at different places of their spaces of
states and observing how position of such "hole" influences dynamics has already
been taken up by physicists in numerical experiments and will be a useful and
easily implemented tool in laboratory experiments as well in physics, chemistry
and technology. Simple visual models of systems with impacts proposed by the PI
will continue to be built as experimental devices in physics labs all over the
world. As clear visual examples they play an important role in teaching
nonlinear dynamics and complex systems to students and young scientists in all
areas of science and engineering. The proposed research will have impact not
only within the theory of dynamical systems but in other areas of Mathematics as
well, especially in Mathematical Physics. Analysis of chaotic motion of finite
size particles in nonconvex polygons may have applications for transport in
nanotubes where particles propagate one after another and do not interact. The
proposed research will enhance national and international collaborations with
Mexico, Canada, Brasil, UK, Germany and Italy. Among the PI's collaborators are
several females and Hispanics. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in the proposed research. It will also serve to a broad dissemination
to enhance scientific and technological understanding via participation of the
PI, his collaborators and students in interdisciplinary conferences as well as
through special lectures for students and young researchers.