* 1265675
* I/UCRC:  in Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2) - Site
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Satish Kumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 168,011.00

Center for Energy Smart Electronic Systems (ES2) &lt;br/&gt;IIP-1265675; Georgia
Tech (GT); Yogendra Joshi &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal FROM
Georgia Tech seeks to join the Center for Energy Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
comprised of the State University of New York (SUNY, lead institution), the
University of Texas at Arlington, and Villanova University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with other ES2 partners, GT will focus on
the development of systematic methodologies for operating electronic systems,
including data centers, as dynamic self-sensing and regulating systems that are
predictive and verified in real time. Algorithms will be developed to control
cooling resources and to assist expert system schedulers to schedule and/or
migrate workload to achieve optimal energy consumption. Thermal management
resources will also be allocated dynamically in response to system needs. This
is by nature an intrinsically multi-disciplinary research area integrating
software algorithms, control systems, thermal management and hardware. New
models will have direct application to a variety of electronic/computing systems
ranging all the way from the chip or device level to the system or data center
level. Problem-oriented research related to Software Systems, Control Systems,
Thermal Management Protocols, and Implementation and Assessment, will be
addressed during the Centers first five year program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GT,
along with other ES2 partners, will participate in promoting significant
reductions in energy consumption in electronic systems, and will contribute to
the national agenda of pursing transformative technology breakthroughs that will
help us meet our energy challenges. In partnership with other ES2 sites, GT will
implement an effective data management plan that promotes the sharing of data,
models, and practices generated by the Center with academia and industry. These
disseminated resources will strength the competitiveness of our nations
industries in this sector. As part of ES2, the GT Site is committed to
attracting talented and motivated students from all groups, and will integrate a
variety of mechanisms across the partners, including enhancement of existing
minority pipeline programs to exceed participation by women (35%) and
underrepresented students (20%). Students will have access to research data
center facilities to conduct experiments.