* 1265798
* Exploring the Connections between the Nonlinear Spectroscopy and the Potential Energy Landscapes of Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Richard Stratt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2017
* USD 435,000.00

Richard M. Stratt of Brown University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models, and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division for his
research on the relationships between the unusually slow molecular dynamicsseen
in liquid mixtures, liquid crystals, and supercooled liquids, and the global
features of the potential-energy landscapes of these systems. While slow
dynamics is often understandable as a consequence of the need to rearrange
individual chemical bonds or surmount other local bottlenecks on the potential
energy surface, in many of the most interesting cases, the issue is more the
difficulty in locating and traversing even the most efficient global pathways
through the landscape. This work investigates how computer simulations can be
used to characterize these most efficient ("geodesic") pathways and attempts to
forge quantitative connections between the information garnered from these
pathways and that available from novel nonlinear spectroscopies. The
spectroscopic half of the research is focused on solute pump/solvent-probe
spectra, in particular, because those spectra have the potential to reveal how
broad swaths of solvent structure can rearrange in the presence of a newly
electronically excited solute. By computing the spectra expected from
preferentially solvating mixtures, dye-doped liquid crystals, and fragile-glass-
forming liquids, and comparing the outcomes with the results of a geodesic
landscape analysis, the researchers hope to learn how spectroscopy can be used
to discover what is so unique about the potential energy landscapes of these
especially slow systems.

Professor Stratt and his research group are developing computational methods to
explore the relationship between the slow molecular dynamics seen in liquids
mixtures, liquid crystals and supercooled liquids and certain features of the
potential energy landscapes of these systems. A potential energy landscape is
the interaction energy of the atoms in the system as a function of the distances
between the atoms. Stratt's research focuses on how to find the most efficient
pathways through these landscapes; such pathways determine the actual motions of
the atoms. Stratt also develops theoretical methods to predict and analyze
spectra that help us to understand how solvents react to molecules that are in
an excited electronic state. The eventual payoff for this research may be useful
insight into two enormously important practical problems involving slow
molecular rearrangements: determining the properties of glassy and amorphous
materials, and understanding how and when proteins fold incorrectly. The
toughness and ease of processing of amorphous substances often makes them ideal
commercial materials, but there is surprisingly little consensus about many of
the scientific fundamentals of glassiness. Similarly, proteins that resist
folding into well-ordered structures are essential to living organisms, but some
of those that fold in an amorphous fashion are markers of critical human health
problems, including Alzheimer's disease. The research involves undergraduates as
research coworkers, thereby enriching their scientific education.