* 1265959
* Collaborative Research: Seeing the forest with the leaves--inferring plant habit and ecophysiology from leaf fossils
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Maciej Zwieniecki, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 09/30/2015
* USD 196,923.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: SEEING THE FOREST WITH THE LEAVES--INFERRING PLANT HABIT
AND ECOPHYSIOLOGY FROM LEAF FOSSILS C. Kevin Boyce1 & Maciej A Zwieniecki2 (PIs)
1.-Department of Geophysical Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.
2. Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138.

Detached leaves are among the most common of plant macrofossils. Because leaves
are the primary interface between plant and environment, fossil leaf morphology
has been widely proven to be a valuable source of information regarding past
climates and atmospheric compositions. From the leaf's perspective, however, the
plant to which the leaf is attached is as much a part of its environment as
regional climate. Thus, fossil leaves may also preserve an untapped wealth of
information concerning the habit and ecology of the parent plant as well as the
vegetation structure of the landscape. The primary goal of this project is to
develop anatomical proxies for interpreting three parameters of whole-plant
ecophysiology from leaf fossils using the emerging mechanistic understanding of
how leaf structure and physiology are linked. 1) Plant habit -tall tree or low
shrub- is provided from variance in vein density between leaf compressions with
similar total vein number. 2) Adaptation to water vapor pressure deficit -a
sunny, exposed environment or a shaded, understory environment- is provided by
the ratio of the vein-vein and vein-leaf surface distances in anatomically
preserved leaf fossils. 3) Carbon assimilation and transpiration capacities are
provided by the density of veins per leaf surface area in leaf compressions.
These tools will be established with a phylogenetically and ecologically diverse
series of field-based measurements in both tropical and temperate forests, as
well as greenhouse and growth chamber experiments to simulate conditions that no
longer exist in the modern world. First applications will focus on the
ecophysiology of key fossils during the Cretaceous/Early Cenozoic
diversification of flowering plants and the late Paleozoic diversification of
seed plants - key topics in their own right, but also important for the
introduction of these techniques to the larger paleontological community. A
crucial point is that the proxies are based in understood physiological
mechanisms, not just in statistical correlations. Thus, they will be available
to all paleontologists interested in any period of plant evolution from the
first leaves and forests in the Devonian through to the Recent. These tools will
aid reconstruction of fossils and understanding of the evolution of physiology
and ecology. More broadly, this work will provide a new approach for
constraining past climates and the carbon and hydrological cycles of deep time.