* 1265405
* Broadening the Impact of STEM Education: The Community College Leadership Role, 2014-2016
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2019
* Ellen Hause, American Association of Community Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2019
* USD 3,382,244.00

This project features interrelated activities designed to: broaden the impact of
community college leadership in STEM education; encourage greater numbers of
community colleges to develop ATE-related programs; create and support venues
for developing and nurturing STEM professional and leadership development
opportunities; and disseminate the value, resources, and accomplishments of the
ATE program. The project is building upon AACC's previous successful efforts and
supporting:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Three National ATE Principal Investigators Conferences
in 2014, 2015, and 2016;&lt;br/&gt; 2. Expanded access to ATE PI Conference
content through a series of four online workshops developed by filming select
ATE pre-conference workshops in 2014 and 2015;&lt;br/&gt; 3. Continuation of the
AACC MentorLinks program to help 10 community colleges establish new programs or
strengthen existing programs in STEM fields;&lt;br/&gt; 4. AACC project briefs
highlighting the outcomes of the MentorLinks program;&lt;br/&gt; 5. Three STEM
leadership development webinars designed to engage emerging and seasoned
community college leaders as part of AACC's "Trends and Issues in Leadership"
webinar series; and&lt;br/&gt; 6. Dissemination of ATE program resources,
information, and impact through presentations, feature stories, web site,
conference proceedings, and the use of social media
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities have strong intellectual merit
to advance knowledge and understanding of various STEM disciplines and the
strategies used to build and strengthen STEM programs. They are enriching and
expanding the current network of institutions working at the forefront of
technological education reform; supporting and expanding that network through
professional development and mentoring programs that provide venues for
identifying promising strategies and lessons learned; cultivating new community
college STEM leaders and advocates through leadership development and STEM
awareness opportunities; disseminating information and resources generated by
the ATE community to grow and strengthen STEM technician education nationally;
and promoting the value, impact, and national significance of the community
college leadership role in technician education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project activities are helping community college leaders make the important
connections and partnerships necessary to build and sustain STEM programs. The
networking and professional enrichment leads to numerous interactions among
participants, involving the sharing of materials and curriculum, exchange visits
to campuses, and collaborative activities including joint proposals to advance
the field. The activities are: helping to strengthen and expand the ATE
community to meet the increasing demand for a trained technical workforce;
playing a critical role in addressing the national student completion agenda in
STEM fields; and facing the challenges of maintaining U.S. global
competitiveness.