* 1265594
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Prediction of Sliding Friction Using Integrated Theory and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2016
* USD 266,049.00

This research is about obtaining a quantitative understanding of energy
dissipation, interfacial structure and friction of model boundary films. While
theoretical methods have hitherto been able to provide qualitative insights into
sliding friction, they have not yet been able to quantitatively describe the
structure of a sliding interface and the associated friction forces. The
approach of this research will be to combine experiments in ultrahigh vacuum on
well-defined model boundary films consisting of a range of isostructural alkali
halides on metal substrates with molecular dynamics simulations using tailored,
high-precision interaction potentials obtained from density function theory
calculations of the same systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
benefits of this research will include an understanding of the friction
properties of the boundary films that are formed by chemical reactions between
lubricant additives or gas-phase lubricants at a sliding, solid-solid interface.
This fundamental understanding will underpin efforts to design effective
lubricants that form films with low friction or wear, thereby resulting in
energy savings and longer machine lifetimes, and benefit the United States'
economy. In addition, understanding sliding friction poses a unique experimental
challenge because the processes occur at an inaccessible, sliding solid-solid
interface that cannot be interrogated directly. This means that advances in
understanding such interfaces will rely on integrating experiments and
theoretical methods carried out on the same systems. Being able to achieve this
for the simple systems explored in this proposal will develop the theoretical
and experimental strategies for understanding more complex sliding interfaces.
Finally, the integrated experimental and theoretical approaches will provide a
broad-based education for students and will involve both undergraduates and
under-represented minorities. Developments in theoretical methods and the
refinement of experimental approaches over the past few decades have resulted in
a fundamental shift in the way that science is carried out and will require both
graduate and undergraduate education that integrates theory and experiment. This
has been emphasized in a recent special issue of Tribology Letters co-edited by
the Principal Investigators of this proposal entitled "Progress in Tribology
Through Integrated Simulations and Experiments".