* 1265807
* Organometallic complexes of late d-block elements and pi-acid ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Rasika Dias, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor H. V. Rasika Dias of the University of Texas at Arlington
will investigate organometallic chemistry of late d-block elements. In
particular, the proposed activity is aimed at developing strategies for the
stabilization of rare metal adducts featuring one or more unsaturated, carbon
centered, pi-acid ligands such as carbon monoxide, alkenes, and alkynes on
either "naked" or auxiliary ligand supported group 12 metal (Zn, Cd, Hg) or
coinage metal (Cu, Au, Au) ions. In addition to the study of structures and
metal-ligand bonding of these complexes, metal mediated cycloaddition processes
such as [2+2+2] chemistry and nucleophilic addition chemistry of coordinated
ligands are of particular interest as they permit the construction of useful
ring systems on a metal ion template and the functionalization of hydrocarbons.
The new weakly coordinating and highly fluorinated ligands and anions Professor
Dias plans to develop during this work will be potentially useful for the
stabilization of reactive and labile metal molecules involving various other
metal ions as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will significantly improve
our understanding of the organometallic chemistry of the group 11 and 12 metals
and provide useful new information on key intermediates proposed for a range of
industrially important metal catalyzed processes. This work will provide milder
routes to the activation of bonds and useful new chemicals. The principal
investigator will also mentor K-12 teachers and high school students, and train
graduate and undergraduate researchers with diverse backgrounds in modern
chemical research. Professor Dias also plans to utilize the Planetarium at the
University of Texas at Arlington to show digital movies to educate and excite
young audiences and general public on chemistry and science. Extensive
collaborations with faculty members at foreign universities will continue as
they provide opportunities for students to learn new cultures and the value of
team-work.