* 1265347
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Model-based Autonomic Cloud Computing Software Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Peter Dinda, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 83,000.00

The project entails research on software engineering (e.g., mapping requirements
to software architectures, software architecture models and their adaptation,
software re-factoring, adaptable/autonomic middleware, etc), networking
(software-defined networking, ad-hoc peer-to-peer networks, social private
networks, etc), computer systems (virtualization, distributed computing, etc).
The work will also provide techniques and middleware for distributed
cyberinfrastructure supportive of mobile-hosted apps for science and education
(e.g. middleware for virtual networking, social collaboration, resource
virtualization and virtual appliances for different domains). By studying the
mobile application-induced workload at the lowest layers of the systems software
stack, such as the VMM, the project will identify how these layers can be
improved to better support such workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance the fundamental understanding of multiple technical issues faced in
enabling flexible end-to-end management of cloud-supported mobile applications.
Methods are needed to (re)implement applications so that their software
architectures can reconfigure in response to changes in requirements as the
environment changes, and to allow for runtime re-factoring of components for
execution locally or remotely. Virtual networking techniques are needed to
enable seamless off-loading of computation from a device to remote resources
possibly provided by multiple clouds. In addition, both software adaptation and
network configuration must be done on demand.