* 1265956
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design:  Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 720,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Paul A. Wender and co-workers of the Department of Chemistry
at Stanford University will explore the development of new reactions, reagents
and catalysts for organic synthesis. Studies will focus on new reagents for
[5+2] cycloadditions and on a new family of reactivity relaying reagents for
multicomponent [5+2]/[4+2] cycloadditions. Studies will also be directed at new
strategies for carbon-carbon bond activation, a required step in a large class
of cycloaddition reactions. Finally, studies will be directed at the development
of the first transporter-catalyst conjugates for imaging and sensing in
biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed at the
introduction of new reactions, catalysts and reagents for organic synthesis and
thus at the introduction of new strategies for synthesizing molecules of
interest for theoretical, medicinal, materials, imaging and energy research. New
reactions, catalysts and reagents change how we think about bond construction,
thereby providing options for improving step and time economy and providing
greener if not ideal approaches to making molecules of scientific and societal
value. Such advances provide the foundation for the pharmaceutical,
agricultural, fine chemicals, materials science, environmental science, and
energy industries and the fundamental tools for scientific research. The focus
of this work on molecular processes also advances our basic knowledge of
molecular structure and function, which in turn provides the foundation for the
molecularization of science from molecular anthropology to molecular zoology. As
evident from over 300 former coworkers trained in this program, many in
leadership positions in academia and in industry, this research provides an
exceptional training program for undergraduates, graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows, including those from historically under-represented groups,
and a source of inspiration and knowledge for others to use chemistry to address
pressing and unsolved problems in medicine, materials, diagnostics and energy
research.