* 1265860
* GOALI: Engineering-Driven Modeling of Multi-Resolution Data for Surface Variation Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2014
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 299,998.00

This GOALI project develops methodologies and algorithms to reduce surface shape
variation, enabling cost-effective high-precision machining by integrating
process physics with multi-resolution surface data for quality diagnosis and
monitoring. The integration of the process physics model and multi-resolution
data will improve surface data modeling, variation prediction accuracy, and
interpretability. Based on the improved data model, a cost-effective surface
measurement strategy and monitoring scheme will be developed by which abnormal
process variations can be detected and identified with reduced false alarm
rates. The model will also improve surface variation diagnosis. By combining the
modeling and monitoring approaches, a two-level surface variation control
methodology is established to improve surface quality for multistage machining
processes. The PI and co-PIs will collaborate with major US automakers and/or
powertrain system suppliers for data acquisition, experiments, algorithm
verification and validation, and technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcome of this research provides new insights into surface variations in
multistage machining processes and will transform in-plant quality control
practice from dimensional variation reduction to surface shape variation
control. If successful, this project will enhance US manufacturing
competitiveness by improving powertrain machining precision and quality. The
surface modeling and control framework established in this research focuses on
face milling and can potentially benefit other surface machining applications.
In addition, the methodology of surface variation control established in this
research will contribute to development of a novel optical surface measurement
system that can intelligently select metrology resolution and determine
defective surface regions. The surface variation monitoring scheme can also be
extended to quality control for micro manufacturing processes by reducing the
measurement time of high-definition metrology such as atomic force microscopy
and 3D profilometry.