* 1265383
* The iPlant Collaborative: Cyberinfrastructure for the Life Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Stephen Goff, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,300,000.00

iPlant is a new kind of virtual organization, a cyberinfrastructure (CI)
collaborative created to catalyze progress in computationally-based discovery in
plant biology. iPlant has created a comprehensive and widely used CI, driven by
community needs, and adopted by a number of large-scale informatics projects and
thousands of individual users. The project has laid a strong foundation to build
an increasingly more capable CI and is poised to have an even greater impact on
the plant sciences and a number of related fields, with a new focus on
addressing computational bottlenecks for a broad number of life science
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the next five years, iPlant will continue
to enhance the capabilities of a comprehensive CI and will also expand the scope
to cover a number of new fields of inquiry. In iPlant's initial phase, Grand
Challenge projects were defined to shape community requirements for the design
of the CI. The two projects, Genotype-to-Phenotype and the Tree of Life, led to
new analytical tools and competences for genomics and evolutionary biology.
Future work will advance these capabilities and expand into capture and modeling
of phenotypic, environmental, and ecological data. As before, this growth will
be motivated by community needs and accomplished by community collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iPlant will continue to actively partner with other large
CI development efforts and will coordinate CI development where feasible,
appropriate, and mutually beneficial. iPlant will continue to be the underlying
infrastructure provider for a number of projects that provide a variety of
bioinformatics services. While continuing to support plant biology discovery
research, iPlant will expand scope beyond the plant sciences, in coordination
with nascent animal-centered efforts. The project will continue to adapt to the
rapidly changing needs of the life sciences community and the rapidly changing
technological landscape faced by researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project is in advancing the state of modern biology.
Without question, research progress in the plant sciences, and in life sciences
more generally, is increasingly limited by data and computational challenges. As
knowledge of plant biology increases, the field will progress from informatics-
based discovery to predictive modeling and eventually to synthetic biology. A
comprehensive CI that eliminates the bottlenecks of data management, data
standards, file formats, analysis, efficient collaboration, and knowledge
dissemination will be a necessary underlying enabler to achieve this vision, and
iPlant is positioned to be this enabling infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are numerous. The CI
currently supports thousands of end users through its data storage, cloud, and
online analytical capabilities. As a service provider, iPlant underlies a number
of other online biological information resources. The project will continue its
wide-ranging and successful education and outreach efforts, and will teach
computational skills to learners at all levels, with particular focus on faculty
to enable a sustained culture change that incorporates these advanced skills
into the teaching of biology.