* 1265055
* Highly Multiplexed Optogenetic Neural Stimulation using integrated optical technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 386,536.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will use modern integrated wavelength
division multiplexing to minimize the&lt;br/&gt;amount of external points of
interface needed by optical probes while maximizing the total points of optical
stimulation on an augmented electrophysiological neural recording probe. Array
waveguide grating demultiplexers will be fabricated on neural probes and will be
used to segregate multiple optical signals passed over a common fiber. The
improvement of optical channel density will allow for more precise stimulation
of local nuclei, enable high spatial and temporal multiplexing of selective
stimulation of neurons and will allow for more flexibility when implanting
neural probes. To allow for individual or multiple channels to be activated, the
authors will build a ?polychromator? which will utilize a grating to separate
spectral components from a broadband light source and project the spectrum onto
a digital mirror device (DMD), similar to those found in digital projectors.
Since the spectral information will be encoded spatially, spectral bands can be
selected using the DMD by activating or deactivating columns of pixels. The
resulting spectral bands will be collimated and used to provide a source with
carefully controlled and manipulated spectral bands, allowing for direct spatial
control of the stimulus through on-probe demultiplexing.