* 1265830
* Catalytic Coupling Reactions via C-H, C-C and C-N Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Chae Yi, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 455,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Chae S. Yi of the Marquette University to
investigate the synthetic and mechanistic aspects of transition metal-catalyzed
coupling reactions involving unreactive carbon-hydrogen, carbon-carbon, and
carbon-nitrogen bonds. The first objective of this research is to develop and
utilize novel, catalytic carbon-hydrogen coupling methods directed towards the
synthesis of complex organic molecules. The research elucidates the molecular
mechanisms exhibited by a variety of ruthenium catalysts. The second objective
of this research project involves the development of novel, catalytic carbon-
carbon and carbon-nitrogen bond activation methods from biomass-derived
substrates. These studies advance fundamental knowledge in catalytic bond
activation and functionalization methods. Such reactions are of fundamental
importance due to the enormous synthetic and economic potential of realizing
cost-effective and environmentally-benign products from petrochemical and
biomass-derived agents. The products of these reactions are of importance in the
petrochemical, fine chemical, and pharmaceutical industries. The research effort
trains graduate and postdoctoral students to contribute to the highly-skilled
U.S. chemical workforce. Professor Yi recruits students from local and regional
colleges as well as internationally.

Faced with growing environmental pollution from petrochemical use, one of the
most urgent challenges in catalysis research centers is the development of new
catalytic processes that give the desired products without forming wasteful
byproducts. Transition metal catalyzed bond activation methods such as those
described by Professor Yi hold tremendous potential in achieving energy-
efficient and ecologically-friendly syntheses of organic chemical commodities.
Professor Yi's group investigates a number of highly selective syntheses that
employ readily-available alcohol substrates, tolerate a wide range of functional
groups, and generate only water as the by-product.