* 1265833
* Exploring electronic response properties of molecules and extended systems using theoretical methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Jochen Autschbach, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 357,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jochen Autschbach of the
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and his research team will
develop theoretical models for the calculation of nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectra, and for optical activity such as circular dichroism and optical
rotation. Approximations made in density functional theory (DFT) and their
impact on NMR and optical activity calculations will also be investigated. This
work will advance our understanding of structure-specific NMR parameters, of NMR
relaxation phenomena, and the structural and electronic origins of natural
optical activity. In addition, the influence of the chemical and physical
environment on these molecular properties will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will not only advance our
understanding of the relationship between molecular structure and measured
spectroscopic and optical properties of molecules, but also our general
understanding of the interaction of light and matter. Theoretical methods and
software developed during this investigation will be made available to the
larger community of scientists. In addition, this research project will be a
vehicle for the training of graduate and undergraduate students. The student
experience will be enhanced by the collaborative nature of the project; while
the work within the Autschbach group is computational, it will be done in the
context of collaborations with experimentalists from a variety of fields,
including materials science and catalysis.