* 1265182
* The Structure, Evolution, and Life Cycles of Intraseasonal Fluctuations of the North Pacific Jet Stream
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 11/30/2017
* USD 663,394.00

The work aims to substantially increase our knowledge of wintertime Pacific jet
variability through a combination of statistical, synoptic-climatological and
case study analyses. As the primary phenomenon at the interface between
synoptic-scale weather systems and the large-scale circulation, upper
tropospheric jets are particularly strong governors of regional climate. Despite
the substantial influence that the wintertime Pacific jet has on both sensible
weather and large-scale circulation within and beyond the Pacific basin, current
understanding of its intraseasonal variability is far from complete. In prior
work the team has identified two leading modes of this variability. In this
project the team will identify preferred transitions between the leading modes
of variability of the Pacific jet; the results of this will inform construction
of composites of the basin-wide structure, evolution and weather features
associated with each species of preferred transition. Using the phase space
analysis to expand the jet retraction climatology, the relationship between the
areal extent of lower tropospheric cold air over the Siberia/Eurasia sector and
the zonal extent of the Pacific jet will be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the Pacific jet is a hybrid of the polar and
subtropical jets, reanalysis data will also be used to examine the behavior of
these two components in identified cases of jet retraction as a first step
toward segregating the population of retraction events into those forced
primarily by extratropical and tropical variability, respectively. Finally, in
order to better understand their underlying large- and synoptic-scale dynamics,
detailed case study analyses of two representative cases of jet retraction
employing output from fine-scale numerical simulations of the selected cases
will be undertaken using the NCAR Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model.
This project will shed insights into wintertime Pacific jet variability; this
has implications for improved prediction for the state of Hawaii as well as the
west coast. Thus the broader impacts of this project are substantial.