* 1265447
* Probing the Mechanics of the Axoneme in Genetically-Modified Flagella
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Susan Dutcher, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

The research objective of this award is to measure the mechanical properties and
active processes that produce propulsive motion in cilia and flagella. Cilia and
flagella are tiny subcellular structures (about 200 nanometers in diameter and
5-30 micrometers long) that beat regularly to propel cells or to move fluid.
Cilia line the airways of the human respiratory system and beat in coordination
to eliminate bacteria and particles. In this project, elastic stiffness and
ability to produce force will be measured in algae flagella, which have
structure and behavior very similar to human cilia. Mechanical properties will
be tested in flagella with specific genetic mutations, under varying
experimental conditions, to learn how the underlying structural features produce
the coordinated oscillations required for effective propulsion. The novel
combination of mechanics and genetics is uniquely suited to make progress on
this problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies will advance
our scientific understanding of cilia and flagella, and provide insight into how
these systems fail in injury or disease. This improved understanding could lead
to new methods for diagnosis and therapy, or ways to harvest energy from
biological oscillators. More generally, these studies will clarify the
coordination mechanisms which allow many independent microscopic oscillators to
work together to produce macroscopic motion. The project will achieve broad
impact through a partnership between Washington University (WU; a research-
intensive private university) and the University of Central Oklahoma (UCO; a
public institution focused on undergraduate education). Through this
partnership, undergraduate students from both institutions will participate in
research, enhancing the availability of such experiences to a diverse
population. This award will also support educational projects in which high
school and undergraduate students design large-scale, physical models of cilia
and flagella. These models will illuminate the behavior of cilia and flagella
while providing practical experience in electromechanical design and control.