* 1265886
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research:  Broadband Wireless Access &amp; Applications Center (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 02/28/2019
* USD 747,187.00

The proposed center seeks to establish a new Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center (I/UCRC) addressing broadband wireless access and applications.
The center will focus on four areas: 1) enabling sharing up to many GHz of
spectrum using technological advances and enabling platforms such as spectrum
trading and auctions, and millimeter wave communications; 2) co-existence of
heterogeneous devices (e.g. radar and communication systems); 3) providing
connectivity for new applications such as wireless devices in the hospitals of
the future, bringing wireless into the hospital in novel ways; and (d) improving
electronic warfare technologies that address national-security issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new center addresses an area of critical economic and
has the potential to support development of broadband wireless as a platform for
innovation as addressed in the White House PCAST Report. The proposed center has
the potential to link a diverse set of member companies across the broadband
industry sector with university discovery in this area. Moreover, the center
participants have a history of start-up initiation, and the opportunity from new
starts to leverage the ecosystem created by the center is significant. The
center plans to impact students via their conduct of center research, curriculum
development and REU site development.&lt;br/&gt;