* 1265592
* Spectral Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Barry Simon, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 399,530.00

Professor Simon plans to study the spectral theory of orthogonal polynomials and
related systems, following up on the substantial progress in the subject within
the past ten years. One intriguing problem he intends to study is the spectral
theory of the orthogonal polynomials associated to the Cantor measure where
there is currently strong numerical evidence that the recursion coefficients are
asymptotically almost periodic and Prof. Simon hopes to prove theorems. A second
problem concerns exponential decaying perturbations for elements of the
exponential torus of finite gap Jacobi matrices where the need to employ
techniques from the theory of Riemann surfaces presents some difficulties in
extending the one band results obtained earlier by Damanik and Simon. A third
problem concerns a conjectured dichotomy about the zeros of orthogonal
polynomials on the unit circle where numeric evidence suggests that either every
point on the circle is a limit of zeros or else all the zeros stay away from the
unit circle. Finally, Professor Simon is planning to explore extensions of the
results obtained in the past for orthogonal polynomials on the real line and
unit circle to the context of more general measures in the complex
plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research concerns the spectral and
inverse spectral theory of orthogonal polynomials. Inverse spectral theory is
connected with determining the properties of an object from its measured
spectral properties. Practical examples include using x-rays to determine the
structure of crystalline matter and medical imaging technology such as CAT
scans. The underlying mathematical theory is the seed corn for further
developments in these important applied areas. The spectral theory of orthogonal
polynomials is significant because it is a theory where there is a general
explicit set of formulae for solving the inverse problem. During his career,
Professor Simon has made important contributions to developing our scientific
infrastructure with over 30 graduate student PhD supervisions and mentoring of
almost 50 postdocs and other scientists. Many of these have gone on to
distinguished careers of their own. He expects this to continue during the new
grant period.