* 1265223
* Collaborative Research: Producing Wildlife: Biodiversity Conservation in Dynamic Commodity Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/13/2012,12/31/2015
* Paul Robbins, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2015
* USD 264,923.00

This project considers the ways in which biodiversity conservation and
agriculturally-based livelihoods can exist together in a way that is beneficial
to both. It is increasingly well understood that closed park (or 'fortress')
approaches to conservation may be insufficient to address the current global
biodiversity crisis on its own and that such approaches have sometimes proven
destructive to local livelihoods and people. By determining where local
agricultural and economic activities also benefit biodiversity, the research
seeks to find win-win approaches to preserving wildlife and maintaining
livelihoods. This research therefore seeks to determine: 1) the degree to which
plantation landscapes (e.g. coffee, tea, rubber) in central India foster native
biodiversity; 2) what producer practices and decisions support such diversity;
and 3) what socio-economic conditions encourage or discourage biodiversity-
friendly production. The investigators hypothesize that specific conditions such
as range of plantation area, use of inputs, and the intensity of production
encourage habitat appropriate for wildlife. This will be tested using a
combination of methods including intensive ecological observation and
measurement. The work also stresses how local agricultural choices bear on
preserving or thwarting bird and mammal populations of conservation interest. As
such, the work involves interviews with local agrarian producers to determine
what land management strategies they employ (e.g. fertilizer choice), what
conditions favor or discourage such practices (e.g. belonging to a producer
cooperative), and the degree to which wildlife is a hindrance to production
(e.g. through crop raiding). The research further involves the reconstruction of
historical conditions that have led to crop and production choices that exist
today, including a survey of changing commodity prices and land cover.

The results will likely reveal agricultural configurations and decisions that
favor specific wildlife species. The research will also assess the degree to
which such systems are sensitive to the vagaries of commodity price shifts as
well as local institutional change. These findings can help determine which
wildlife species are being maintained in areas distant from sites of controlled
conservation effort. Results can inform future policies which encourage and
reward local people for maintaining specific crops and cropping approaches of
value to biodiversity. The research also stands to open future dialogues on the
role of local people in conservation more generally, moving away from
confrontational situations more typically associated with community-wildlife
interactions. Finally, the study stresses the broadening of conservation
attention and direction of resources to heavily humanized places in the world,
an urgent question in light of the ongoing global transformation of the earth's
surface by people. The project will train numerous graduate students at two
United States institutions, as well volunteer citizen science participants in
the study region in India. Resulting ecological and economic data, maps, and
survey findings will be loaded into publically available websites and findings
will be published in academic as well as other outlets.