* 1265885
* Optical and Microwave Absorption Spectroscopy of Metal Containing Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Timothy Steimle, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2017
* USD 387,088.00

This award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, enables Prof. Timothy C. Steimle of the
Department of Chemistry, Arizona State University at Tempe to experimentally
determine the most fundamental chemical behavior and properties of small metal
containing molecules using new laser-based technologies. Two interrelated
classes of molecules will be investigated: a) diatomic molecules containing
heavy metal atoms of thorium, hafnium and ytterbium, and b) the triatomic
molecules, Si3 and SiH2. Both classes of molecules exhibit vibrational and
electronic motions that defy conventional theoretical description. Molecular
magnetic and electric dipole moments, which are used in the proposed schemes to
produce ultracold samples and are routinely predicted by theorists, will be
experimentally measured from the analysis of Zeeman and Stark laser
spectroscopy, respectively. The data is critical for proposed experiments that
use heavy metal containing molecules (e.g. ThO, ThS and YbF) to test various
extensions of the Standard Model through the detection of the electric dipole
moment of the electron (eEDM) and the anapole moment of nuclei. The laser-based
studies of Si3 and SiH2 will investigate the mechanism of spin-orbit and other
relativistic induced coupling between electronic and vibrational motions. In
collaboration with theorists, new methodologies for addressing relativistic
effects will be developed and assessed. All studies will be performed in the
gas-phase, which is most compatible with new
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules containing elements near the end of the
periodic table (e.g. Th, Hf, and Yb) are poorly understood and modeled compared
to those at the beginning (C, O and H), yet are of great technological
importance in, for example, catalysis, batteries or solar cells. Much of the
unique properties of these molecules can be traced to the fact that the
electrons forming the chemical bonds are accelerated to speeds approaching the
speed of light. At these unusual speeds, relativistic effects become important
which, in general, strengthen and shorten chemical bonds. Furthermore, it is
predicted that under these relativistic conditions, here-to-fore unobserved
phenomena become greatly enhanced. One such phenomenon is the interaction of the
electron with the very large electric fields predicted to exist in the region of
the nuclei. The data generated in this study are critical for sophisticated
experiments designed to precisely measure these effects. A comparison of
predicted and measured charge distribution of the electron is critical to the
field of physics for validation of modern models for fundamental particles.
Hence, the tiny metal containing molecules studied here are the laboratory for
understanding new properties of matter, generating information typically
obtained at large research facilities that possess particle accelerators, but at
a small fraction of the cost.