* 1265212
* Inspiration, Frustration, and Fascination:  An Excursion into Low-Oxidation State Main Group Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Gregory Robinson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 508,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Gregory H. Robinson of the Department of Chemistry at The
University of Georgia will pursue an ambitious program to explore challenging
areas of low-oxidation state main group chemistry. The work will demonstrate
that N-heterocyclic carbenes and their N-heterocyclic dicarbene derivatives
constitute a unique platform from which many unusual low-oxidation state main
group species may be obtained. Major goals in the proposed work include: (a) the
synthesis of unusual species containing one-coordinate borocations; (b) the
synthesis of two-coordinate borylenes; (c) the carbene-stabilization of a Si(0)
atom and a parent silylene; and (d) the preparation of extended molecular
systems integrated with main group diatomic allotrope moieties. These targeted
low-oxidation state species may further be utilized in the synthesis of other
unusual main group molecules such as NHC-stabilized boron analogs of carbonyl
derivatives.

This project utilizes a class of organic bases to stabilize highly reactive
diatomic molecules such as disilicon, diphosphorus, and diarsenic at room
temperature. This proposal describes efforts to further study the synthesis,
structure, and reactivity of these base-stabilized diatomics. It is possible
that these base-stabilized diatomics may have applications related to new ways
to deposit elemental silicon or phosphorus in the fabrication of advanced
electronics and computer chips and chemical catalysis. Indeed, Professor
Robinson and coworkers were recently granted a US patent (No.: 8278456) for
their discovery of using organic bases to stabilize diatomic molecules.