* 1265703
* Metal-Catalyzed Diradical Reactivity: From Fundamental Thermal- and Photo-Chemistry to Novel Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Jeffrey Zaleski, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2017
* USD 451,504.00

In a project entitled "Metal-Catalyzed Diradical Reactivity: From Fundamental
Thermal- and Photo-Chemistry to Novel Nanomaterials," the Chemical Catalysis
(CAT) program supports Professor Jeffrey M. Zaleski at Indiana University to
probe the geometric and electronic factors that control metal-catalyzed and
photochemical diradical generation by the Bergman cyclization. Three primary
structure types are investigated: 1) combined sigma/pi complexes where
activation is geometrically controlled through the sigma bonds and
electronically via the pi-system. Structures in this theme examination of
catalytic Bergman vs. Myers-Saito cyclization pathways that are important to
radical-mediated chemical transformations; 2) construction of large chromophoric
assemblies that use thermal and photochemical Bergman cyclizations to fuse ring
systems catalytically to form optically responsive molecules; and 3)
incorporation of these reactive ligand sets into large nanoassemblies that can
be activated to form all carbon frameworks by template vaporization. These three
architectural classes carry both a fundamental research question to be addressed
as well as a potential broader impact from the final architectures and
reactions. Thermal reaction pathways are evaluated using standard synthetic
methodology such as NMR, crystallography, and spectroscopic characterization of
reaction intermediates. Optical properties of chromophoric products are examined
using nanosecond and ultrafast lifetime and transient absorption methods, while
characterization of nanoarchitectures is conducted mainly using electron
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research impacts chemical catalysis
methodology for constructing new molecules using metal/radical mediated
reactions, which is a fundamental need in the chemical community. The
chromophore assembly component of the work builds new constructs that can be
used as chemical sensors, or for light harvesting in solar energy conversion.
The nanomaterial aspect of the project generates reactions on nanoscale surfaces
to create new, higher-order assemblies that have potential applications in
molecular electronics and ultralight pure carbon electronic arrays. From an
educational perspective, the research helps to train students in a combined
fundamental science/application approach to chemistry that spans synthesis and
high-tech measurements. Students at all levels from undergraduate to
postdoctoral, including those from underrepresented minorities programs at IU,
benefit from exposure to a range of research challenges and diversities of
solution. Some of the work is outreached to local schools to entice young minds
to pursue degrees in science.