* 1265834
* Room-temperature Operation Single-Photon Detectors Based on Nanoparticle Super-gated Organic Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Jinsong Huang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

The goal of this award is to develop room-temperature operation single-photon
photodetectors utilizing a structure of nanoparticle super-gated organic field
effect transistors. Such photodetectors will use the incident photons as a
switching valve to control the current flowing through the transistors. Light
absorbing nanoparticles will be sandwiched between two gate dielectric layers to
tune the source-drain output current of the transistors. The thickness of a
second dielectric layer will be controlled to be very small so that photo-
generated electrons in the nanoparticles can cause a dramatic variation of the
hole transport behavior in the semiconductor channel by the columbic interaction
between the electrons and holes. Therefore, one absorbed photon in the
nanoparticles can cause a large output current variation in the transistor,
which will realize huge apparent gain for single photon detection applications.
The sensitivity of present photodectors will be improved with optimized
semiconductor channel materials, device structure parameters, and the size of
the transistor detector will be scaled down for single photon
detection.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will yield a new
generation of low cost, disposable, uncooled single-photon detectors with
unprecedented performance over traditional single photon detectors, such as
photomultiplier tubes or avalanche photodiodes. The super-gating detection
mechanism and device structure will also establish the platform for single
photon detection of very weak radiation from a broad spectrum from near infrared
to ultraviolet as well as high energy radiation such as X-ray. The application
of this type of photodetector in sensor array will enable higher resolution
images because of the increased fill factor of each pixel. The application of
such high sensitivity photodetectors in medical devices, such as computerized
tomography scanners, would reduce the radiation dose exposed to the patient.