* 1265945
* First-Principles Excited State Electronic Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 404,997.00

Xiaosong Li of the University of Washington is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop several time-dependent electronic structure methods in
conjunction with rigorous analytical methods to address some specific and
important systems of excited electronic dynamics interacting with an
environment. The proposed research program builds on what the LI group has
already accomplished in the field of first-principles electronic dynamics. The
overall objective is to develop new methods that are able to address the time-
dependent interactions of excited electronic dynamics with molecular degrees of
freedom and solvent. The new methods allow Li and his coworkers to explore new,
interesting phenomena with a level of accuracy and detail that meets the needs
of cutting-edge experiments. Specifically, they plan to apply the new methods to
investigate vibration-induced electron-hole pair relaxation, solvent-induced
excited state decay and solvent-modulated excited state reaction pathways in
organic and inorganic materials. The fundamental knowledge gained from these
studies deepen the understanding of numerous related photophysical processes in
organic and inorganic materials.

Excited electronic dynamics are ubiquitous in energy conversion, energy storage,
and photocatalysis, as well as in information processing and storage. They are
central to numerous futuristic, proposed technologies most notably in the area
of photonics and spintronics. The knowledge gained from the proposed research
has broad implications for each of these technologies by changing the way
researchers understand excited state electronic structure/function
relationships. This project could furthermore result in the development of new
materials with novel photophysical properties for application in a variety of
scientific contexts from fundamental research to energy conversion. The results
of this project provide new fundamental insights into the interactions of
excited electronic states and environments in chemistry and physics. The
proposed research provides a mechanism for advanced interdisciplinary education
and training in the areas of inorganic, theoretical, physical, and materials
chemistry, in order to prepare participating undergraduate and graduate students
for future careers in science, engineering, and education.