* 1265162
* Novel Phenomena in Single-Crystal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Gang Cao, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project encompasses a systematic effort to
elucidate the novel physics driven by spin-orbit interactions (SOI) in heavy
transition metal oxides and a rigorous search for new spin-orbital materials
having exotic ground states. It is recently established that SOI in heavy
transition metal oxides vigorously competes with Coulomb interactions, non-cubic
crystal electric field and Hund's rule coupling, and critically biases their
mutual competition to stabilize ground states with exotic behavior, which
sharply contrasts with traditional electronic structure arguments. The most
profound effect of the SOI is the Jeff = 1/2 insulating state, a new quantum
state that represents the novel physics in the 5d-based systems. Considerable
recent experimental and theoretical work has appeared in response to this new
quantum state discovered by the PI and collaborators, presenting us new physics
and profound challenges. It is the new physics and challenges that the PI seeks
to further pursue. This project provides all students involved rigorous training
that emphasizes both synthesis and characterization techniques covering a broad
spectrum of materials and experimental probes. The transfer of technical
expertise will be achieved via direct integration of the students into ongoing
research efforts with a goal of professional journal publication of results. The
project also constitutes a key thrust within the Center for Advanced Materials
(funded by NSF EPSCoR RII) where the PI is Director.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Condensed matter and materials physics addresses
identification of novel, fundamental properties of solids and liquids that have
generated a remarkable number of cutting-edge technologies in recent decades. It
is widely recognized that whoever discovers and controls the optimized synthesis
of novel materials generally controls the investigation of their often unique
properties and, ultimately, their successful integration into advanced
technologies. Unfortunately, U.S. leadership in materials research has seriously
eroded in recent years due to a growing shortage of scientists who possess
skills in both the synthesis and characterization of new materials. The current
situation presents an urgent national challenge that could ultimately undermine
our economic competitiveness if left unaddressed. This project will emphasize
discovery, synthesis and characterization of novel transition metal oxides that
have already revealed a wide array of phenomena seldom or never found in other
materials. This project provides all students involved rigorous training that
emphasizes both synthesis and characterization techniques covering a broad
spectrum of materials and experimental probes. They will be further trained via
short courses, seminars, national lab visits, paper and proposal writing, and
conference participation. The project also constitutes a key thrust within the
Center for Advanced Materials (funded by NSF EPSCoR RII) where the PI is
Director, an association that helps nurturing interdisciplinary expertise that
will generate synergies and attract new students who are the future human
capital in technologies driving the economy.