* 1265993
* SusChEM: Trianionic Pincer Supported Transition Metal Complexes for Catalyzing Value-Added Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 465,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Adam S. Veige of the University of Florida to
explore the use of trianionic pincer-supported transition metal catalysts for
the production of value-added materials. This research is conducted in three
parts. The first objective is to develop tungsten and molybdenum complexes using
unique three-coordinated pincer ligands for alkyne metathesis - an organic
reaction involving the redistribution of alkyne (triple) bonds. The trianionic
ligand fuses three negatively-charged (anionic) donor groups to the meridional
coordination plane, thus enabling access to highly-reactive, coordinatively and
electronically unsaturated metal complexes. The second objective capitalizes on
the preliminary discovery of highly-active substituted alkyne polymerization
catalysts. Experiments elucidate the catalyst's role in the polymerization
reaction, providing insight into the creation of new, more active versions of
the catalyst. The third objective includes the development of catalysts capable
of converting polyolefin waste into usable products. This project focuses on
elucidating the rare, but fundamental beta-alkyl elimination reaction.

In 2010, the global demand for catalyst manufacturing reached $30 billion. These
catalysts produced more than $10 trillion in goods and services annually.
Catalyst development, such as that explored in this research project, broadens
scientific knowledge and presents opportunities for discovering new catalysts
and catalytic reactions. The underlying theme is to transform commodity or
feedstock reagents into high-value products using non-precious metals to speed-
up the reactions. Student scientists in the Veige research group receive hands-
on training in modern inorganic/organometallic chemistry to meet the demands of
an increasingly specialized technological workplace. In addition, interactive
and entertaining events such as the Chemistry Day at the Oaks Mall are designed
to raise public awareness and to inspire the next generation of scientists and
their parents.