* 1265770
* Metal Coordination Compounds as Reporters for Biological NO
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Stephen Lippard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Nitric oxide (NO) is an important molecule that controls many biological
processes including smooth muscle dilation in the heart and other organs,
neurotransmission, and functioning of the immune system. Through this award,
funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Stephen J. Lippard from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology will investigate the chemistry of nitric oxide with
transition metal complexes that can be incorporated into novel, peptide-based,
platforms for its detection as a signaling agent in biology. This project
investigates these roles through the preparation and application of bright,
light-emitting molecules based on transition metal chemistry to track the
generation and translocation of nitric oxide to its biological targets. Several
of these targets include transition metals centers, and the chemistry by which
they respond to NO is another subject of investigation. By directing the sensors
to specific cellular locales, such as the cell membrane or organelles like the
mitochondrion, spatiotemporal information about NO as a signal transduction
molecule can be obtained by fluorescence microscopic studies. Reactive species
derived from NO, specifically HNO (nitroxyl) and HSNO (nitrosothiol), will also
be investigated. Through chemistry, the probes will be made selective for NO,
HNO, or HSNO, kinetically tuned for rapid turn-on, ratiometric to allow for
quantitation, reversible, and able to emit at low energies to minimize unwanted
background. The chemical dynamics and mechanisms discovered during the design
and implementation of the sensors may have parallels in living systems and
thereby enrich our knowledge of how transition metal centers respond to nitric
oxide and its derivatives. Peptides provide an excellent platform for
incorporating units to localize the sensors to subcellular locales, a great
advantage for studying functions in live cells and tissue slices. Applications
ranging from the design of antibiotics to the determination of the roles of
nitric oxide in sensory perception can be envisioned. These projects will
continue the training of young scientists in chemistry. Graduate and
postdoctoral researchers on the project are also mentors to undergraduate
research opportunity participants (UROPs) at MIT. These scientists are
encouraged to communicate their work both orally and in writing. Many
subsequently assume key positions in academic or industrial organizations and
some are active in outreach programs at schools in the local communities.