* 1265480
* CAREER: The neural mechanisms underlying visual target and task switching
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Nicole Rust, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 482,895.00

One of the hallmarks of human intelligence is our ability to flexibly adapt our
thinking and behavior based on the overall context of a situation, a trait known
as "cognitive flexibility." Among the simplest behavioral tasks that require
cognitive flexibility are visual "target switching" paradigms that involve
viewing the same visual stimuli in the context of searching for different
targets. As an extension, "task switching" paradigms often involve searching for
a target based on one stimulus property (e.g., match the shape regardless of
color) followed by searching for a different property (e.g., match the color
regardless of shape). While interactions between brain areas that lie in the
visual, temporal and frontal lobes are thought to play important roles in
flexibly switching between targets and tasks, the specific neural mechanisms
that allow for cognitive flexibility remain little-understood. Understanding
these neural mechanisms has proven to be a considerable challenge, at least in
part because the neural activity in the brain areas involved reflect
heterogeneous and difficult-to-understand mixtures of different types of
information. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Nicole Rust
and colleagues will record neural signals as subjects perform target and task
switching paradigms and they will then use newly-developed computational data
analysis techniques to tease apart the neural mechanisms that the brain uses to
flexibly switch between targets and tasks.

An array of disorders including obsessive compulsive disorder and autism have
been linked to deficits in the mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility, thus
developing a basic understanding of how these mechanisms function is likely to
be important for developing treatments to address the disorders that arise when
these mechanisms go awry. Additionally, a basic understanding of the neural
mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility has the potential to benefit the
robotics and computer vision communities interested in constructing artificial
systems that can flexibly switch between targets and tasks to assist humans.
Motivated by the notion that the experience of scientific discovery is one that
cannot be fathomed through classroom experiences alone, the results of this
project will also be incorporated into an undergraduate educational course
focused on analyzing neural data. Finally, Dr. Rust will participate in the big
data effort by making the data available to support other coordinated NSF
efforts that aim to make use of real data in the teaching of STEM related
courses and to enable participation in discovery science by those who would
otherwise have no access to such data.