* 1265029
* Two-compartment microfluidic bioreactor with functionalized PEG hydrogels to promote platelet production in culture
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Paul Lindholm, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2017
* USD 449,987.00

1265029 - Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generating many units of 300-600 billion
platelets from megakaryocytic cells in culture will require advances in
hematopoietic (blood) stem and progenitor cell expansion, megakaryocyte
production and maturation, and platelet release and recovery. Shear from blood
flow in the sinuses is important for proplatelet and platelet release. Inspired
by the bone marrow sinusoid niche, this project will employ a microbioreactor
with two compartments separated by a porous support coated with microporous
poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogel functionalized with adhesive ligands. To mimic
proplatelet formation across the sinusoidal endothelium, megakaryocytes will be
seeded on the hydrogel in the upper compartment and medium will be perfused
through the lower compartment. The microbioreactor will be used to investigate
effects of shear stress, hydrogel stiffness, and adhesive ligand types and
density on proplatelet and platelet production. Increasing gradients of pH and
chemokines will be investigated to further increase proplatelet formation. The
perfusion system will allow platelets to be harvested as they are released,
which is important because platelet quality deteriorates during storage at
20-24°C and even faster at 37°C. The quality of culture-derived platelets will
be verified via agonist-induced activation. The microbioreactor could be scaled
for clinical production of platelets using formats such as hollow-fiber
bioreactors and spiral-wound membrane cartridges to generate the required
surface area. &lt;br/&gt;Several million units of platelets are transfused each
year in the United States and Europe. Production of platelets in culture by
megakaryocytes derived from patient or matched blood stem cells would increase
the supply and decrease the contamination risk and adverse immune responses, but
platelet production in culture is currently very inefficient. Successful
completion of the proposed research will bring the large-scale production of
culture-derived platelets closer to fruition. Graduate students and
undergraduates working on this project will be trained in an interdisciplinary
environment. A key element of the project is for the graduate students to
develop educational modules on microfluidics, polymer hydrogels, megakaryocytic
cells, and platelets for high school students, including two half-day classes
for the Oncofertility Saturday Academy and presentation at local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Bioengineering Program of the CBET Division is co-sponsored by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.