* 1265265
* I-Corps:  Implementation of Genetic Algorithms for Personalized Chemosensitivity Testing for Cancer Patients
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* M. Umit Uyar, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Researchers are investigating a direct approach to evaluate chemotherapy
effectiveness, where tumor tissue that has been extracted from a patient is
exposed to clinically relevant treatments in an environment that closely mimics
the human body. Through monitoring and analysis methods, researchers are able to
determine which chemotherapies appear to be most effective in treating a
patient?s cancer. These results can be used synergistically with current gene
expression methods to improve predicting patient response to all therapies
including chemotherapy. In the proposed process, researchers provide a mechanism
for determining the efficacy of a cancer treatment directly on living biopsied
tissue. This method is not dependent on historical statistical correlations to
predict patient treatment and outcome. Researchers propose to predict
therapeutic patient response more accurately by precisely measuring drug
efficacy directly on cultured tumor tissue. This method is designed to be a high
throughput real-time assay using genetic algorithms for automated data capture.

Currently, clinicians choose chemotherapy treatment options for their patients
according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines and
historical clinical outcome results for patients with similar types of breast
cancer. Historically this approach has had limited success since less than 10%
of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy are thought to exhibit absolute
improvement. Researchers aim to provide oncologists and pathologists with
information to better determine the best FDA approved chemotherapeutic option
for their patients. The proposed method, if successful, will be provided as a
service requested by an oncologist and pathologist, similar to other current
forms of clinical diagnostic testing, such as medical imaging, blood work, etc.
This method has the potential to be expanded to all other solid tumor cancers as
well as being adapted to testing novel therapeutic agents.