* 1265247
* Rapid: The Impact of Domestic Election Observers on Electoral Violence, Integrity , and Voting Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Miriam Golden, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2014
* USD 98,243.00

This study leverages a unique opportunity to randomly assign election observers
to a sample of over 1,000 of Ghana's 21,000 polling places during the country's
December 2012 general elections. With the direct collaboration of the Coalition
of Domestic Election Observers (CODEO), Ghana's most prominent domestic
observation group, and CODEO's secretariat, the Centre for Democratic
Development (CDD), the project's random assignment of a large subset of election
observers permits causal estimates of the effects of observers on electoral
violence and voter intimidation. The project compares outcomes at polling places
located in constituencies with a high concentration of observers to outcomes at
polling places in constituencies with a low concentration of observers. These
comparisons will yield direct policy implications with respect to the optimal
and most cost effective deployments of observers in future elections.

The intellectual merit of this project lies with how it advances understanding
of political violence and intimidation. If election observers are effective, as
donors and civil society groups believe, their presence at a polling place will
generate a noticeable reduction in violence and intimidation. The data collected
will allow estimations of the size of this effect. In addition, reductions in
violence can also be used to estimate the impact of violence and intimidation on
a range of other relevant outcomes. These include voter turnout, the political
participation of women and other vulnerable groups, the extent of electoral
support for incumbent legislators, and citizen perceptions of the election's
legitimacy. The project will also produce a publicly-available micro-level
dataset with which to test theories about where violence is most likely to
occur.

The project will have broad impact on the placement of election observers in
countries whose elections have histories of violence and intimidation. It will
be the first to experimentally study the impact of election observers on
violence and intimidation. The findings will yield direct policy implications
regarding the optimal geo-spatial and numerical deployment of observers for
future observer missions.