* 1265817
* SI2-CHE:  CCP-SAS - Collaborative Computing consortium for advanced analyses of structural data in chemical biology and soft condensed matter
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Emre Brookes, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2018
* USD 263,926.00

An international team consisting of Paul Butler (University of Tennessee,
Knoxville and NIST), Jianhan Chen (Kansas State University), Emre Brooks
(University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio) and their UK
collaborators led by Stephen J. Perkins (University College, London) are
supported through the SI2-CHE program. The object of this project is to provide
a web-based GUI front-end with a high-performance back-end to increase the
accessibility of advanced atomistic modeling of scattering data by novice users.
Advanced analysis modules and new simulation methods including implicit solvent
models are being developed to increase the accuracy of scattering calculations
and simulation protocols. Software is being developed and disseminated with
continual feedback from the research teams' large international user-base. These
efforts leverage an international user and developer community that use high-
performance computing resources on a wide-range of cutting-edge chemical
problems.

A typical bench scientist purifies and characterizes samples, collects the small
angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), small angle neutron scattering (SANS), or
analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) data, and interprets the results using
simplistic models. It is rare that the same individual also has the skills to
use advanced atomistic simulation software. The CCP-SAS project is focused on
developing an easy-to-use modeling package that enables users to generate
physically accurate atomistic models, calculate scattering profiles and compare
results to experimental scattering data sets in a single web-based software
suite. This enables a broad range of scattering scientists to access often
complicated simulation and scattering analysis methods seamlessly thus providing
a significant acceleration to the discovery process.

The US based investigators are supported by the CHE and ACI divisions within
NSF; the UK based investigators are supported by the EPSRC.