* 1265664
* Energetics and Excitations of Glass-Forming Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Chandler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

David Chandler of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry division to carry out research in the area of non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics, specifically to elucidate the underlying driving forces
and implications of glass transitions. These are transitions of complex systems
driven far from equilibrium, transitions manifested in the structure trajectory
space. Theoretical techniques have only recently allowed for their systematic
analysis, and results from these techniques are now being used in this research
to further explore the molecular origins of glass transitions in systems ranging
from simple to complex mixtures. In particular, this research aims at predictive
theory for the energies and structures of elementary excitations in glass. It
should answer how these properties relate to the preparation of the glass, to
responses of glass to stress, and to changes in components. The theory should
have a degree of generality to reveal implications for other classes of
materials, making predictions that can be tested by experiment, and with
practical approximations and insights guided by unambiguous results derived from
molecular simulation.

The work is at the frontier of contemporary statistical physics. Scientists have
long understood the principles of equilibrium theory and exploited these
principles to design useful ordered and regular condensed phases. Examples
include regular solution theory as it is used in the oil-refining industry, and
the Ostwald step rule for nucleation used in the steel industry. But no
similarly fundamental understanding is yet available for kinetically trapped
disordered solids and nanoclusters -- materials, like glass, that emerge by
driving liquid matter out of equilibrium. This research is devoted to
ameliorating this gap in knowledge. Concerning glasses, in particular, these
materials are welcoming and long-term stable hosts for impurities. Glasses are
thus materials of choice when contemplating the safe stable storage of
radioactive waste materials. Of similar or possibly greater importance,
secondary organic aerosols (SOAs) are most often in glassy states. Their
transformations play a dominant role in the chemistry of the atmosphere,
affecting Earth's climate and human health. This research, therefore, addresses
issues pertaining to significant problems in society. Its profound importance
together with its fundamental nature makes it superbly appropriate for
motivating and training students to become scientists.