* 1265260
* RIG:  Functional roles of host fatty acyl-CoA binding protein in assembly and function of positive-strand RNA virus replication complexes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Xiaofeng Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,445.00

Intellectual Merit. All positive-strand RNA viruses, which include many human,
animal and crop pathogens, replicate their RNA genomes on rearranged host
intracellular membranes. However, the mechanism whereby these membrane
rearrangements are formed is not well defined. The primary objective of the
project is to examine the roles of host acyl-CoA binding protein (ACBP) in the
assembly and function of viral replication complexes, or viral spherules, of
Brome mosaic virus (BMV) using a combination of genetic, biochemical and cell
biology approaches. ACBP is highly conserved in all eukaryotes, specifically
binds to long chain fatty acyl-CoA, and plays major roles in cellular lipid
synthesis. Lack of ACBP severely inhibits BMV replication and results in
formation of aberrant viral spherules with a significantly reduced diameter
paralleled by a 5-fold increase in frequency compared to those in wild type
cells. The specific objectives are: (1). Determining the role of 1a-ACBP
interaction in BMV spherule formation and replication. (2). Determining the
roles of ACBP in modulating lipid synthesis during BMV replication. The results
from this project will better elucidate relations between lipid synthesis and
viral replication as well as the microenvironment of the viral replication
complexes. Such understanding would advance fundamental knowledge of viral
replication mechanisms and virus-host interactions common to positive-strand RNA
viruses, and allow identification of potential targets for virus control in
humans, animals and plants.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: ACBP is essential in
mammals and this project should stimulate broader interests in testing its roles
in replication of human and animal viruses. Besides training a post-doctoral
research associate, the PI will continue to involve and train high school and
undergraduate students from the Rio Grande Valley (Texas), where more than 85%
population are Hispanic.