* 1265652
* SusChEM: New Chemistry of Carbene-Boranes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Dennis Curran, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2017
* USD 559,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Dennis P. Curran of the Department of Chemistry at
University of Pittsburgh will explore objectives in small molecule synthesis,
polymer synthesis, and main group chemistry. Mechanistic experiments will be
conducted to better understand newly discovered boryl radical homolytic
substitution reactions with disulfides. The results will be used to develop new
conditions for polarity reverse catalysis (PRC) reductions with NHC-boranes and
to develop NHC-boranes as coinitiators for Type I and Type II radical
photopolymerizations. Reactions of carbon-centered radicals with boron
substituents will be studied and the products will be used for new kinds of
cross coupling reactions. NHC-boranes will be developed as safe and practical
reagents for common types of preparative hydride reductions. New methods for
hydroboration based on borenium catalysts [NHC-BH2]+ will be developed. These
could supplant transition-metal catalyzed reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
concepts and methods of this work deepen and broaden the disciplines of small
molecule and polymer synthesis and help in the quest to provide the molecules,
materials, and technologies that other disciplines that rely on to progress.
There is a broad focus on sustainable chemistry with the common second row
element boron (readily available, not toxic, easily reused) replacing rare,
expensive or toxic elements. There is a strong coupling of advancing the
frontiers of science with teaching, training and learning of the diverse group
of undergraduate students and graduate students who do the day-to-day research
work. They move into the workplace to become the human capital that drives
progress in many areas that are vital to the health of our citizenry and the
economy of our nation. The project also regularly uses technology like
videoconferences to manage intercontinental collaborations. These collaborations
expand the direct teaching/training impact of the proposal beyond Pittsburgh to
Lyon and Mulhouse in France.