* 1265711
* Harmonic and functional analysis of wavelet and frame expansions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Marcin Bownik, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 132,000.00

This mathematics research project by Marcin Bownik is focused on the
investigation of the harmonic - and functional-analytic aspects of the
mathematical theory of multi- dimensional wavelet and frame expansions. One of
the main research directions of the project is the development of techniques for
the construction of well-localized orthogonal wavelets for large classes of non-
isotropic expansive dilations. A closely related complementary topic is the
study of non-isotropic analogues of classical function spaces associated to
expansive dilations. Another direction of the project is the construction of
frames with desired properties such as with prescribed norms and frame operator.
This line of research is closely related with the infinite dimensional
generalizations of the Schur- Horn theorem.

This mathematics research project by Marcin Bownik explores the mathematical
theory of wavelet and frame expansions. In recent years, wavelet and frame
theory has found many applications to a wide range of disciplines including
applied and computational harmonic analysis, signal processing and data
compression. Some well -known examples where wavelets are a key tool include the
JPEG 2000 digital image standard and fingerprint compression for data storage.
This project aims to further the mathematical theory that provides the
foundation for further applications of wavelets and frames.