* 1265353
* Conference:   Keystone Symposium on "Precision Genome Engineering and Synthetic Biology" to be held in Breckenridge, CO from March 17-22, 2013
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Woodland, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 8,400.00

PI David Woodland, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology Title:
Conference: Keystone Symposium on "Precision Genome Engineering and Synthetic
Biology" to be held in Breckenridge, CO from March 17-22, 2013

The Keystone Symposia conference on Precision Genome Engineering and Synthetic
Biology: Designing Genomes and Pathways will bring together scientists who: 1)
develop tools for precision genome engineering; 2) use those tools for specific
purposes in a wide range of organisms, including humans; 3) create whole
synthetic genomes with prospects for wholesale reengineering; and 4) engineering
cells with novel pathways and properties. Exchange of cutting-edge information
regarding approaches, accomplishments and ambitions will augment the
capabilities of each group. The meeting will provide an outstanding forum for
students, postdoctoral fellows, and senior investigators who envision careers in
genome and pathway design. The specific objectives of this meeting are as
follows: 1. To collect leaders in genome engineering and synthetic biology and
make them aware of current technologies and opportunities. 2. To stimulate
ongoing interactions and collaborations between these disciplines. 3. To
encourage the development of new approaches that will accelerate progress in the
target areas. 4. To enlist trainees into these emerging fields, so they will
drive future uses and developments. Intellectual merit: Both precision genome
engineering and synthetic biology are relatively new fields of research that are
developing rapidly, but largely independently of each other. This meeting is
designed to bring together the goals, approaches, technologies and leaders in
these areas to encourage cross-fertilization and collaboration. Keystone
Symposia provides an internationally recognized platform as well as resources to
ensure the success of this meeting, and the organizers are well-recognized
leaders in the fields of genome engineering and synthetic biology. Broader
Impacts: This meeting aims to encourage extension of pathway engineering into a
broader range of organisms through genome editing and to stimulate the
development of expanded tools of genome manipulation for multi-gene
modifications. Moreover, this meeting will enhance infrastructure by fostering
networking and initiation of collaborations. The following educational benefits
are anticipated: acquaint trainees and investigators new to the field with the
state-of-the-art; critical scientific feedback; and career development for
trainees and new investigators, including opportunities both to see successful
scientists presenting cutting-edge science and to network with prospective
mentors and others who might contribute to their scientific and professional
development.