* 1265568
* Linear Partial Differential Equations on Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jared Wunsch, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 195,000.00

This project focuses on the study of partial differential equations on singular
spaces, with an emphasis on spectral and scattering theory. The propagation of
waves on smoothly varying spaces is well understood in many respects, but the
interaction with singularities--which might range from boundaries, to corners or
cone points, to large-scale structures "at infinity"--presents many open
problems. The principal investigator will study the asymptotic behavior of waves
propagating on certain curved spacetimes such as arise in the theory of general
relativity. The goal is to understand the long-time behavior of the radiation
pattern observed far away from a source. Recent work of the principal
investigator has yielded results in spacetimes with a compactification similar
to that of Minkowski space, and he will continue to pursue such results in a
wider range of geometries. The project will also study the decay of waves near
their source in different geometric settings. In particular, in the presence of
corners or cone points, diffraction of waves is a potential obstruction to the
rapid decay of waves; the principal investigator will continue his ongoing
investigations in this area, especially into the question of resonances
generated by cone points. Additionally, he will continue to study the behavior
of eigenfunctions and quasimodes of the Laplace operator associated to
completely integrable systems, in an effort to understand to what degree an
eigenfunction can concentrate on a sub-torus of an Arnold-Liouville torus. These
techniques should also yield new estimates for solutions to the linear
Schrodinger equation in completely integrable
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometry influences the behavior of solutions to
wave equations in many interesting and subtle ways. Following Newton, we know
that light behaves in many regimes as if made of tiny particles; on the other
hand, we also know that light can turn corners ("diffract") and that it tends to
disperse. The effect of changes in geometry to changes in propagation of waves
(be they light or sound or water or gravity waves, or the wave-functions
describing quantum particles) is the central focus of this project. In
particular, the principal investigator's work on decay of waves in curved
spacetimes is closely related to problems of intense interest in the physics
community, for instance as it gives a much simplified model of gravitational
waves. His closely related work on the linear Schrodinger equation is related to
applications not just to the physics of nonrelativistic quantum particles, but
also to the nonlinear Schrodinger equation, which models such disparate
phenomena as laser pulses and superconductivity.