* 1265449
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  Using PDE Descriptions To Generate Code Precisely Tailored To Energy-Constrained Systems Including Large GPU Accelerated Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Koppelman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 169,999.00

Modern computer system architectures are forcing computational scientists to
move scientific applications&lt;br/&gt;from traditional homogeneous cpu-based
systems to heterogeneous multi-core/accelerator architectures.
&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining performance in the presence of accelerators requires close
attention to&lt;br/&gt;the memory hierarchy and chip-level parallelism to reach
even a modest fraction&lt;br/&gt;of the potential performance. As a result,
coding tasks which were once the province of&lt;br/&gt;lone graduate students in
a single discipline now require interdisciplinary teams of people.
&lt;br/&gt;Project Chemora will explore the design of a new application
framework for automatically&lt;br/&gt;creating highly optimized code for high-
end computational machines. The system&lt;br/&gt;will use as input a set of
partial differential equations (PDEs) that describe a&lt;br/&gt;problem, it will
then construct a machine-specific abstract performance model, and using
these&lt;br/&gt;it will generate well-tuned code and execution configurations
for accelerated&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., hybrid CPU/GPU) computing clusters at various
scales. Chemora will&lt;br/&gt;improve programmability in this simplified domain
by decoupling the science and&lt;br/&gt;computer science at a high level,
thereby reducing the complexity and number of issues scientists need
to&lt;br/&gt;collectively understand and allowing individual scientists in the
team to focus on their area of&lt;br/&gt;specialty. Chemora will improve
performance (both wallclock time and energy) for&lt;br/&gt;systems with both
simple and complex sets of equations by making use of
detailed&lt;br/&gt;information describing the problem and machine, and will
provide improved load&lt;br/&gt;balancing through the AMPI
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemora project has chosen the Einstein
equations as the primary science driver because&lt;br/&gt;these equations are
one of the more complex PDE systems, one with many&lt;br/&gt;hundreds of terms,
and a problem scale that is challenging to optimize for
most&lt;br/&gt;compilers. Achieving this vision for a general scientific problem
would indeed&lt;br/&gt;be a "Grand Challenge" in computational science, but in
order to give our&lt;br/&gt;research a sharper focus we have chosen as a science
driver the&lt;br/&gt;simulation of Intermediate mass ratio Binary Black Hole
(IBBH) systems. Such&lt;br/&gt;systems, consisting of a black hole of mass 100
to 1,000 solar masses orbited by&lt;br/&gt;a smaller black hole of mass 5 to 20
solar masses are expected to be important&lt;br/&gt;sources of gravitational
waves for advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational&lt;br/&gt;Wave Observatory
(LIGO) and the Einstein Telescope (ET). Accurate modeling of&lt;br/&gt;the
waveforms from IBBH systems will be necessary in order to
extract&lt;br/&gt;gravitational wave signals using template-matching data
analysis techniques.