* 1265296
* Logistical Planning for Scientific Drilling in Lake Towuti, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2015
* USD 39,982.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop new records of terrestrial
climate and&lt;br/&gt;environmental change in central Indonesia spanning
multiple glacial-interglacial cycles over the late Pleistocene through
continental scientific drilling in Lake Towuti, the largest lake in Indonesia.
Lake Towuti has long been recognized as a priority drilling site for a global
lake drilling program due to its location in the climatically-important Indo-
Pacific region, its extraordinarily high rates of biodiversity and biological
endemism, and its location within the East Sulawesi Ophiolite, giving rise to
important biogeochemical cycles of carbon, iron, chromium, and other metals.
Recent geophysical and piston coring surveys, combined with an international
workshop, have developed the scientific rationale and hypotheses behind the
Towuti Drilling Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will provide
funds to conduct site visits to Lake Towuti with drilling engineers and
personnel to develop a logistically feasible drilling plan for Towuti, and to
develop a budget that is both realistic and cost-effective for drilling
proposals to be submitted in 2013. In particular, this award will provide funds
for two trips to Lake Towuti for the lead PI and DOSECC Exploration Services
(DES) staff to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Identify sites on Lake Towuti for
constructing, deploying, and recovering a drilling barge, to identify local
contractors for site improvements related to barge deployment (e.g. dock
construction), and to develop a budget for these
activities;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop a concrete plan and budget for
housing the drilling barge crew near Lake Towuti;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Finalize agreements with PT Vale Indonesia Tbk, a local mining company, for
logistical support in the areas of shipping, import/export, supplies, and other
local needs;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Identify local contractors for heavy
equipment supply, fuel supply, and other services, and obtain price quotes for
those services;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5) Obtain up-to-date information on
permitting procedures for large, international projects such as the Towuti
Drilling Project;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6) Finalize and verify a budget for the
Towuti Drilling Project for drilling proposal submission to the International
Continental Drilling Program, the NSF, and other national agencies.