* 1265330
* Function theory in several complex variables and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Yuan Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 75,302.00

This mathematics research project concerns a variety of embedding problems
arising from CR manifolds and complex manifolds. Zhang will focus on the
classification problem of proper holomorphic maps between manifolds of different
dimensions, and the rigidity problem of local conformal embeddings between
bounded symmetric domains. Zhang and her collaborators have also been studying
the CR embeddability problem. By suggesting an analytic approach, they find
criterions for the embeddability of CR manifolds into the model manifolds and
associate the CR transversality of the map with the geometry of the CR
manifolds. Zhang will continue to explore effective methods to study the CR
transversality and the finite jet determination in their full generality.
Another aspect of this project focuses on Cauchy-Riemann equations in several
complex variables. It is well known via the pseudo-differential operator theory
that the regularity of the Cauchy-Riemann operator is closely related to the
geometry of the boundary of the domain. Zhang and her collaborators will study a
variety of geometric type conditions on the boundary. In the meanwhile, they
will investigate the regularity problem of Cauchy-Riemann equations over
pseudoconvex domains through the method of integral representation theory. Since
the solutions are explicitly expressed in terms of singular kernels derived from
the boundary conditions, it provides a direct way to understand the relationship
between holomorphic function theory and the geometry of the domain where
functions are defined.

This mathematics research project is in the areas of several complex variables
and partial differential equations, which are two fundamental sub-disciplines of
modern mathematics. The new ideas presented in this project may lead to new
applications in computational mathematics, as well as new applications to other
disciplines such as fluid dynamics, where the use of complex variables has been
known to reduce complex flows to very simple systems, and electrical
engineering, where complex variables have been intensively used to analyze
circuits with alternating current. Since the techniques to be used and developed
in this project are accessible to graduate students, collaborations with other
junior researchers and graduate students will be an integral part of this
project. Throughout her teaching activities, the principal investigator will
continue to mentor undergraduate students, especially female students, and help
them to cultivate their interests in the mathematical sciences.