* 1265673
* RUI: Low-Lying Zeros of L-functions and Problems in Additive Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Steven Miller, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 135,610.00

The PI plans on studying several projects on zeros of L-functions, as well as
problems in additive number theory. The main research concerns the behavior of
zeros near the central point. While these zeros have been known to be related to
arithmetic problems since Riemann, in the last few decades connections have been
observed with high energy nuclear physics and random matrix theory (RMT) as
well. Thus investigations in one of these topics can be fruitfully used in the
others. The additive number theory problems have a similar flavor; many of them
concern density of states as well as gaps between events. Similar techniques are
used in the analysis here as in some of the number theory and random matrix
theory investigations. Specifically, the PI proposes to study: (1) the n-level
densities of low-lying zeros of GL(2) L-functions (including level 1 Maass forms
and increasing the support for holomorphic cuspidal newforms by deriving
alternatives to the Katz-Sarnak determinantal expansions that are more amenable
for comparing number theory and random matrix theory), (2) the n-level densities
of Dirichlet and number field L-functions (which involves exploring and
extending our understanding of the finer properties of the distribution of
certain classes of primes), (3) finding random matrix theory analogues to
Rankin-Selberg convolutions (to extend the predictive ability of RMT), (4)
additional consequences of the L-function Ratios Conjecture and other arithmetic
conjectures, (5) the density of states and behavior of the eigenvalues of
structured random matrix ensembles (with special emphasis on the resulting
combinatorics, which is frequently related to other problems of interest), (6)
generalized Zeckendorf decompositions and the gaps between summands, (7)
generalized sum and difference sets (especially phase transitions from different
models of randomness, behavior in subsets of highly structured sets, and results
in non-abelian cases), and finally (8) Benford's law of digit
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central questions in this proposal involve
studying how events are distributed in diverse systems, such as energy levels of
heavy nuclei, prime numbers and zeros of L-functions, leading digits in sets of
data, and summands in generalized Zeckendorf decompositions. Similar to the
Central Limit Theorem, there seem to be a few universal spacing laws that govern
these and other phenomena; thus studies in one of these topics can frequently
provide useful insights in the others. Understanding these systems requires the
development of tools and techniques in complex analysis, Fourier analysis,
number theory and probability. Some of the projects have real world
applications; for example, the IRS uses Benford?s law to locate corporate tax
fraud. Many of these projects have components that are amenable to numerical
experimentation; these and tractable special cases will be investigated with
undergraduate research assistants. The PI will also continue his extensive work
in math education. In addition to providing numerous mentoring opportunities to
his students (such as arranging for them to referee for journals, write reviews
for MathSciNet, write expository articles for journals, and co-organize AMS
special sessions), the PI will also involve them with expanding his math riddles
page (http://mathriddles.williams.edu/). This site is frequently one of the top
hits when searching for math riddles, and is used in junior high and high
schools around the world to excite students to mathematics.