* 1265783
* Dynamics of Orographic Rain Associated with Landfalling Hurricanes over the Central and Southern Appalachian Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Yuh-Lang Lin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 465,388.00

The objectives of the research are to: 1) improve the understanding of dynamics
of orographic and environmental influences on tropical cyclone (TC) track
deflection over the Appalachians and other mesoscale mountain ranges; 2)
determine major control parameters and moist flow regimes for orographic
precipitation associated with TCs over mesoscale mountains; and 3) understand
the interaction of microphysical and dynamical processes in enhancing
precipitation associated with TCs over mesoscale mountains. To accomplish the
above objectives, both idealized and real-case numerical simulations using the
research version of Weather Research and Forecast model (WRF version 3)
developed at National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The research will
improve the fundamental understanding of the dynamics of orographic influences
on TC track deflection over the Appalachians and other mesoscale mountain
ranges, which, in turn, will improve the prediction of rainfall distribution.
The studies of major control parameters, moist flow regimes, and interaction of
microphysical and dynamical processes associated with TCs over mesoscale
mountains will help improve the microphysics and planetary boundary-layer
parameterization schemes, which, in turn, will help improve quantitative
precipitation forecasts over the Appalachians as well as other mountains that
share similar environments. All these research efforts are consistent with one
of the major initiatives of the U.S. Weather Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
understanding of heavy orographic precipitation associated with the passage of
tropical cyclones should lead to improvements in the quantitative forecasts of
precipitation and hydrological prediction of flooding and, thus, advance the
protection of life and property in areas near mountains. The project will
educate and train two graduate students and two undergraduate students at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University. Most of the students in the university come
from underrepresented populations and the Co-PI is a female scientist. The
students and faculty worked on the project will contribute information to local
high-school teachers and students through various science programs. The research
results derived from the project will be used to develop a new graduate course
that fills the gap between mountain meteorology and hurricane dynamics. Offering
of the course through UCAR's COMET virtual education program will be attempted
to allow a large number of students and scientists to be impacted by it.
Existing University-Government and international collaborations will be
strengthened as students supported by the project will have opportunities to
interact with atmospheric scientists in NCAR, NOAA, Taiwan, and Madagascar.