* 1265988
* GOALI: SusChEM: An industrial-academic collaboration for high throughput discovery of base metal catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Paul Chirik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 477,000.00

In this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liasons with Industry (GOALI) project
funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Paul Chirik of Princeton University in full collaboration with Dr. Matt Tudge
and his colleagues at Merck will develop base metal catalysts for drug discovery
and production. The proposed research focuses on the asymmetric olefin
hydrogenation reaction, a key transformation for the synthesis of single
enantiomer organic molecules with biological activity. In collaboration with
scientists at Merck, high throughput experimentation will be employed to
identify metal-ligand combinations that exhibit high catalytic activity and
enantioselectivity. Once suitable catalysts are identified, the Princeton group
will independently synthesize and isolate these compounds and elucidate their
electronic structure through a combination of spectroscopic, magnetic,
structural and computational studies. The broader impacts of this research will
include the exposure of undergraduate and graduate students to an industrial
research setting at the Merck research site in Rahway, NJ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chirality, the handedness of a molecule, often dictates
the biological function of a molecule. Pharmaceuticals often contain chiral
molecules and frequently require the challenging synthesis of a single hand of
the compound of interest. Transition metal catalysts are known to catalyze
reactions such as the hydrogenation of alkenes to produce the desired mirror
image form. The proposed research seeks to discover metal catalysts that employ
earth abundant and inexpensive elements such as iron and cobalt, a key
innovation in sustainable sciences and technology. The project will also allow
for integration of manufacturing principles into curricula for the classroom as
well as provide undergraduate and graduate students a unique experience in an
industrial laboratory.