* 1265586
* The unique bonding characteristics of beryllium and the Group IIA metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Heaven, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 409,500.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Michael C. Heaven of Emory University and his
research group will investigate unusual bonding mechanisms in (1) beryllium
clusters containing 3 - 30 Be atoms, (2) hypermetallic MOM with M=Mg and Ca; (3)
alkaline earth carbides; and (4) the diatomic ions CaO+, BaO+ and BaCl+. These
clusters and molecules have been the subject of numerous theoretical
investigations, but experimental data are lacking. The ultimate goal is to
develop a better understanding of the unusual modes of bonding that are not
well-characterized in terms of conventional models, and to advance our
understanding of bonding when clusters grow from a few atoms in size to large
systems that approach bulk metal behavior. In addition, the studies of the
carbides MgC and CaC will be of value to the astrophysical community, while work
on the molecular ions CaO+, BaO+ and BaCl+ will advance research programs where
the aim is to generate and manipulate ultra-cold (&lt;mK) molecules for
applications such as quantum computing. A variety of experimental tools will be
employed, including anion photodetachment, laser-induced fluorescence,
resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization, and cavity ring-down spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from these studies will
help chemists to develop a deeper understanding of bonding that encompasses the
traditional models as well as the unusual interactions that are one of the
themes of the present study. The research will provide the graduate and
undergraduate students, and post-doctoral associates involved with a rich
experience in advanced experimental and theoretical methods. A successful
collaboration with Spelman College, that provides research opportunities to
students from a historically Black women's college, will be continued.