* 1265451
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Using PDE Descriptions to Generate Code Precisely Tailored to Energy-Constrained Systems Including Large GPU Accelerated Clusters
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Gengbin Zheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,915.00

Modern computer system architectures are forcing computational scientists to
move scientific applications from traditional homogeneous cpu-based systems to
heterogeneous multi-core/accelerator architectures. Obtaining performance in the
presence of accelerators requires close attention to the memory hierarchy and
chip-level parallelism to reach even a modest fraction of the potential
performance. As a result, coding tasks which were once the province of lone
graduate students in a single discipline now require interdisciplinary teams of
people. Project Chemora will explore the design of a new application framework
for automatically creating highly optimized code for high-end computational
machines. The system will use as input a set of partial differential equations
(PDEs) that describe a problem, it will then construct a machine-specific
abstract performance model, and using these it will generate well-tuned code and
execution configurations for accelerated (e.g., hybrid CPU/GPU) computing
clusters at various scales. Chemora will improve programmability in this
simplified domain by decoupling the science and computer science at a high
level, thereby reducing the complexity and number of issues scientists need to
collectively understand and allowing individual scientists in the team to focus
on their area of specialty. Chemora will improve performance (both wallclock
time and energy) for systems with both simple and complex sets of equations by
making use of detailed information describing the problem and machine, and will
provide improved load balancing through the AMPI framework.

The Chemora project has chosen the Einstein equations as the primary science
driver because these equations are one of the more complex PDE systems, one with
many hundreds of terms, and a problem scale that is challenging to optimize for
most compilers. Achieving this vision for a general scientific problem would
indeed be a "Grand Challenge" in computational science, but in order to give our
research a sharper focus we have chosen as a science driver the simulation of
Intermediate mass ratio Binary Black Hole (IBBH) systems. Such systems,
consisting of a black hole of mass 100 to 1,000 solar masses orbited by a
smaller black hole of mass 5 to 20 solar masses are expected to be important
sources of gravitational waves for advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational
Wave Observatory (LIGO) and the Einstein Telescope (ET). Accurate modeling of
the waveforms from IBBH systems will be necessary in order to extract
gravitational wave signals using template-matching data analysis techniques.