* 1265803
* Collaborative Research:   cliques, stable sets and approximate structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Maria Chudnovsky, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

This proposal deals with a number of problems in graph theory related to the
study of graphs with certain induced subgraphs excluded. The first problem is
the famous Erdos-Hajnal conjecture, and its tournament version due to Alon, Pach
and Solymosi. Following recent results, the PI plans to combine structural
methods with techniques related to Szemeredi's regularity lemma to make further
progress. The second set of problems is a conjecture of Gyarfas and Sumner, and
questions related to chi-boundedness. In particular, the PI plans to study
tournament versions of some of the related classical questions. The last
proposed research direction is the general question of the structure of graphs
with forbidden induced subgraphs, where particular emphasis is placed on perfect
graphs. The PI's have extensive experience in the area, in combination with
recent ideas of "extreme decompositions'', is likely to lead to new results.

This proposal deals with three problems in graphs theory. All three are about
graphs with certain forbidden substructures (called "induced subgraphs")
excluded; and different aspects of graph behavior are studied in each of the
problems. The first two questions considered in the proposal are known
conjectures in the field; their solution, or any progress on them, will be of
interest to many researchers. The last research direction is more of a "theory
building" question, where a general approach, that can be used for a large
number of problems, will be developed.