* 1265118
* The Quantum Mechanical Many-Body Problem and Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Elliott Lieb, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 465,000.00

This research is devoted to various aspects of many-body theory in quantum
mechanics, condensed matter physics, quantum information theory, and quantum
electrodynamics, as well as some related mathematical problems. These various
topics have grown out of a body of research over several decades and the
underlying unity is that solutions in the various problem areas shed light on
each other. The intellectual merit is contained in the following partial list of
specific research goals. 1. Building on the recent success in proving the 34
year old conjecture about the Wehrl entropy for spin coherent states, the
extension from SU(2) to other Lie groups of interest to mathematics and physics
will be investigated. 2. Various topics and conjectures concerning magnetization
and long-range order in the Hubbard model of correlated electrons will be
investigated. Other problems in condensed matter physics are to understand the
binding of polarons and to build models that can be rigorously demonstrated to
have striped states. 3. A fundamental statistical-mechanical property of matter
is the existence of the thermodynamic limit of the free energy. A proof of this
has been only partially accomplished so far when the electromagnetic radiation
field is taken into account. It is intended to complete the demonstration. 4.
The Lieb-Thirring inequalities are important in a variety of physical and
mathematical problems. One goal is to find sharper constants. 5. An attempt will
be made to verify the long-standing conjecture that the maximum negative
ionization of a large atom is only about one electron. It is very difficult,
even with computers, to be sure about ionization of atoms, but nature seems to
be telling us about a universal fact about fermions that it would be desirable
to understand from first principles. 6. Density functional theory for atoms and
molecules is important practically and conceptually. Some open questions about
the Muller theory will be investigated, as well as possible improvements to the
Lieb-Oxford bound for the exchange- correlation energy that will include the
concept of local kinetic energy. 7. Building on previous expertise in the area,
the increasingly important field of quantum information theory will be pursued.
In particular, the recent success in understanding measures of entanglement as
well as the the uncertainty principle for bipartite systems will used to try to
solve the bipartite density-matrix reconstruction problem. &lt;br/&gt;A broader
impact of this activity is that students and postdocs will be involved in these
projects, which will combine mentoring with research and help produce the next
generation of mathematically knowledgeable physicists. It will also further the
interdisciplinary bonds between the communities of mathematicians and physicists
and promote the relevance of modern concepts of mathematical analysis to
problems of condensed matter physics.