* 1265849
* SI2-CHE: Collaborative Research: Developing First Principles Monte Carlo Methods for Reactive Phase and Sorption Equilibria in the CP2K Software Suite
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Joern Ilja Siepmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2017
* USD 349,250.00

An international research team consisting of Ilja Siepmann, Ben Lynch
(University of Minnesota), Neeraj Rai (Mississippi State University), Troy Van
Voorhis (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Ben Slater (University College
London), Michiel Sprik (University of Cambridge), Adam Carter (Edinburgh
Parallel Computing Centre), JÃ¼rg Hutter (University of Zurich), I-Feng Kuo
(Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory), Christopher Mundy (Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory), Joost VandeVondele (ETH Zurich), and Rodolphe Vuilleumier
(University Pierre &amp; Marie Curie Paris) is collaborating to develop and
implement new theoretical methods in the CP2K computational chemistry software
suite. These new methodologies enable the predictive modeling of reactive multi-
phase systems, including free energy landscapes and product yields, where the
system interactions are described by Kohn-Sham density functional theory with
van der Waals and hybrid functionals. Markov chain Monte Carlo approaches
utilizing smart moves with asymmetric underlying matrices, such as the
aggregation-volume-bias and configurational-bias Monte Carlo methods, and the
Gibbs ensemble framework are employed for efficient exploration of the phase
space for reactive single- and multi-phase equilibria in bulk and in
confinement. The U.S. based research team is supported jointly by the Chemistry
Division in MPS and the Office of Cyberinfrastucture. Funds for the UK based
research team are provided by the EPSRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software
infrastructure is advanced by the development of efficient and accurate
methodologies for reactive phase and sorption equilibria that are applicable to
chemical processes in diverse science and engineering applications. The
extensively validated methodologies will be incorporated into the open-source
CP2K software suite to make them available to a large user base. The new
software can be used to identify optimal reaction conditions and separation
processes for sustainable chemistry. The collaborative research team plans to
use the new software for the investigation of reactive processes that address
critical needs of society (fertilizers for food supply, fuels from renewable
sources, and environmentally benign chemical processes).