* 1265560
* Collaborative Research - Living with War: The Impacts of Chronic Violence on Everyday Life in the Central Illinois River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2013,03/31/2014
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2014
* USD 583.00

This project will explore the catastrophic and wide-ranging consequences of war
on Mississippian period (A.D. 1100-1425) communities in the Central Illinois
River Valley (CIRV). The work is significant because it provides insight into
the conditions which in less developed societies can lead to intergroup conflict
and which, on the other hand, are conducive to more peaceful relations.
Archaeological data linking escalating violence with both population nucleation
and declining health in the Central Illinois River Valley from A.D. 1200 to 1425
reveal that the causal dimensions of warfare were not restricted to political
centralization and collapse but reshaped other, more mundane aspects of life.
Determining the impacts of this violence on the Mississippian groups subject to
these hostilities will help explain the historical trajectory of conflict
culminating in the abandonment of the region around A.D. 1425.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A geophysical survey, combined with three seasons of
excavation targeting residential groups at the Eveland site adjacent to the
Dickson Mounds Museum will identify subsistence practices and
household/community organizational patterns that predate the period of
escalating violence in this region. Laboratory analysis of collections from a
previously excavated site (Orendorf) that post-dates the increase in violent
attacks will also be conducted, enabling the documentation of domestic changes
occurring as a result of the intensification of warfare. Project goals include
determining (1) if and how people altered their subsistence pursuits in response
to the increased risk of attack while foraging, fishing, and farming, and (2) if
and how people altered the size and arrangement of their households and
communities as a result of nucleation into fortified villages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include public education
and outreach, as well as contributing to planning and development of an
important state heritage site. The project provides research opportunities to
both undergraduate and graduate students: (1) undergraduates will be trained in
field methods in the context of a field school, in addition to more structured
opportunities for problem-oriented undergraduate research; and (2) graduate
students will participate as both field school supervisors and as lab
assistants, with the project providing data and partial funding for two related
dissertation projects. Project archaeologists will also interface with the
public on a daily basis during the course of excavations, in addition to
delivering public presentations to the local archaeological society. Project
personnel will also work with the Dickson Mounds Museum staff to develop
interpretive museum exhibits based on the proposed research. A project website
will provide the public with updates on project excavations and results, and
restricted website access will be given to staff at the Illinois State
Archaeological Survey, Western Illinois University at Macomb, and Dickson Mounds
Museum for the purpose of data sharing. Finally, results from the geophysical
survey of the Eveland site (located on Dickson Mounds property) will provide
important data for planning development and preservation at this important state
heritage site.