* 1265660
* Collaborative: SI2-CHE: Development and Deployment of Chemical Software for Advanced Potential Energy Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2014
* Paul Nerenberg, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 10/31/2014
* USD 56,983.00

An international team consisting of Teresa Head-Gordon and Martin Head-Gordon
(University of California, Berkeley), Paul Nerenberg (Claremont McKenna
College), David Case (Rutgers University), Jay Ponder (Washington University),
Mark Tuckerman (New York University) with their UK collaborators: Lorna Smith
and Neil Chue Hong (University of Edinburgh), Chris-Kriton Skylaris and Jonathan
W. Essex (University of Southampton), Ilian Todorov (Daresbury Laboratory),
Mario Antonioletti (EPCC) are are supported through the SI2-CHE program to
develop and deploy robust and sustainable software for advanced potential energy
surfaces. The greater accuracy introduced by improvements in the new generation
of potential energy surfaces opens up several challenges in their manifestation
as algorithms and software on current or emergent hardware platforms that in
turn limits their wide adoption by the computational chemistry community. The
research team is overcoming these obstacles via multiple but integrated
directions: (1) to optimally implement advanced potential energy surfaces across
multi-core and GPU enabled systems, (2) to develop a hierarchy of advanced
polarizable models that alter the tradeoff between accuracy and computational
speed,(3) to create new multiple time stepping methods; (4) to write a Quantum
Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM ) application programing interface (API)
that fully supports mutual polarization, (5) to adopt software best practices to
ensure growth of a self-sustaining community and (6) to provide exemplar
calculations with the new software in the several emerging application areas.

Molecular simulation and quantum chemistry software is an integral part of
chemistry and chemical biology, and has been broadly adopted by academic
researchers and industry scientists. Next generation scientific breakthroughs
that utilize chemical software will be enabled by the deployment of state of the
art theoretical models and algorithms that are translated into a sustainable
software framework rapidly implemented on emergent high performance computing
platforms. Potential energy surfaces describe the interactions between atoms.
Advanced and highly accurate potential energy surfaces encounter software-
related obstacles that inhibit their application to grand challenge chemistry
problems. This UK and US consortium, representing a broad cross section of the
computational chemistry software community, is working to directly tackle these
obstacles. This US and UK collaboration between universities and High
Performance Computing centers works to endure that chemical software investments
made in advanced potential energy surface models has a long term payoff in
community sustainability and the training of the next generation of scientists.
Outreach and training workshops are organized around the emergence of the
advanced potential energy software including an introductory molecular
simulation software boot camp for undergraduate students.

The US based investigators are supported by the CHE and ACI divisions within
NSF; the UK based investigators are supported by the EPSRC.