* 1265758
* Metal-Catalyzed Asymmetric Synthesis of P-C and P-P Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Glueck, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professor David S. Glueck at Dartmouth
College for research on new methods to prepare chiral phosphorus (P)-stereogenic
phosphines via metal-catalyzed asymmetric synthesis of P-carbon (C) and P-P
bonds. Chiral phosphines are useful in asymmetric catalysis, which is commonly
employed in the pharmaceutical industry to make single-enantiomer drugs.
However, the development of P-stereogenic chiral ligands has been relatively
slow because of a lack of general synthetic methods. This project further
develops the metal-catalyzed stereocontrolled formation of P-C bonds, a new and
potentially useful approach to this problem, and investigates analogous
processes to make P-P bonds, which are virtually unexplored. In both cases,
secondary phosphine substrates containing two stereocenters separated by a
linker (*P~P* or *P~C*) have been designed so that interactions between these
atoms and the catalyst result in selectivity higher than that enforced by the
catalyst alone (positive cooperativity). The resulting P-stereogenic
phosphiranes and diphosphines are potentially useful building blocks for other
P-stereogenic phosphines, while the unique stereoelectronic properties of
phosphirane ligands are also under investigation. Related studies take advantage
of new substrates derived from cheap naturally occurring chiral compounds,
enabling stereocontrol using achiral catalysts, and investigating an unusual
method for screening racemic catalysts to prepare C2-symmetric bis(phosphines)
and rare C3-symmetric triphosphines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops
a better understanding of metal-catalyzed formation of phosphorus-carbon and
phosphorus-phosphorus bonds and new chiral phosphines, valuable ligands in
asymmetric catalysis with potential applications in the pharmaceutical industry.
Studies of positive cooperativity are broadly useful in homogeneous catalysis.
Graduate and undergraduate students receive training in the synthesis and
characterization of inorganic, organometallic, and organic compounds,
mechanistic studies of their reactions, and in catalysis. The students have
opportunities to present their work to other scientists and to the public. The
results are disseminated broadly in publications and conference presentations,
and they are integrated into Dartmouth courses and outreach presentations. This
project continues to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups,
especially women and Native Americans, in research at the graduate and
undergraduate levels.