* 1265691
* Collaborative Research: Fatique and Lifetime Performance of Polymer Sandwich Constructions -A Multi-Scale Experiment and Modeling Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Valeria LaSaponara, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 190,880.00

Polymer foam core sandwich composites have been utilized for modern marine
vessels, civil infrastructures and large wind turbine blades. These structures
experience continuous cycles of loadings and continuous exposure to hostile
environments, which could lead to degradation in the materials and structural
failures. Our aim is to predict the time when global failure starts, and its
critical location in the sandwich structures during their service. This will be
achieved through the development of material and structural models for the
sandwich structures that incorporate the time-dependent mechanical loadings
coupled with thermal and moisture diffusion, and degradation in the properties
of the constituents. A comprehensive testing scheme including accelerated
fatigue tests will be conducted on the sandwich composite and its constituents
at different loading histories and various moisture and temperature conditions.
The experimental results will be used to characterize the material parameters in
the time-dependent (creep) material model, hygro-thermal diffusions, and
degradation model for each component of the sandwich structures and verify the
prediction of the time and mode when fatigue failure initiates in the sandwich
structures.

The thick and multi-layered nature of sandwich structures lead to multiple
failure mechanisms, which can be difficult to detect from their surfaces.
Currently, fatigue failure in sandwich composites has been determined mainly by
counting the number of repeated loading cycles until overall failure is observed
in the composites without any explanation on the failure mechanisms and
consideration of the environmental conditions. The results of this study will
significantly improve our understanding on the life performance and fatigue
failure mechanisms in many structures and infrastructures made of polymer
sandwich composites undergoing mechanical loadings while being exposed to
hostile environments. The research outcomes will help engineers in improving the
design of structures/infrastructures made of these composites in order to avoid
catastrophic failures. This information can also help manufacturers and
researchers designing better quality polymeric composites. The proposed modeling
concept will address the above challenges, which will enhance the reliability of
polymeric sandwich structures and hence public safety.