* 1265630
* Synthesis of High Performance N-Heteroaromatic Organic Field Effect Transistors from Azides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tom Driver, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Tom G. Driver of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois at Chicago will explore the design and execution of
modular, efficient syntheses of N-heteroaromatic materials from vinyl azides
using their rhodium(II)-catalyzed C-H bond amination reaction. The targeted
dipyrrolothiophenes and N-heterocyclic heptacenes are two classes of low
molecular weight N-heterocycles that exhibit promising properties in thin film
organic field effect transistors. By making rational changes to both the
N-substituent and aromatic groups, the relationship between the molecular
structure and bulk physical properties of their N-heteroaromatic materials will
be determined to allow the properties of thin film organic field effect
transistors to be tuned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achievement of the research goals
might change the synthetic strategies used for the construction of
N-heteroaromatic materials. From readily available starting materials, C-H bond
functionalization efficiently establishes the N-heterocyclic core and produces
an N-H bond that enables easy modification of the solubility of the material. By
examining the properties of the proposed N-heteroaromatic materials, fundamental
insight into the relationship between the molecular structure and bulk physical
properties of these materials will be gained. The knowledge gained by these
studies is anticipated to enable the rational design of materials with
predictable bulk properties to advance high performance printable organic
electronics. In addition, this project will serve as a fertile ground for the
training of students to advance in their scientific careers. By emphasizing the
participation of female and underrepresented minority students, this program
will help meet the goals outlined by President's Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology to transform and charge the STEM-student pipeline.