* 1265332
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Cross-Layer Modeling and Design of Energy-Aware Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Joseph Cavallaro, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Minimization of energy consumption is critical to developing green, sustainable
technologies for cognitive radio terminals that can connect to networks that
operate on different frequency bands with a variety of air interfaces. The
intellectual merit of this project is a unified and coherent consideration of RF
components, communication system algorithms, baseband computation platforms, and
design tools, to greatly increase spectrum sharing efficiency. Dataflow
methodologies are a promising candidate for the modeling, analysis and
verification of cognitive radio systems. As dataflow models are abstract and
platform independent, the same model can be used to generate implementations for
very different devices from low-power sensor nodes to high-end mobile terminals.
The key novelty is in the development of systematic methods for design,
implementation, and integration of configurable RF chains, and in the
development of dataflow methods for formal analysis and optimization of these
new capabilities. The expected results are: (1) Energy consumption models and a
design framework for computation, control and configuration of future radio
devices, leveraging the investigators' existing experimental testbeds, (2)
Configurable radio architectures for wide-scale cognitive access of
noncontiguous RF spectrum, and (3) Design methodologies for flexible, energy-
efficient cognitive wireless networks. The broader impact includes international
collaboration through the WiFiUS program creating a holistic design for
configurable frequency agile terminals. A novel interdisciplinary approach is
enabled by the unique international team, which builds upon collaborations
between experts at the Tampere University of Technology and University of Oulu
in Finland, and Rice University and the University of Maryland in the US.