* 1265662
* Bilingual Exhibits Research Initiative (BERI)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/28/2012,06/30/2013
* Steven Yalowitz, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2013
* USD 101,845.00

The Bilingual Exhibits Research Initiative (BERI) project is conducting research
and producing a series of deliverables that provide the necessary background to
advance understanding of how to best develop bilingual (Spanish/English)
exhibits in ISE museums and related institutions, thus broadening access to
informal science education. The primary target audience for this project is
informal science education professionals who plan to employ the most current
research results and effective practices in development of bilingual exhibits
and related programs. BERI is a partnership among the Institute of Learning
Innovation (Edgewater, MD), Garibay Group (Chicago, IL), Miami Museum of
Science, and the San Diego Natural History Museum, as well as partners where
front-end evaluation is being conducted on bilingual learning in exhibits. The
STEM content employed during the research includes socially relevant topics such
as biodiversity, health, and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BERI
Pathways project is developing five principal deliverables: (1) literature
review (available online); (2) on-line archive of current bilingual exhibits on
the Association of Science-Technology Center's web site at www.exhibitfiles.org;
(3) a pilot front-end research study of visitors to five bilingual exhibits
located at museums and related institutions; (4) a bilingual exhibit framework
(effective practices) document disseminated online; and (5) talks and workshops
to disseminate these results and effective practices to the informal science
education community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Once this project is completed, the
informal science education community will be better positioned to serve the
needs of the Spanish-speaking segment of the U.S. population. The long-term
outcomes of this project will ultimately benefit visitors to diverse informal
science learning institutions who are bilingual or do not speak English. This
project primarily deals with Spanish/English learning in informal science
settings. Nevertheless, the general outcomes of this project may also be
applicable to learning in other kinds of cultural institutions (e.g., art
museums and libraries) and to other bilingual or multilingual exhibits that
involve languages other than Spanish. BERI is therefore developing, contributing
to, and advancing the infrastructure of informal science education and other
fields of learning that are communicated in more than one language.