* 1265687
* Catalysis Chemistry Involving Nucleosides and Related Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Mahesh Lakshman, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports the research and pedagogical activities of Prof. Mahesh K.
Lakshman at The City College and The City University of New York. Professor
Lakshman's research involves the chemical modification of nucleosides and purine
derivatives as well as closely related heterocycles, using catalysis
methodology. Studies are conducted on metal-catalyzed carbon-carbon and carbon-
nitrogen bond-formation methodologies. There are several aims of the research:
chemoselective and room-temperature transformations of nucleosides, design of
new ligands for modulation of catalytic conversions, development of
benzotriazolyl nucleoside analogues, and use of pyrimidine, quinazoline, and
purine as potentially disposable handles for functionalization of organic
molecules. Professor Lakshman collaborates with researchers at several national
and international institutions to access the activity of the new nucleosides and
related heterocycles created as part of this project. The research has various
levels of complexity and students at all educational levels participate in the
program. In addition, this research has led to opportunities for outreach to
local schools and colleges.

Metal-catalyzed reactions offer a state-of-the-art approach to assembling
complex molecular structures, often not accessible by other means. Nucleosides
and purines are highly important biomolecules with applications in biochemistry,
biology, and medicine. Metal-catalyzed reactions of nucleosides and purines
allow for ready diversification of these biochemical scaffolds and provide
access to previously unknown molecular architectures. Metal catalysis also
offers access to molecules that resemble nucleosides, and the intrinsic chemical
reactivity of purines and related heterocycles can potentially be exploited in
new ways. New nucleosides and related heterostructures that are produced as part
of this research are evaluated at several schools of pharmacy and medical
institutions as potential anti-viral or anti-HIV medicines as well as treatments
for cardiovascular disease and cancer. Students at various educational levels,
including those from local middle and high schools and colleges, gain training
in contemporary chemistry and professional preparation by participating in this
research project.