* 1265896
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for technology innovation for novel cost-reducing and quality-enhancing musculoskeletal therapies
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jeffrey Lotz, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 05/31/2014
* USD 38,443.00

1265896 University of California-San Francisco (UCSF); Jeffrey Lotz

The proposed center will focus on technological advances and trends of health
outcomes, quality, and costs associated with several areas of musculoskeletal
care, including spine, arthroplasty, and sports medicine. University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF), the University of Toledo (UT), and the
University of California-Berkeley (UCB) are collaborating to establish the
proposed center, with UCSF as the lead institution.

With current trends in healthcare reform, there is a growing conflict between
the need for medical cost containment and the nation's commitment to
technological innovation to improve human health. Consequently, successful
medical therapy development now includes not only advancing new technologies
that are safe and effective, but also factoring overall costs for the episode of
care, pricing, and reimbursement. Disruptive innovations are new technologies
that are cost-saving, or that add value to the healthcare encounter by improving
outcome and/or reducing cost. Success in developing disruptive musculoskeletal
innovations requires balancing clinical insight, technological know-how, supply
chain management, and commercial market intelligence. The proposed activity
involves substantial engineering and bio-engineering multi-disciplinary
collaboration. Business faculty involvement provides a solid approach to the
engineering systems challenge of maximizing the value of innovative therapies.

The proposed Center will represent an exciting and novel integration of
healthcare economics, biomedical science, and clinical medicine as we target
technological innovations on cost-cutting and quality-enhancing interventions
for management of patients with musculoskeletal disease. The proposed Center
will focus on a natural integration of multi-disciplinary research activities,
and consequently, a cross-fertilization that provides rich educational
experiences for trainees who are mentored during the supported research
activities. The Center plans to implement an active program for identifying and
including Center members and trainees from underrepresented groups. Important
data and findings will be disseminated and shared via the Center website and
publications that result from Center-supported research.