* 1265922
* Biradical-Like Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2016
* USD 552,263.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professor Josef Michl of the University of Colorado at
Boulder for investigation of previously unknown relaxed geometrical structures
of peralkylated oligosilanes in their lowest singlet excited state, which are
responsible for observed blue and green emissions in such compounds. These
structures contain one silicon atom in a trigonal bipyramidal geometry or two
silicon atoms at geometries half-way between tetrahedral and trigonal
bipyramidal, and their silicon atoms carry five instead of the usual four
"valence" orbitals. The calculated structures have implications for electronic
excitation and electron conduction in silicon nanoparticles and all saturated
molecules, but this requires experimental verification. A second independent
project deals with the chemistry of the icosahedral carborane cage CB11. It is
proposed to prepare new reversible anion/radical couples of potential interest
as components of new hole conductors, and to examine the reactivity of such
cages when they contain a naked boron vertex.

The proposed research is especially relevant for solar energy conversion in
solar cells and for photonics (for example, understanding light emission in
silicon nanoparticles that may be used in television and computer displays). To
date, several theoretical predications have yet to be tested, and the work in
this award will provide much-needed experimental verification. The work will
provide graduate students and postdoctoral research associates with excellent
training in both synthetic organic and experimental physical chemistry.