* 1265343
* Mapping Saharan dust fluxes through the onset and termination of the African Humid Period in a transect of African margin cores
* GEO,OCE
* 08/17/2012,08/31/2014
* William McGee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2014
* USD 275,579.00

During the African Humid Period between 11 and 5 thousand years ago, central
North Africa supported large lakes, abundant megafauna and numerous human
settlements. The transition from this period to the dry conditions of the last 5
thousand years marks one of the most dramatic regional climate changes since the
end of the last glacial period, but currently available records disagree over
the timing and abruptness of the transition. This research develops records of
wind-blown dust deposition-- a sensitive recorder of continental aridity and
atmospheric circulation-- from a north-south transect of eight sediment cores
from along the northwest African continental margin. These records will reveal
whether the beginning and end of the African Humid Period occurred synchronously
and with similar abruptness throughout North Africa. Fluvial sediment fluxes and
dust grain size data from the cores will provide complementary insights into
changes in precipitation and wind strength. In addition to elucidating the
mechanisms driving abrupt climate changes in monsoonal regions, this project's
broader impacts include support and mentoring for a new principal investigator
in a postdoctoral position, involvement of undergraduate students in research,
and adaptation of project findings for inclusion in undergraduate Earth science
courses at Columbia University and in high school curricular materials.