* 1265725
* Photodissociation Dynamics of Transient Species:  Hydrogen-Bonded Dimers and Trimers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2017
* USD 462,500.00

In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hanna Reisler from the
University of Southern California will elucidate mechanisms of predissociation
of hydrogen-bonded complexes in the gas phase, in particular dimers and trimers.
Despite their weak interaction strength, hydrogen bonds are crucially important
in environments ranging from living cells to icy bodies in the solar system. To
gain insight into the predissociation mechanisms and determine the hydrogen bond
strength, the state resolution and detection sensitivity of photofragment ion
imaging will be exploited to obtain pair-correlated distributions of fragments
following laser excitation of one subunit of hydrogen-bonded dimers or trimers.
Cyclic trimers will serve as prototypes of vibrational energy dissipation in
larger hydrogen-bonded networks and for experimental estimates of cooperative
interactions that strengthen hydrogen bonding. State-specific energy flow
patterns that lead to bond breaking will be inferred from fragment quantum state
distributions, and bond dissociation energies will be obtained with
spectroscopic accuracy. For example, in HCl-water mixed clusters, the influence
of incipient proton transfer from HCl on predissociation dynamics will be
revealed. In trimers and larger clusters, the contributions of 2- and 3-body
fragmentation processes will be determined. Vibrational predissociation
mechanisms will be elucidated in collaboration with the theory group of
Professor Joel Bowman at Emory University. This collaboration, which has already
resulted in a description of the bond breaking mechanism in water dimers, will
be extended to include other dimers and trimers. The ultimate goal is to
understand the yet unexplained exquisite state specificity in vibrational energy
flow that leads to bond breaking, and to extend to work to larger hydrogen
bonding networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding energy flow through
hydrogen-bonded networks has been a major goal of experimental and theoretical
studies of molecular behavior in the gas and condensed phases. However, little
is currently known about how these weak bonds are formed and broken, what is
their flexibility, and how networks, made of many molecules, contribute to the
strength of the bonds. Hydrogen bonds are important in environments such as
biological systems, molecular solids, hydrated solutions of neutral molecules
and ions. The chosen molecular systems are also relevant to atmospheric
processes that affect climate change. Students participating in this research
observe experimental manifestations of concepts learned in courses on
spectroscopy and dynamics, compare their experimental results to theory, and
construct dynamical models that emphasize physical insight. Professor Reisler
has developed and leads a wide variety of activities aimed at encouraging women
in science and engineering to pursue research careers, and incorporates results
from this research in her undergraduate and graduate courses.