* 1265224
* RAPID: Quantifying the Impact of the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on the Health and Productivity of Louisiana Salt Marshes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Deepak Mishra, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 32,538.00

Assessment of marsh health is essential to the evaluation of the short-term
impact of the BP Deepwater Horizon spill and for the prioritization of future
restoration actions. This study will allow the identification of hotspots of
marsh degradation by evaluating marsh biophysical characteristics including
distribution of chlorophyll content, green leaf area, and green marsh canopy
cover. These characteristics are the primary indicators of photosynthetic
capacity and physiological status of marsh vegetation. NASA's Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite images will be used to
retrieve and map these characteristics across the coastal Louisiana salt marshes
before and after the spill. Pre and post spill weekly composite maps of salt
marsh biophysical characteristics for the entire Louisiana coast will be
generated showing the extent of damage and recovery. By examining the satellite
images, the overall health and productivity of coastal salt marsh can be
inferred and the ecological impact of the oil and oil/dispersant on health and
productivity of these sensitive ecosystem can be effectively analyzed.

The maps and tools produced by this study will be helpful to coastal managers
across Louisiana as they evaluate and prioritize the massive marsh restoration
effort that is going to take place because of the spill. For the first time,
tangible map products will be generated that can quantitatively assess the
effect of the restoration activities and speed of marsh ecosystem recovery. The
proposal also directly addresses the Gulf of Mexico Alliance's (GOMA) long term
goal to enhance monitoring for the conservation and restoration of coastal
wetlands throughout the Gulf of Mexico.