* 1265227
* EAGER: Cognitive Radio with 2-D Cognition: Dynamic Spectrum vs. Power Accesses
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Shuguang Cui, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project focuses on the fundamental tradeoff between spectrum efficiency and
energy efficiency in cognitive radio systems by exploring the correlations
across both spectrum and energy domains, in the notions of both frequency holes
and energy holes. The considered application scenario is a spectrum sharing
system with both legacy and cognitive radios, where the nodes are powered by
either smart grids or environment energy harvesters or a mix of two. The three
main research objectives are: develop joint 2-D sensing scheme to explore the
correlation between frequency holes and energy holes; derive efficiency
maximizing resource allocation schemes considering constraints in both energy
and spectrum domains; and study performance enhancement mechanisms in the
framework of collaborative clouds via node conferencing. Novel interdisciplinary
approaches are applied to combine the methods of 2-D statistical signal
processing, non-convex optimization, and analytical energy harvesting system
modeling to study the unique problem considered for the newly defined cognitive
radio systems with 2-D cognition. The project provides both theories and
algorithms for energy-efficient operation of future cognitive radio systems with
accesses to both spectrum and energy dynamics. The research findings will be
incorporated into graduate courses; the results will be disseminated to the
community via journal papers and conference presentations.