* 1265278
* SI2-SSE: General Tensor Software Elements for Quantum Chemistry, Tensor Network Theories, and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 06/26/2012,05/31/2015
* Garnet Chan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 386,818.00

The PI will develop reusable software components to accelerate innovation in
science that relies on high-dimensional tensor computations. While the
components are informed by use-cases taken from quantum chemistry, the
challenges of tensor computation are universal, and span diverse areas of
science and engineering. These problems range from simulations of nuclear spin
spectra, to quantum chemical calculations on molecules, to psychometric
analysis, to numerical general relativity. The overarching aim of the funded
work is to develop reusable tensor software elements, based on modern
sustainable software practices, to benefit tensor algorithmic development in the
scientific community at large. In addition, beyond the broad scientific impacts
of the software, our education and outreach agenda comprises a multi-tiered
effort to uplift the ability of the science and engineering community to reason
about high-dimensional tensor and matrix
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important aspects of the software elements
will include (i) expressive programming interfaces for rapid prototyping of
tensor based theories (ii) layered tensor libraries for dense, block-sparse, and
out-of-core tensors that provide peak-performance implementations of the above
interfaces, (iii) a multi-linear algebra package for general high dimensional
computations, based on the matrix product state approach, and (iv) tensor
virtual machine technology that abstracts algorithm development from hardware,
and which provides a framework for optimizing compiler transformations to adapt
algorithms to the memory access, communication networks, and processor
characteristics of modern computer architectures.