* 1265105
* I-Corps:  Translation of High Frequency Irreversible Electroporation (H-FIRE) for Human Clinical Applications via the Veterinary Oncology Market
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Rafael Davalos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

High Frequency Irreversible Electroporation (H-FIRE) is a new, minimally
invasive, non-thermal tissue ablation technique in which a tumor is exposed to
bursts of very short electric fields for approximately 2 minutes. These pulses
structurally rearrange the lipid bilayer of cells a target region inducing cell
death. As opposed to other focal ablation techniques, H-FIRE does not affect
major blood vessels, nerves or the extracellular matrix making unresectable
tumors treatable. The goal of this project is to transfer fundamental technology
for solid tumor treatment from the laboratory to clinical
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of this minimally invasive
technology facilitates the treatment of tumors currently inoperable with
surgical resection or other focal ablation technologies due to their proximity
to critical structures such as nerves and major blood vessels. Some tumor types
are known to become chemo-resistant and radiation exposure must be closely
regulated, especially in younger patients. Thermal-ablation techniques suffer
from heat sinking effects by local vessels and tight control of treated regions
is challenging. H-FIRE has the potential to complement these other technologies
as a standard of care. If successful, a direct result of this project will be
the development of an instrument which will be made available for clinicians and
researchers to evaluate H-FIRE based therapies.