* 1265311
* EAGER: Supporting Social Applications in a Hybrid Architecture with CR-Enabled Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Xiuzhen Cheng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 03/31/2016
* USD 299,949.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate a number of
challenging problems that play critical roles in enhancing the performance of
social applications by taking advantage of the benefits brought by integrating
cognitive radio networking (CRN) and mobile ad hoc networks (MANET). This
research is motivated by the observations of (i) the lack of successful and
practical applications of CRN and MANETs, though both have been extensively
studied in recent years; and (ii) the benefits of integrating CRN and MANET to
launch new and to enhance the performance of existing mobile social
applications. In this project, graph theoretical approaches are employed to
enable scalable HD video chat, to improve the performance of time-bounded
information dissemination, and to enhance the privacy of information sharing
among the CR-enabled devices. Moreover, network formation games are exploited to
construct social-application-aware network topologies for capacity and
performance enhancement; and statistical approaches are adopted to investigate
the impact of topology control on social behaviors and vice version.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected results of this project include novel
methodologies and theories to enhance the performance of existing and to enable
new mobile social applications. The success of this project will have strong
impact on both the theoretical and the practical aspects of social applications
in the foreseen hybrid environment of CRN and MANETs. The research findings will
be disseminated through high-quality publications as well as presentations in
focused workshops and conferences. The project outcomes will provide guidance to
and may be adopted by industry for enhancing service availability and
integrity.&lt;br/&gt;