* 1265964
* New Approaches for Stereoselective Formation of Quaternary Carbon Stereocenters and Fragment Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Larry Overman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 629,934.00

With this award, the Chemistry Synthesis program is supporting the research of
Professor Larry Overman of the University of California, Irvine. This project
deals with a critical step in the efficient chemical synthesis of valuable,
structurally complex, organic chemicals: the step that joins elaborate
fragments. When the atoms joined in a fragment-coupling step are chiral, this
union is particularly challenging. The objective of this research is the
development and validation of new methods for combining complex fragments of
this type. Specifically, the proposed research will investigate the general
utility of bimolecular reactions of tertiary organometallic and tertiary carbon
radicals with carbon-centered electrophiles for fragment coupling and the
construction of quaternary-carbon stereocenters. Such chemical transformations
are not currently part of the repertoire of organic synthesis, yet hold exciting
potential to solve formidable challenges in constructing complex organic
molecules. A majority of the synthesis methods under scrutiny will employ photo-
redox catalysis, and, thus, are particularly attractive for their low
environmental impact and their use of a sustainable energy source, visible
light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constructing complex carbon stereocenters remains
today a hurdle to be surmounted in evolving efficient chemical syntheses of many
organic molecules. The chemical syntheses to be developed should prove valuable
in the discovery and potentially production of fine chemicals in the
pharmaceutical, biotechnology, agricultural, and related industries. In
addition, this program of research will lead to the training synthetic organic
chemists at the BS, PhD and postdoctoral levels; such scientists play an
essential role in the US pharmaceutical, biotechnology, agricultural, and
chemical industries, besides being essential elements of university and college
departments of chemistry and material science.