* 1265591
* Synthesis, Mechanistic Investigations, and Applications of Transition Metal Enolates for Asymmetric Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Brian Stoltz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Brian M. Stoltz of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering at the California Institute of Technology will investigate the
origins of high enantioselectivity in an important asymmetric catalytic
alkylation reaction discovered in his laboratory, and apply the knowledge gained
toward the development of a broad platform for enantioselective transition metal
enolate functionalization chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work described
could provide unprecedented access to simple chemical building-blocks containing
stereogenic centers, and could be widely adopted by synthetic chemists in both
academia and industry. This unique collection of tools could enable chemists to
push beyond the state-of-the-art in applying such technologies to compounds and
substances that are beyond the scope of the current methods. In addition to the
on-site, laboratory science described in this grant, the science proposed herein
will directly impact the education of scientists at the California Institute of
Technology, while the skill set and expertise they gain will broadly impact
society-at-large as they too move on to productive careers in academia,
industry, and government. Finally, ongoing teaching and outreach efforts with
young students (K-6) will impact the lives and decisions of the next generation
of students.