* 1265513
* Scholars Award: The sciences of the similar: Innovations in chemistry and the limits of equivalence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jeremy Greene, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 153,154.00

Generic pharmaceuticals are considered biochemical copies of brand-name drugs
and have become an important component of contemporary scientific innovation and
policy. As the market for generic substitutes has grown--from only 10% of the
American pharmaceutical market in 1960 to nearly 80% by 2010--so too have
technical and political conflicts over whether generics are truly "the same
thing" as their brand-name counterparts. Indeed, generic drugs are never fully
identical to their original counterparts; rather, their identity as generic
resides in being similar in the particular ways that regulators and scientists
think matter.

This Scholar's Award, funded by the STS program and the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, will support Jeremy Greene, a physician-
historian with ethnographic training, as he tracks the emergence of scientific
and policy definitions of biochemical equivalence in the late 20th century and
early 21st century. Using archival data, analysis of scientific publications,
and in-depth interviews, Greene will trace how the question: "when are two
medicines the same?" generates different answers depending on the method and
discipline from which it is asked. For example, people (at different times and
in different countries) have used innovations in chemistry, biology,
engineering, and management science to either argue for or contest the
similarity of generic pharmaceuticals.

This research will contribute to social scientific studies of science policy and
regulation as well as the history of science and innovation. A close examination
of how generics are defined over time and across countries reveals how different
stakeholders promote and contest various ways of defining biochemical
equivalence. Grappling with the problems of equivalence and interchangeability
also demonstrates how specialization shapes the generalizability of scientific
knowledge and the cultural and scientific assumptions that help produce science
policy.