* 1265967
* Simulating Magnetohydrodynamic Turbulence in the Plasma Sheet and its Role in Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Robert Richard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2017
* USD 372,844.00

This project will perform and analyze numerical magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD)
simulations of the terrestrial magnetosphere with the aim to investigate the
causes of large-scale, low-frequency turbulence in the plasma sheet and its
implications for convection, transport, and the energy budget. With respect to
potential causes of turbulence, the relative roles of turbulence in the upstream
solar wind, reconnection, and other internal processes will be investigated. In
addition, the role of coupling to the ionosphere will be examined. A well-
documented and successfully validated MHD model will be run on state-of-the-art
NASA and NSF XSEDE supercomputer systems to perform a well planned set of high
resolution idealized simulation runs as well as case studies driven by solar
wind observations for real events. For the latter, the results will be further
analyzed and verified by comparison with magnetosphere observations from the
THEMIS spacecraft.

Turbulence is a phenomenon that occurs widely in fluid systems and turbulent
processes are abundant in space plasmas. The Earth's magnetosphere is a natural
laboratory for studying such processes, where both simulations and direct
observations are possible. Results from this project therefore will have impact
on a broad variety of research areas.