* 1265143
* I-Corps:  Robust and Efficient Solid Oxide Fuel Cells for Clean Energy Generation
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Nina Orlovskaya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project builds upon two major results of priorr research to develop high
performance Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs) with improved durability and
reliability using unique multilayered structural approach to design and process
of electrolyte and cathode/anode constituents of the single cells. The first is
the multilayered electrolytes with carefully designed thermal residual stresses
bringing the significant increase in reliability of the electrolytes and the
single cell as a whole, at the same time allowing maintaining the very high
oxygen ion conductivity and chemical and phase stability of the structures. The
second is the use of the catalytically active perovskites cathodes deposited by
the superior additive manufacturing techniques on the electrolyte substrates. It
is expected that highly compatible electrodes/electrolyte assemblies will be
produced as single solid oxide fuel cells exhibiting superior power densities,
reliability, and durability at lower operational temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing global industry for fuel cells
including, but not limited to: telecommunications; space industry; hospital and
commercial building backup and; large-scale data backup. Fuel cells can
potentially supply the total power demand for large capacity applications, while
reducing carbon dioxide emissions. The SOFC systems developed through this
project are quiet, have no carbon emissions and have the potential to reduce
facility energy service costs. SOFCs can also be positioned on-site in remote
areas, making it possible to match power generation to the electrical demands of
the site.