* 1265301
* EAGER: Constructing, Indexing, and Searching Super-Enriched Document Representations in the Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eduard Hovy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 236,111.00

There are billions of new digital documents created around the world every day.
Examples include emails, blog posts, legal documents, and news articles. To
enable effective information management, many of these documents are processed
by information retrieval systems, such as desktop search tools or Web search
engines. Most existing technologies represent documents digitally. To a
computer, these representations are nothing more than a sequence of bits,
completely devoid of any explicit meaning. Since most modern search engines
utilize such basic representations, they often fail to properly account for the
meaning of the words found in the documents, thereby diminishing the quality of
their results. Despite the importance of this fundamental problem, there have
been surprisingly few attempts to build, and subsequently search, document
representations that encode the deeply rich meaning of text, especially for data
sets that contain millions or billions of text
documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how to automatically
construct, index, and search next-generation super-enriched document
representations. The approach relies on the careful integration of traditional
text representations with natural language processing-based sources (e.g., named
entities, synonyms, and paraphrases), rich knowledge sources (e.g., Wikipedia
and Freebase), contextual sources, and other value-added sources of content.
Constructing such representations for large document collections requires
computationally intensive batch processing to mine, aggregate, and join data
across disparate sources. To overcome these challenges, a scalable, massively
distributed cloud computing solution is adopted. The resulting enriched document
representations can be effectively applied to a wide variety of information
retrieval, natural language processing, and data mining tasks.