* 1265075
* Cell Sorting and Separation via High Frequency Dielectrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Emil Geiger, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2018
* USD 300,222.00

1265075 Geiger

The goal of this project is to investigate high frequency (10-160 MHz)
dielectrophoresis (DEP) as a tool for sorting cells based on differences in
cytoplasmic conductivity and other interior features. The PI will focus on
microalgae due to the ease of controlling and measuring cytoplasmic lipid
content. The primary hypothesis is that increases in lipid content within the
microalgal cell will change the high frequency DEP response due to a decrease in
cytoplasmic conductivity. In particular, it is expected that the upper crossover
frequency (i.e., the frequency at which no DEP-induced motion is observed) will
be shifted to lower frequencies as the volume of lipids within the cell
increases. A range of frequencies should exist where cells with high lipid
content and low lipid content can be separated since the DEP-induced motions
will be in opposite directions. To test this hypothesis, extensive analytical,
numerical, and experimental studies of high frequency DEP are proposed to
determine the correlation between the lipid content of a microalgal cell and the
cell?s high frequency DEP response. The lipid content will be quantified via
fluorescent microscopy. A high throughput screening device that can sort
microalgae on the basis of lipid content will be designed and built for the
purpose of exploring one potential application of this technology. Lastly, a
comprehensive study will be performed to discover what other cells can be
separated using high frequency DEP. This approach is potentially transformative,
as it is label-free and depends on intrinsic cell properties. In particular,
high frequency DEP could have much broader applications when compared to low
frequency DEP as it probes the interior of the cell as opposed the cell
membrane. Broader Impacts. Microalgae technology has the potential to supply the
US with significant quantities of biofuels suitable for transportation. High-
frequency DEP may have other applications beyond microalgae such as drug
discovery and cancer research. The results of this project will be presented at
conferences and in journals to both the DEP and microalgae communities in order
to disseminate the results as widely as possible. Underrepresented graduate and
undergraduates students have already been identified for this work. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide excellent training
opportunities for the students giving them exposure to both microtechnology and
microbiology. These activities will support continued development of an
interdisciplinary class, "Introduction to Microtechnology," at the University of
Nevada, Reno.