* 1265733
* Collaborative Research: Correlating Geospatial Data Lineage and Positional Accuracy for Excavation Damage Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* yanfeng ouyang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this research is to explore methods that model and quantify the
uncertainty associated with recorded underground utility location data.
Locational uncertainty is the error associated with the methods of mapping
underground utilities, and will be modeled as three-dimensional geometric shapes
that correspond to the probability that these shapes contain the utilities.
Locational uncertainty is dependent on locational accuracy, which will be
estimated from data lineage - the format and process used to collect data. The
premise associated with this research is that locational uncertainty results
from inaccurate locational information that, in turn, is a function of data
lineage. The utility data and its quantified uncertainty will be integrated with
excavation operations, and communicated to operators by blending the geometry
and attribute information with operators' views of the work environment using
video-see-through augmented reality. Field experiments will be conducted with
industry partners to validate the proposed geospatial uncertainty model and
evaluate its benefits of improving excavation safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the research results will lead to improvements in construction
operations such as, excavation in the presence of buried utilities, drilling in
the presence of hidden obstructions, and robotic construction in the absence of
exact prior knowledge of the environment. The project will impact education by
promoting subsurface utility engineering as an area of specialization. A diverse
group of under-represented students will participate in the project through
active collaboration with the Women in Science and Engineering, and the Minority
Engineering Program offices at Purdue and the University of Michigan. In
summary, the societal benefits of the project are expected to be the improved
safety of excavation and other construction operations, and the multi-
disciplinary education and training of current and future engineers in an
emerging engineering specialty.