* 1265713
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Noncontact Dimensional Metrology to Understand Complex Part-to-Part Variation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* George Runger, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 167,400.00

The objective of this award is to develop a paradigm for identifying and
visualizing complex part-to-part variation patterns in high-dimensional,
spatially dense optical coordinate measuring machine (OCMM) data. OCMMs for
noncontact dimensional metrology using laser and/or vision systems are one of
the most promising emerging measurement technologies for quality control in
discrete parts manufacturing. They produce large volumes of profile, point
cloud, and high resolution image data that represent parametric and
nonparametric surface geometry characteristics. The emphasis of this award on
part-to-part variation is fundamentally different than the emphasis of current
OCMM data analysis software, which fits geometric features separately to
individual parts. To create the proposed paradigm for understanding variation, a
manifold learning framework for identifying and visualizing the variation
patterns will be developed, addressing challenges that include simultaneously
identifying nonparametric and parametric variation patterns, handling
measurement noise structure that differs from what is typically assumed in
manifold learning, transforming OCMM data to reduce the extent of nonlinearity
in the patterns, and handling heterogeneous data types obtained at different
process stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will provide a powerful tool to facilitate the discovery and elimination of
major root causes of manufacturing variation. Many discrete parts manufacturing
industries invest heavily in OCMM equipment but lack knowledge discovery tools
for fully utilizing the technology to understand part-to-part variation. This
research will fill a critical void by creating a methodology for more
effectively analyzing high-dimensional, spatially dense OCMM data. It will
provide more sophisticated, badly needed variation reduction tools suitable for
manufacturing six-sigma programs that employ modern OCMM technology, which will
increase the competitiveness of US manufacturers. It will also allow for a
greater return on investment in OCMM technology, which is expected to increase
demand for the hardware/software systems and spark further advances in the
technology.