* 1265488
* New Organic and Organometallic Synthetic Methods for Manipulation of Pyridine and Related Azole Anhydrobases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Fred Pigge, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 408,673.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Christopher Pigge of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Iowa will investigate new approaches to construct aza-heterocyclic
ring systems via manipulation of alkylidene dihydropyridines (anhydrobases) and
related intermediates. While anhydrobases are established compounds, their use
as synthetic intermediates has not been extensively explored. In this project
both conventional bond forming methods as well as organotransition metal-
catalyzed processes (e.g., palladium, rhodium, gold) will be developed in order
to harness the synthetic potential of pyridine and related aza-heterocyclic
anhydrobases. Development of asymmetric metal-catalyzed transformations also
will be undertaken. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work could lead to more
efficient methods for the general preparation of various nitrogen-containing
heterocyclic ring systems. These types of compounds are ubiquitous in
biologically active natural products and pharmaceuticals. Moreover, aza-
heterocyclic derivatives are also common building blocks of functional materials
such as organic light emitting diodes and organic semiconductors. Thus,
successful execution of this project will impact numerous fields of important
contemporary chemical research in areas ranging from organic synthesis and
medicinal chemistry to materials research. In addition, this project will
provide excellent training of undergraduate and graduate students, including
those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.