* 1265166
* EAGER: CDRIVE: Cognitive Radio Enabled Spectrum Aware Intelligent Vehicular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 01/31/2016
* USD 293,974.00

Transferring high bandwidth content is a challenge in vehicular and mobile
networks that are limited by spectrum scarcity in the unlicensed bands, short
connection times, and the cost of cellular data plans. These observations
motivate the use of frequency agile cognitive radios as part of the project
called CDRIVE (for Cognitive raDio enabled spectRum-aware Intelligent Vehicular
nEtworks). CDRIVE involves the use of theoretical analysis tools and exploration
of correlation functions. A major contribution lies in creating a new ns-2 based
simulation tool that combines spectrum-related functions in a cognitive radio
within a vehicular environment. CDRIVE makes advances towards developing a
holistic framework for vehicular cognitive radios networks for allocating
roadside base station locations that have spectrum database access capability,
enhancing the science of collecting spectrum measurements under different
topographical conditions, surrounding urban structures and speeds, and devising
a new rate control mechanism that anticipates network and correlated road
congestions, and intermittent disruptions due to spectrum outages. CDRIVE will
yield insights on integrating cognitive radios with spectrum databases,
especially for mobile networks, which are now mandated by the FCC. It will
provide the theory and practical validation of the best mobility-aware spectrum-
sensing strategies, and tightly couple the external environment with the sensing
method. It will also shape future safety-related messaging in vehicles, support
real-time telemetry analysis, and allow high-bandwidth communication for
emergency response personnel.