* 1265989
* A Discrete Method for Allocation of Float Along the Critical Path in Construction Project Schedules
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Gunnar Lucko, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this project is to investigate how construction
projects can be made more resilient to delays in support of achieving on-time
performance. Current scheduling paradoxically generates a sequence of activities
that are most vulnerable to delays; the critical path. This research takes the
opposite stance, that no schedule activity should be critical. Therefore fair
allocation of limited time flexibility, called float, should be proportionate to
the risk of individual subcontractors who perform critical activities.
Conceptual analogies from several decision-making areas are explored as building
blocks toward solving this allocation problem. For example, political voting
addresses how to equalize the power of subcontractors that impact project
outcomes; fair division focuses on allocating limited valuable assets such as
float; game theory models address cooperation for win-win scenarios of
allocating time flexibility; and agency theory describes incentives in
hierarchical interactions within construction projects. Validating the method
inspired by these analogies will entail simulations of exemplar and real
schedules to compare scenarios without versus with the strategically allocated
float in terms of mitigating delays.

If successful, this research will improve risk mitigation by proactively
protecting projects against critical delays, thereby reducing conflicts and
claims, by solving the ambiguous issue of float ownership with mathematical
fairness, and by treating float as a commodity. Ultimately, this allows the
monetization and trading of float among subcontractors, which could incentivize
on-time performance. Educational outreach activities focus on minority high
school students in an inner-city career mentoring program, for whom a German-
style board game on risk management will be created. Youth participating in on-
campus summer programs will receive a discovery brochure with information and
activities on project planning. Results will be widely distributed via industry
case studies and a seminar to the community of professional schedulers.