* 1265695
* Arithmetic, Geometric and Ergodic Aspects of the Theory of Lie Groups and their discrete subgroups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Gregory Margulis, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 602,028.00

The problems to be investigated are in the area of the theory of Lie groups and
their discrete subgroups. One of the main objectives is to continue the program
of establishing a homogeneous space approach as a powerful tool in number theory
and, in particular in Diophantine approximation. Special attention will be given
to the problem of the effective density and the effective equidistribution in
homogeneous dynamics. There will also be emphasis on logarithm laws for
unipotent flows and applications of homogeneous dynamics to metric theory of
Diophantine approximation. It is also proposed to continue the work on discrete
groups of affine transformations in two directions: (a) Auslander conjecture and
classification problems related to it; (2) the boundary of the set of proper
affine transformations of Fuchsian groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
Lie groups and their discrete subgroups is one if the central areas in
mathematics. During the last few decades, it was realized that some aspects of
the theory can be applied to solve longstanding problems in number theory,
quantum chaos and related topics, which could not be tackled by other methods.
The proposal is related to rigidity theory that studies phenomena when rather
weak data about geometric and mathematical objects determines completely or
almost completely the structure of those objects. The proposal should establish
new connections between theory of Lie groups and their discrete subgroups,
number theory, geometry, dynamical systems and ergodic theory, probability
theory, theoretical computer science, mathematical physics, and in general
between discrete and continuous in mathematics.