* 1265388
* CAREER: Stimuli-Responsive Dynamic Macromolecular Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Brent Sumerlin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2014
* USD 204,163.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This research capitalizes on the robust nature of reversible bond formation
between diols and boronic acids for the preparation and investigation of self-
assembled and responsive macromolecular material. Two particular systems will be
investigated: (1)stimuli-responsive block copolymer assemblies and (2)dynamic
covalent self-assembled materials. In the first system, diblock copolymers with
a permanently hydrophilic block (e.g.,poly(ethylene glycol) or polyacrylamide)
and a responsibe boronic acid containing acrylamido or styrenic block will be
prepared by combination of controlled radical polymerization and other efficient
postpolymerization transformations. In the absence of diol and at pH<pKa of the
boronic acid moieties, the organoboron segments will be dehydrated and
insoluble, leading to self-assembly of the amphiphilic block copolymers into
micelles and vesicles. Introduction of diols will lead to a reduced pKa of the
boronic acids, and the resulting anionic boronate ester formation will cause a
solubility transition and aggregate disassembly. Investigations will elucidate
the critical diol concentration, pH, and temperature necessary to induce
aggregate dissociation, and insight will be gained into the kinetics governing
assembly and sissociation. The second class of materials relies on boronic acid-
diol esterification to construct covalent macromolecular architectures via self-
asembly of (co)polymers with either terminal or pendant diol and boronic acid
functionality. Molecular brushes, stars, and other branched chain topologies
will be constructed via boronic or boronate ester formation in the bulk state
and in organic or aqueous solutions. Hydrolysis of the boronate esters will lead
to reversible dissociation of the topologically complex macromolecules into
individual linear polymer components. Under the equilibrium conditions inherent
to reversible covalent systems, introduction of a second diol-containing polymer
that forms a more stable boronate ester complex will lead to an exchange of
macromolecular building blocks. The selectivity requred for efficient exchange
will be implemented by designing polymers with dramatically different
complexation potentioals. Thus, after macromolecular dissociation,
reconstruction in the presence of a competing equilibrium will result in
exchange of polymer building blocks to yield a new materials. The ability to
reshuffle constituents through assembly-disassembly will also be employed to
induce dramatic architectural rearrangements in solution (e.g., brush to star
transitions). This research seeks to redefine the traditional concept of
stimuli-responsive polymers to include macromolecular constructs that change
both their chemical functionality and overall chain topology in response to
environmental stress.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

By preparing nanoscale objects that undergo rupture and reconstruction when
exposed to changes in their local environment, fundamental insight can be gained
into many of the mechanisms governing the controlled delivery of therapeutics
and the behavior of new self-healing and adaptive materials. Because these
studies require a diverse set of skills from materials science, chemistry, and
engineering, students and junior scientists involved in this research are
provided with a truly interdisciplinary set of skills that can enhance the
workforce necessary to accelerate development of new advanced and sepciality
materials market. An outreach component of the research is desinged to directly
address many of the mandates of the American Competitiveness Initiative by
establishing collaborations with local community colleges and independent K-12
school districts to facilitate the inclusion of underrepresented minority
students for internship positions within the Department of Chemistry at Southern
Methodist University.