* 1265651
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling and Space Weather Using the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies (MACCS)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Mark Moldwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 02/28/2018
* USD 55,189.00

This project consists of two activities. The first will continue the operation
and data distribution of observations from the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and
Cleft Studies (MACCS). The second is a research program using the MACCS data
along with SuperDARN radar, the Relocatable Atmospheric Observatory in Resolute
Bay, nominally conjugate stations in the Antarctic and GPS TEC receivers at two
of the MACCS sites. Data from the AMPERE satellites also will be used. The
proposal identifies four topics: &lt;br/&gt;* Performing detailed studies of
dayside high-latitude ULF waves and transient events, using multi-instrument
ground-based and satellite data. &lt;br/&gt;* Providing observational and
theoretical support for the recently-launched Radiation Belt Storm Probes
mission by investigating the role of ULF waves in energizing or depleting
radiation belt electrons during magnetic storms, in part using the recently
developed ULF index. &lt;br/&gt;* Investigating the high-latitude field-aligned
current structures associated with both transient events and steady convection,
using magnetic field and GPS TEC data along with global data from the AMPERE
project. &lt;br/&gt;* Using the combination of MACCS data with simultaneous data
from both low-orbiting and high-orbiting satellites to separate spatial and
temporal variations in magnetospheric and ionospheric processes, and carrying
out theoretical and modeling studies of the excitation and propagation of ULF
waves through the global magnetosphere-ionosphere system. This study will use
the BATS-R-US global magnetohydrodynamic simulation code.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAACS data are freely distributed to the entire
science community.