* 1265714
* Phylogenomics, Revisionary Systematics, and Evolution of the Visual Systems in Dragonflies and Damselflies (Insecta: Ononata)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2020
* Seth Bybee, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2020
* USD 963,562.00

Dragonflies and damselflies belong to a primitive insect group that occupies a
key point in the evolution of insects. They were among the first insects to gain
wings, have an excellent fossil record, have the most acute vision of any
insect, and are the focus for many speciation and conservation studies. Despite
the importance of these insects as a study group, there is no comprehensive
phylogeny depicting the evolutionary relationships among these insects. By using
anatomical information gathered from fossil and living dragonflies and
damselflies in combination with DNA data gathered by harnessing the power of
next generation sequencing technologies, this research will produce the first
comprehensive phylogeny for this group. This phylogeny will become the
foundation for all future research on these insects, including the discovery and
description of new species. In addition, this work will focus on deciphering the
genes associated with visual systems in these insects, and results from this
research will allow scientists to better understand how visual systems evolve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several minority undergraduate and graduate students as
well as postdoctoral researchers will be trained in cutting edge DNA sequencing
technology. All personnel will work to convey our research to the general public
via a museum exhibit focused on dragonfly diversity and the evolution of their
visual systems. We will also use Internet websites devoted to earth's
biodiversity (e.g., Encyclopedia of life and Morphbank) to provide the general
public and the scientific community with detailed information regarding both
fossil and living dragonflies and damselflies. This research will push
evolutionary biology forward by innovations in working with fossils, the
development of new molecular tools to capture, sequence and characterize genes,
and exciting insights that will provide a more in-depth understanding of the
evolution of visual systems.