* 1265868
* The nonlinear Schrodinger equation, its physical origins, and the spectral measures of random matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Rowan Killip, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 236,001.00

The main purpose of the proposed research is to further the mathematical
understanding of several standard simple physical models: the nonlinear
Schrodinger equation and its connections to many-body quantum mechanics; the
scattering resonances of a random black-box system; and the spectral measure of
CMV matrices with random decaying coefficients. A major theme of the NLS portion
of the project is to investigate the effect of obstacles. This is a concrete and
challenging model case for the investigation of NLS in general geometries.
Examples of dispersive equations that are scaling-critical but on the very cusp
of super-criticality will also be investigated; this is an ideal proving ground
for existing energy- and mass-critical techniques. Two classes of physically
motivated NLS models with combined attractive and repulsive nonlinearities will
be investigated. These models have already started to reveal interesting and
unusual variational and dynamical structures that warrant further investigation.
Additionally, the distribution of resonances associated to finite dimensional
quantum systems (chosen uniformly at random, respecting time-reversal symmetry)
will be investigated. Related methods will be employed to investigate the fine
spectral properties for discrete Dirac equations with decaying random
potentials.

The theory of random matrices is driven by empirical data as surely as any
physical science: Its roots lie in statistical analysis (specifically, ANOVA)
and the analysis of experimental energy-level data. More recently, random matrix
statistics have been observed in the vibrations of drums and the behaviour of
the prime numbers. The researches of this project are aimed at helping to
elucidate and explain the results of these truly mathematical experiments.
Although the nonlinear Schrodinger equation is used as a simple effective model
for several physical phenomena, the goal of this project is to further our
understanding of the behaviour of solutions to this equation principally as a
model for general evolution equations. As a step towards the vicissitudes of
laboratory science/engineering, we will consider evolution in the presence of
obstacles and other irregularities as well as incorporating more complicated
nonlinear effects that cannot be described by a simple power law. The training
of graduate students as educators and researchers in the mathematical sciences
is also a significant portion of the project.