* 1265100
* Surface Stress Relaxation and Resulting Residual Stress in Glass: A New Mechanical Strengthening Mechanism of Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Minoru Tomozawa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 670,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Glasses have many important applications because they
are transparent, low cost, light-weight, and can be produced in large quantities
and rapidly. They have one drawback: a lack of high mechanical strength. There
are some methods to make glasses stronger such as rapid cooling called tempering
which is used to make stronger window glasses or the ion-exchange method which
is used to make stronger touch screen for smart phones. However, these methods
are not applicable to all glasses and cannot be used, for example, to make
stronger silica glass optical fibers. A new glass strengthening method, which
can be used for all types of glasses, is
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Water vapor in the atmosphere
can affect the glass surface characteristics. When a glass is subjected to a
tensile stress below the critical stress which can break the glass, at an
appropriate temperature below the glass transition temperature, some of the
surface tensile stress is relaxed by the influence of moisture. When the applied
tensile stress is removed, the surface of the glass acquires a residual
compressive stress. The resulting glass sample is stronger than before, because
a greater tensile stress is required, in order to overcome the generated surface
compressive stress, to break the glass. By clarifying mechanism by which water
promotes surface stress relaxation and controls the kinetics of surface residual
stress generation, an optimum temperature, time, tensile stress, and moisture
content can be chosen to produce high strength glasses. Specifically, the
magnitude of a sub-micrometer thick surface residual stress in silica glass
optical fiber, produced by heating under a tensile stress and water vapor, can
be estimated by using both the bending of sliced fibers as well as FTIR
reflection spectroscopy and the result compared with the measured mechanical
strength of the fibers. Furthermore, the proposed mechanism of glass
strengthening can explain some long-standing mysteries in glass science. For
example, a crack in a glass can grow under a low tensile stress. However, when
the glass was first subjected to a low tensile stress, one which does not cause
crack growth, and then subjected to the original tensile stress, the crack does
not grow. Apparently, the glass became stronger by a sub-critical tensile stress
application, but no convincing explanation exists at the present. In this
research two graduate students and two undergraduates are trained on this
research topic which combines exploration of the science and technology of
glasses.