* 1265610
* Conference on Metric Geometry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2014
* USD 35,900.00

The University of Notre Dame will host the Conference on Metric Geometry and
Applications during March 14-17, 2013. The objective of the conference is to
provide a forum for the presentation, exchange and discussion of new ideas and
directions in the broad area of metric geometry and its interface with other
areas. Another goal of the conference is to provide an informal setting for
graduate students and younger researchers in the USA to learn of the newest
trends and interact with prominent geometers and geometric analysts. The topics
treated at the conference are at the core of metric geometry and its impact on
other areas such as comparison geometry, Alexandrov geometry, and geometric
analysis with emphasis on geometric flows and complex geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The abstract notion of distance has always played an
important role in mathematics and applications. During the last few decades
geometry and analysis in this general setting has witnessed dramatic
developments and in turn is playing an increasingly important role in many areas
of mathematics. The topics to be treated at the conference represent vibrant and
growing fields with strong interactions to large classical areas in geometry and
analysis. The strong field of speakers include several of the best contemporary
researchers in these areas, and their work has opened up new and important
avenues of investigation. Besides providing and opportunity for senior
researchers to exchange ideas and discuss important new results and directions,
another equally important goal of the conference is to foster interaction among
graduate students from different universities. Graduate students and junior
researchers have much to gain from being exposed to the most recent research
problems and from contact with students and faculty from universities other than
their own. Participation at such an event could trigger interesting thesis
projects, or suggest new ideas for ongoing research. The conference website can
be found at http://nd.edu/~conf/mga13/.