* 1265593
* Emergent Behavior of Microscopic Model Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Steven Kivelson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to address long-standing fundamental problems concerning the emergent
properties of correlated electron fluids using well-controlled methods of
theoretical physics. The PI will investigate properties of electronic systems
through a careful analysis of the behavior of simplified models of interacting
electrons defined at the lattice scale. The PI will explore generic properties
of interacting electronic systems and also attempt to gain insights into
material specific features of strongly correlated electronic systems through the
inclusion of salient features of the electronic structure of interesting
materials. The PI will pursue a three-pronged approach:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
The PI will study the behavior of simplified models of interacting electrons in
the weak-coupling limit where controlled, perturbative renormalization group
calculations are possible and asymptotically exact results can be obtained. In
order to broaden the scope of the physics accessible by these methods, fine-
tuned electronic structures will be investigated. This amounts to studying the
properties of the phases and phase transitions in the vicinity of quantum
multicritical point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Near a quantum critical point,
electronic properties can often be described by a quantum field theory. A
particularly successful use of quantum field theory in correlated electron
systems has been the use of Chern-Simons Landau Ginzberg theory to describe
quantum Hall systems. This approach implies a profound analogy between the
properties of quantum Hall systems and the properties of superconductors. The PI
will study the justification and limits of applicability of the Chern-Simons
Landau Ginzberg theory, and further explore the consequences of the implied
analogy between superconductors and quantum Hall
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Specific aspects of the properties of certain
correlated materials can be addressed in terms of models that capture some
essential feature of their local electronic structure. The goal is mainly to
gain insights into the physics of one experimentally interesting material or
another. A good example is provided by the newly discovered antiferromagnetic
insulating state of Cs3C60; because it is insulating, it can be studied by
expanding about a Mott insulating state in which the number of electrons on each
C60 molecule is fixed by the effective Hubbard interaction. Understanding which
further interactions dominate in this strongly correlated limit, and how they
determine the nature of the ordered states may shed light on the interactions
that give rise to superconductivity of this material under pressure, and in the
broader family of superconducting materials A3C60, where A is any of a number of
alkali metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the properties of correlated
electron fluids may lead to the ability to exploit novel materials properties to
develop new devices and technologies that derive their operating principles from
the novel phases and phase competitions that occur in highly correlated electron
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education with an aim to advance understanding of materials with electrons that
interact strongly with each other giving rise to new states of electronic matter
with interesting and unusual properties. The broad thrust of this research is to
gain insights into the nature of the states of electronic matter that emerge in
strongly interacting materials. The PI will use simplified models for electrons
in materials to examine the relationship between solutions obtained from
controlled theoretical methods that assume that electrons are effectively weakly
interacting to results obtained by various other methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is one kind of emergent state of matter
which is characterized by the ability of conduct electricity without resistance
or loss of energy. The PI will explore an interesting connection between the
fundamental physics of superconductors and the seemingly very different state of
matter known as the quantum Hall effect. The quantum Hall effect arises when a
two-dimensional layer of electrons, which can exist in an artificially layered
semiconductor material, is exposed to a perpendicular magnetic field. The PI
aims to exploit knowledge of superconductivity to gain new insights into the
fundamental physics of the quantum Hall effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
also investigate the superconducting state that emerges in a material composed
of the element cesium and a molecule of carbon containing 60 atoms which
exhibits superconductivity under pressure. Experiments reveal properties that
are qualitatively similar to those of the high temperature superconductors and
other materials with strongly interacting electrons. The PI's study of this
recently discovered superconductor may lead to insights into the nature of
superconductivity in the high temperature
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the properties of correlated electron
fluids may lead to the ability to exploit novel materials properties to develop
new devices and technologies that derive their operating principles from the
novel phases and phase competitions that occur in highly correlated electron
fluids.