* 1265491
* SusChEM: New Strategies for Catalytic Couplings, Cycloadditions, and Redox Conversions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* John Montgomery, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John Montgomery of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Michigan will explore the development of methods for transition
metal-catalyzed couplings and cycloadditions. Strategies will be developed that
enable carbonyl-activated substrates to be utilized in couplings, with
deoxygenation occurring during the coupling process. New strategies for the
cycloaddition assembly of five-membered rings will also be pursued, with a focus
on multicomponent coupling processes. By the proposed strategies, the
combination of three simple and widely available components will provide access
to a range of structurally complex carbocycles. While some aspects of the
specific aims will allow a comparative analysis of nickel and palladium
catalysts, the majority of efforts will involve the utilization of inexpensive
and readily available nickel catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
provide insights into the use of first row metals for the catalytic assembly of
complex structures from simple and readily available substrates. New strategies
for the development of environmentally benign catalytic processes will be
elucidated by these studies. The advances from these studies could be applied to
research questions in the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, agricultural, polymer,
and petroleum industries. The students engaged in these studies will obtain
skills that will enable them to be productive members of these industries or in
academic positions at large universities or undergraduate institutions. Student
coworkers with an interest in small college academic positions will be given the
opportunity to develop collaborative projects with faculty at neighboring
institutions.