* 1265070
* Fitting Time-Varying Queueing Models to Service System Data:  Accounting for Dependence in the Arrival and Service Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Ward Whitt, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2017
* USD 359,999.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods to fit time-varying
non-Markovian multi-server queueing models to data from healthcare systems and
customer contact centers, so that the models can be used to analyze and improve
the performance; e.g., to set staffing levels. Complex models are needed
because: the arrival rates typically vary significantly over time; there is
often customer abandonment, which significantly alters performance; service
times and customer patience times are usually not exponentially distributed;
finally, service systems often need to be represented as a network of queues.
Special attention will be given to stochastic variability caused by dependence
in the arrival and service processes as well as non-exponential distributions
and the time-varying arrival rates. Such dependence can be caused by network
structure, including overflows from one queue to another when the first is
congested, as occurs in the different wards of a hospital. The dependence
("burstiness") in overflow processes has been found to have a big impact upon
performance in telecommunication networks. Estimation will be guided by many-
server heavy-traffic limits, revealing key partial characterizations of the
model needed to analyze and improve the performance.

If successful, the results of this research will provide the basis for new
methods and tools to fit stochastic models to service system data. These models
will provide the basis for new methods and tools to design and manage large-
scale service systems, such as healthcare systems and customer contact centers,
for which there is a recognized need for new methods to improve capacity
planning and operational control. The models are also relevant for many other
applications, e.g., web server farms processing web-page requests, public
housing authorities providing apartments to low-income tenants and financial
back offices processing loan applications. Successful results can contribute to
better ways to select capacity levels in design decisions and better ways to
select staffing levels and to route and schedule customers in operational
decisions. Nonstandard methods for treating time-varying arrivals are especially
important when service times are relatively long, as in healthcare.