* 1265545
* RUI-Benzannulated antiaromatic dications and dianions: using antiaromaticity to probe delocalization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Nancy Mills, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Nancy Mills of Trinity University will
examine the factors that affect delocalization by modification of antiaromatic
dications and dianions. Antiaromatic species have been shown to be more
sensitive to factors affecting delocalization because of their inherent tendency
to avoid delocalization which results in an increase in antiaromaticity. For
example, by annulation of a variety of polycyclic aromatic compounds to a
cyclopentadienyl cation, the tension between the energetic advantages of
delocalization of positive charge versus the stability from the intact
polycyclic aromatic compound can be probed. Antiaromatic dianions are also
accessible experimentally. Initial studies suggest that they are more
antiaromatic than corresponding dications. Varying the position of
benzannulation of a cycloheptatrienyl anionic system can again result in
differences in antiaromaticity through differences in patterns of
delocalization.

Stability is one of the most important concepts in chemistry because all
chemical reactions result in making the most stable molecules possible. There is
a class of compounds, called antiaromatic, which have been suggested by theory
to be particularly unstable. Needless to say, these compounds have not been
carefully studied because of the anticipated difficulty in making them. However,
a suite of these compounds was discovered in an attempt to make something else
and have proven to be much easier to make and study than anticipated. Because
they are still relatively unstable, they turn out to be very sensitive to
changes in their structure. Just as some changes in a physical structure, like a
house or an automobile, might be hard to see in the dim light of dusk, but be
very visible in daylight, changes that are hard to understand in a molecular
structure that is stable, become very visible in a less stable, antiaromatic
compound. These studies will be carried out by undergraduate students, with an
emphasis on students just beginning their study of chemistry. By engaging these
students in research early in their academic career, they are in a better
position to learn what aspects of science interest them the most, and to make
choices in coursework to support that interest. They will be aided by post-
doctoral researchers who are interested in teaching undergraduate students as a
career. The workforce development inherent in training undergraduates and
prospective faculty is the primary broader impact of the grant.