* 1265789
* Mechanisms and Mitigation of Shrinkage and Carbonation in Alkali-Activated Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Aleksandra Radlinska, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 305,507.00

Alkali activated concretes (AACs) are promising green alternatives to
conventional portland cement concrete, as they offer significant energy and CO2
savings that results from full (100%) replacement of portland cement with
industrial waste products. However, these materials have not yet received broad
industry acceptance, primarily due to their uncertain long-term durability
performance against shrinkage/cracking, carbonation/corrosion, and alkali-
aggregate reaction. The objectives of this work are to (1) advance the knowledge
on the causes and mechanisms of shrinkage and carbonation of AACs at multiple
length-scales, and (2) utilize this new knowledge to propose and evaluate
effective mitigation strategies to promote production of high performance AAC
materials. Three main alkali activated binders with vastly different
compositions will be studied; a Ca-rich slag-based AAC, an Al-rich class F fly
ash-based AAC, and a composite slag-fly ash binder, containing moderate levels
of both Ca and Al. A novel research approach is proposed where the macro-scale
shrinkage and carbonation performance is quantitatively linked to the material?s
microstructure and phase-specific compositions and properties. This approach is
based on integrating advanced characterization techniques (e.g., FIB, nano-
indentation, NMR, SEM/EDS/ QXRD) with object oriented FEM simulations; and
allows identifying the optimum material proportioning and processing practices
that result in stable phase formation, and low risk of shrinkage and
carbonation, without compromising strength and other performance requirements.
In addition, chemical speciation modeling is used to design novel admixtures to
reduce carbonation and to induce expansive reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research outcomes can be extremely beneficial towards improving the performance
of alkali activated concretes, as well as portland cement and other alternative
concrete materials. The research is well integrated with educational plans,
including (a) outreach, recruitment, and retention of female and minority
students in civil engineering education, research, and careers, and (b)
providing a world-class research and teaching experience for graduate and
undergraduate students. In addition, this work will contribute to engineering
education literature by developing active learning and innovative student-
centered instructional methods, and assessing the effectiveness of such methods
in improving learning, engagement, and retention of students.&lt;br/&gt;