* 1265428
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:  Electrical conductivity of deformed partially molten rocks: Implications for upper mantle structure and dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2017
* USD 214,605.00

This project is a laboratory investigation of the electrical conductivity of
deformed partially molten rocks to help understand the mechanisms by which plate
tectonics operates. The motion of rigid plates that comprise Earth's lithosphere
relative to the underlying convecting mantle is thought to promote the formation
of sheared rock and/or partially molten zones beneath the lithosphere. This
deformation has been suggested to explain geophysical anomalies detected at
depths below the lithosphere, such as zones of high electrical conductivity and
low seismic velocity. Partial melt is known to redistribute under shear into a
texture in which melt is focused into bands with a strong preferred orientation
in the direction of the shearing. The proposed experiments are designed to
determine the manner in which the electrical conductivity of deformed partially
molten mantle rocks varies with shear and orientation. The results will provide
information that helps to understand the mechanisms of coupling of lithospheric
plates with the underlying mantle and the processes that govern plate tectonics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will involve multidisciplinary investigation of
the electrical conductivity signature, in terms of both magnitude and anisotropy
relative to the shear direction, of partially molten mantle rocks deformed to
high shear strain combined with correlation to field electrical measurements.
Melt spatial arrangement in partially molten materials in the upper mantle can
result in highly anisotropic geophysical signatures when the materials are
deformed to high shear strains. The evolution of melt structure in shear
experiments, promoting formation of melt-rich bands, is expected to have
significant effects on both bulk conductivity and electrical anisotropy, but
such effects have not been fully experimentally investigated. Deformed partially
molten samples in the olivine-melt system will be synthesized and electrical
conductivity measurements will be performed on prepared sections of these
samples, oriented with respect to the maximum applied shear stress, under sub-
and super-solidus conditions. Melt compositions will include anhydrous, hydrous
and carbonate-bearing melts. The effects of temperature, compaction length and
total shear strain will be investigated. Samples will be characterized in 2-D
with optical and electron microscopy and in 3-D by synchrotron x-ray tomography.
Electrical measurements will be combined with the textural characterization of
the samples to develop geometry-based conductivity models as a function of
physical and chemical parameters. We will apply our conductivity models to
interpret field electrical data. These results will help constrain the nature of
and processes in the asthenosphere.