* 1265899
* Advancing Understanding of the Tornado Vortex through Numerical Simulations of Increasing Complexity and Evaluation of Observing Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* David Nolan, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 464,340.00

Detailed understanding of the structure and variability of winds in the core of
tornadoes remains incomplete. While recent advances in observational technology
(particularly Doppler radars) have revealed the inner-core structure of the
primary tangential circulation, large uncertainties remain regarding the
secondary (radial and vertical) circulations, and there remains a paucity of
information concerning flow near the surface (below 50 meters) where most of the
inflow to tornadoes resides. Previous simulations of tornado-producing
supercells portray believable, detailed structures of the tornado near the
surface, but their inherent complexity has inhibited understanding of the most
basic dynamics of tornadoes. Simpler tornado-chamber-type simulations facilitate
understanding, but almost all previous simulations have used prescribed inflow
and outflow boundary conditions that preclude interactions between the tornado
and the larger environment that creates it. The research in this project will
bridge the gaps between theory (primarily from highly idealized, low-Reynolds-
number, axisymmetric simulations), aforementioned storm-scale simulations that
are far more complex, and observations (which always have limited spatial and
temporal coverage). A widely-used numerical model (CM1) will be used to perform
simulations of tornado-like vortices of increasing complexity, ranging from
axisymmetric simulations with no-slip lower boundary conditions and constant
eddy viscosity to three-dimensional large eddy simulation (LES) with realistic
surface roughness. In addition, select high resolution direct numerical
simulations (DNS) will be used to assess the accuracy of subgrid turbulence
parameterizations, especially near the surface. Output from these simulations
will also be used to assess the extent to which current (and perhaps future)
instruments and analysis procedures are capable of reconstructing three-
dimensional wind fields from limited observational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this effort will include improved
assessment of the near-surface wind fields of tornadoes as a function of vortex
size, intensity, and over different surface conditions, which will in-turn help
to guide the collection analysis of data from past and future field campaigns.
The extent to which data obtained from recent field campaigns (such as VORTEX2)
can accurately diagnose tornado wind fields will be evaluated, leading to better
analyses of data from past campaigns and better designs for future campaigns.
The project will support education mentoring and career development of a post-
doctoral fellow.