* 1265755
* Bottom-up Design of the Next Generation of Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* April Kloxin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 03/31/2014
* USD 4,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research in
support of the 2013 American Chemical Society Spring Meeting titled "Bottom-up
Design of the Next Generation of Biomaterials" is cofunded by the Interfacial
Processes and Thermodynamics Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. This symposium as part of
the Division of Polymer Chemistry program will focus on four specific areas
related to the bottom-up design of polymeric biomaterials: 1) novel approaches
to synthesis and characterization; 2) design and application for drug and gene
delivery; 3) design and application in tissue engineering; and 4) design and
application for probing biological systems. The planned sessions are expected to
provide recent advances in the bottom-up design, synthesis and characterization;
and application of polymeric biomaterials for understanding and directing
biological systems. This three-day symposium would offer a forum to highlight
the recent developments in the field, and to facilitate discussion of what
chemical, physical, and mechanical properties are needed for specific biological
applications, and how to achieve these through bottom-up design approaches and
novel chemistries. This conference would be of broad interest to researchers in
chemistry, polymer chemistry, material sciences, bioengineering, biology, and
medicine. In addition, this is expected to facilitate a dialogue among polymer
scientists, chemists, bioengineers, and biologists to further the design and
application of biomaterials through networking and the open exchange of
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium is expected to educate both the
biomaterials and chemical communities in the highly relevant area on
interdisciplinary research (chemistry, biochemistry, analytical science,
materials science, and physics). In addition, this will discuss the latest
developments, challenges and opportunities in the area of biomaterials and
biological materials and their interactions. The planned sessions offer a forum
to highlight recent developments in the field, and to facilitate discussion of
what chemical, physical, and mechanical properties are needed for specific
biological applications and how to achieve these through bottom-up design
approaches and novel chemistries. Organizers expect this conference to be of
broad interest to researchers in polymer chemistry, organic chemistry,
bioengineering, biology, and medicine. Additionally, this conference will be
showcasing the advances of interdisciplinary investigators while training young
scientists of the next generation. Furthermore, this will be providing
nucleation points for new research avenues and fostering the development of the
next generation of researchers and educators.