* 1265044
* Spore-Based Designer Enzyme Cascade Biocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Ashok Mulchandani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 364,000.00

Abstract: The creation of value-added products such as fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals by chemical transformations has resulted in significant
improvements in the quality of life we have been enjoying. Many of these
chemical transformation processes use catalysts. These catalysts may be
inorganic or biological in nature. Enzyme catalysts would be widely utilized to
perform these chemical transformation processes, as they frequently offer
advantages of high yield, high selectivity, high product purity, along with
operation at ambient temperature and pressure in aqueous environment at moderate
pH. However, many biocatalytic reactions involve expensive co-enzymes or co-
factors and their recycling is essential for the processes to be cost-effective.
This turns out to be a difficult or expensive process step, thereby limiting the
ability to gain the advantages of using enzyme catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Principal investigators Xin Ge and Ashok Mulchandani from the
University of California Riverside looked to cellular reactions in nature to
develop an approach to circumvent this issue. Inspired by the substrate
channeling phenomena seen in multi-enzyme cascades in nature for circumventing
unfavorable thermodynamics and kinetics, the PIs will explore the development of
a modular designer biocatalyst platform on the surface of spores, where enzyme
cascade is spatially organized with tunable stoichiometry to achieve highly
efficient cofactor regeneration. The enzyme system is easy to produce and reuse,
and has high stability. The modular nature of the system will allow easy
insertion of the genes of the desired enzymes and control of the stoichiometric
ratios on the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project
is significant as it will lead to development of a novel robust modular platform
for designer biocatalysts to address the needs of chemicals and pharmaceuticals
manufacturing. A number of applications are readily envisioned. The improved
catalysts and processes will increase US technological competitiveness.
Collectively, the benefits from this research will support efficient, economical
and green engineering production of many fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. In
addition, the PIs plan activities which will develop a globally competitive and
divergent STEM workforce through the increased participation of women and
underrepresented minorities. UC Riverside is the minority serving institution
with the largest Hispanic student population among all UC campuses. The
investigators plan to hire minority graduate and undergraduate students as
research assistants for this project. The investigators also plan new curriculum
efforts and are collaborating with a local middle school to establish an
interactive science program titled Bio- catalysis for clean fuels.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Most oxidoreductase enzymes involved in specialty chemical synthesis
utilize expensive pyridine nucleotides as cofactors for catalysis. These enzyme
catalytic processes have shortcomings in terms of cofactor recycling that limit
total turnover number and productivity yields. The goal of the proposed research
is to develop a modular designer biocatalyst platform for highly efficient
cofactor regeneration. Inspired by the substrate channeling phenomena observed
in nature and other studies of engineered multienzyme cascades and mini-
cellulosomes, the scaffoldin- cohesin - dockerin system will be used to build a
spatially organized multienzyme complex designed for highly efficient cofactor
regeneration. This enzyme complex will consist of proximally located producing
and regenerating dehydrogenases in desired stoichiometry on a selected surface
to allow channeling of oxidized cofactor from the producing dehydrogenase to the
regenerating dehydrogenases and vice versa, solving the regeneration problems.
Because of their formidable resistance to extremes of temperatures, pH,
solvents, humidity and radiations, bacterial spores will serve as the surface
display for the enzyme cascade. Various control and reference experiments will
be carried out for the typical synthesis reaction of ketone reduction to
alcohol, and the enzyme coupled regeneration of the cofactor will be
demonstrated in both aqueous and nonaqueous media. Extensive characterization
and catalytic performance assessments are planned by the PIs. This information
will be published and available for investigators of other biocatalytic
applications.