* 1265721
* Computing and Engineering Research Experiences for Teachers of STEM (CERTS) Program
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Sheri Sheppard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2017
* USD 487,500.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Stanford University, entitled, "Computing and Engineering Research
Experiences for Teachers of STEM (CERTS) Program", under the direction of Dr.
Sheri D. Sheppard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new CERTS Program enhances
and extends the earlier Stanford Engineering Research Experiences for Teachers
(SERET) Program and creates enduring partnerships between San Francisco area
STEM teachers in grades 6-12 and Stanford faculty and graduate students. CERTS
will expose 39 teachers, and through them, their students, to engineering and
computing disciplines and the ways science and math curricula relate to and
support basic engineering and computing concepts. The goal of CERTS is to
increase the interest and proficiency in STEM among middle and high school
students by providing: 1) 8-week authentic summer research experiences for STEM
teachers in Stanford engineering and computer science labs and centers under the
direct supervision of faculty or graduate student mentors: 2) Exposure to a
diversity of engineering and computer science disciplines and applications
through weekly faculty talks, seminars and lab training sessions at Stanford; 3)
Curriculum development assistance through one-on-one coaching, workshops and
seminars delivered weekly during the summer and periodically during the academic
year: 4) Dissemination of new lessons and teaching materials via various
community websites and teacher attendance at a prestigious national conference;
and 5) Assessment of the program's effectiveness through surveys, and an
extensive external evaluaton that includes surveys, interviews, and
observational case studies of the effects of CERTS in teachers' classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These collaborations address the national need to identify
and nurture the next generation of high-achieving STEM innovators, especially in
the disciplines of engineering and computing that drive U.S. innovation and
global competitiveness. CERTS will create a revitalized and re-tooled teaching
"infrastructure" that stimulates, inspires and invigorates educators to
effectively guide their students toward computing and engineering-related post-
secondary study and careers.