* 1265816
* Agriculture and Empire in the High-Altitude Atacama Desert
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Frances Hayashida, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 05/31/2016
* USD 68,345.00

This award will support a new collaboration between the principal investigator
and researchers from Chile (Diego Salazar and Andres Troncoso, University of
Chile) and Spain (Cesar Parcero-Oubina, U. of Santiago de Compostela, Spain) to
study irrigation agriculture in pre-colonial Chile. The highlands of the Atacama
Desert were conquered by the Inca in the 15th century to take control of the
mineral wealth of the region. It is hypothesized that the changes in
administration and population distribution were accompanied by the
reorganization and expansion of irrigation agriculture to provision laborers and
other personnel. It is further suggested that the appropriation of water and the
new emphasis on tributary production would have resulted in the reorganization
of local communities, as existing economic and social relations were transformed
by increasing state control. In order to test these ideas, the international
research team will initiate data collection in the Atacama region, including (1)
detailed mapping of the study sites and associated fields and canals, with
systematic observations of surface artifacts and architecture to detect changes
in water management, field systems, and site organization through time, (2)
geological survey to assess the geomorphic and hydrological contexts of the
canal systems, (3) collection of samples from the canals and fields to test
dating techniques, and (4) collection of archaeobotanical samples at both sites
to assess the preservation of crops and associated wild plants and to begin
their identification. &lt;br/&gt;Participating researchers will bring
complementary skills and training to this international and interdisciplinary
effort. The collaborators from Chile and Spain, funded by other sources, will
direct the site mapping and study of surface remains. U.S. scientists will
direct the geological reconnaissance and the collection of samples for dating
and botanical analysis. Students from the U.S. and Chile will participate and
work together in all stages of the research.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate how economic decisions made at distant centers of power affect the
landscapes and lives of local farmers, particularly where water is a scarce
resource. Archaeology provides a long-term, historical perspective on the
relationship between water, land, politics, and society. The research will also
contribute to Inca archaeology and to comparative studies of ancient empires.
The award will catalyze a long-term, international and interdisciplinary
collaboration between scholars from Chile, the U.S. and Spain, and their
students. At the University of New Mexico, a Hispanic-Serving Institution with a
large enrollment of Hispanic and Native Americans, students will receive
training and mentoring opportunities through the project, and will work closely
with their international peers. Research results will be shared with local
descendant communities and will be broadly disseminated to the general public
and to professional audiences in both English and Spanish.