* 1265375
* Harmonic measures in approximation and orthogonal polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Vilmos Totik, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 98,113.00

This is a three-year project in classical analysis that focuses, in particular,
on approximation theory and orthogonal polynomials. A common unifying theme is
the appearance of harmonic measures in various problems to be investigated, as
well as the use of fast decreasing (Dirac-delta-like) polynomials to merge local
approximants so as to create global ones. The applications include universality
results in random matrix theory, various polynomial inequalities, and a domain
reconstruction procedure based on Christoffel functions. Other parts of the
project are related to nonclassical orthogonal polynomials/Christoffel
functions, to polynomial approximation in several variables, and to developing
new tools (based on fast decreasing polynomials) for their study. The
intellectual merit lies in achieving a better understanding of the role of
harmonic measures in approximation theory and orthogonal polynomials, as well as
in the manifestation of the usefulness of fast decreasing polynomials in various
areas of mathematics somewhat remote from the main topic of the project. For
example, upon successful completion of the project the Principal Investigator
will have a characterization (in terms of smoothness) of the rate of polynomial
approximation on general convex domains, which will close a classical line of
research going back more than half a century. The techniques to be applied will
include systematic usage of harmonic analysis in approximation theory, thereby
offering new tools in the latter field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have broader impact beyond approximation theory and orthogonal
polynomials, for the results are relevant to other branches of mathematics,
physics, and engineering. For example, various forms of the so-called
universality conjecture have originated from studies in theoretical and
statistical physics, studies that showed a certain universal local behavior that
was independent of the original quantities describing the given system. In some
form the mathematical formulation translates into a fine local behavior of
orthogonal polynomials, and the proposal offers a tool to study this fine
behavior and to prove rigorously universality under general conditions. Another
area where the proposed research on orthogonal polynomials has broader impact is
domain/shape reconstruction from scanned data (MRI-type scans). A recent method
is based on area-generated orthogonal polynomials, but that method assumed that
the domain to be reconstructed was without holes/cavities (information that may
not be true or may not be known in advance). The present proposal lays the
theoretical foundation for a modification of the method applying to domains that
may have holes. By a relatively simple iteration, the algorithm will not only
reconstruct the outer boundary of the domain (the original goal), but it will
actually allow the reconstruction of the inner holes as well. Broader impacts of
the research also include stimulating interest in undergraduates and mathematics
majors and enhancing the research environment for them. Graduate and Ph.D.
students will have the opportunity to learn the basic results and techniques of
several different disciplines, as well as their interrelations. Special emphasis
will be made in outreach to the general public. This will be achieved by
publishing educational articles connected with the research, thereby offering
understanding and appreciation for science. Relevant lectures will be held at
different levels from undergraduate societies to professionals meetings.