* 1265674
* SusChEM: New Chemistry with Transition Metal-Main Group Compounds - Structure, Reactivity and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2016
* USD 560,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor T. Don Tilley and his research group in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley, will conduct fundamental
studies of structure, bonding, and reactivity in new transition metal-main group
complexes, with a particular focus on complexes with silylene ligands,
LnM=SiRR'. This research is designed to provide an understanding of the
mechanism and scope of a new type of hydrosilation reaction discovered in this
program. This work will guide the way to more challenging catalytic
hydrosilation substrates, and to other catalytic systems that utilize cost-
effective, earth-abundant metals such as iron, cobalt and nickel. Efficient
catalysis with first row metals is a pervasive theme attracting strong interest
in the research and industrial catalysis communities, and it is therefore
important to learn how such catalysts may operate.

Broader impacts of this research relate to its development of new strategies for
chemical conversions having potential applications in drug development, polymer
and materials synthesis, and the large-scale production of value-added
chemicals. The proposed basic research will contribute to the knowledge base
chemists use to design new catalytic reactions that will contribute to
sustainability. Furthermore, the proposed research is well suited for the
training of young scientists. In addition, the PI and students involved in this
project regularly participate in and lead outreach activities, such as the
training of local high school students and presenting science demonstrations at
a local middle school. Notably, a collaborative effort within the research group
involves planning and presenting science lessons to grade school students. Group
members travel to nearby elementary schools (at least two each month) and teach
basic scientific principles, hoping to improve early STEM education and
encourage budding scientists.