* 1265396
* SusChEM: Expanding Reductive Chemistry with the Rare Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2016
* USD 560,999.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division,, Professor William J. Evans of the Department of Chemistry of the
University of California, Irvine, and his students will utilize the unique
properties of the rare earth metals, i.e., the lanthanides, yttrium, and
scandium, to explore new aspects of redox chemistry, i.e., the
reduction/oxidation reactions that constitute one of the two most general
classes of chemical reactions. Because the rare earth metals represent extremes
in the periodic table due to their unusual physical properties, they are an
excellent set of elements for expanding the limits of this fundamental reaction
type. The chemistry of the (N2)3- and (NO)2- radicals, new reduced forms of
diatomic molecules of biological, industrial, and atmospheric significance that
were discovered via the rare earths, will be examined. The reasons why (N2)3- is
so effective in forming single molecule magnets with the highest blocking
temperatures known to date will be pursued. The reactivity and physical
properties of seven new rare earth oxidation states, the divalent cations of Y,
Ho, Er, Tb, Pr, Gd, and Lu, discovered while exploring the reductive reactions
that generated the anionic radicals above, will also be examined. In addition,
the recent discovery of reductive photochemistry for rare earth complexes, found
in a reaction powerful enough to reduce dinitrogen to the anion (N=N)2-, will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because redox reactions are central to so many
processes in life and are critical to processes important in global
sustainability such as solar water splitting and dinitrogen reduction, this
research can have a broad impact on science and technology. More specifically,
the reductive rare earth metal based discovery of the (N2)3- and (NO)2- radical
anions has implications in biological, industrial, and atmospheric dinitrogen
and nitrogen oxide chemistry. The (N2)3- radical also has demonstrated a new
approach to the synthesis of single molecule magnets, entities that could have
far-reaching implications in energy utilization and data storage. In general,
this project allows the exploration of an under-developed set of elements, the
rare earth metals, which are a valuable national resource with many
technological applications, while providing training to students in f element
chemistry that is essential to addressing issues associated with radioactive
waste disposal while training the next generation of students in this field.