* 1266105
* Theory and Modeling of Specific Ion Solvation in Water and Non-Aqueous Solvents with Applications to Energy Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Thomas Beck of the University of Cincinnati is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to carry out
theoretical and computational studies of specific ion or Hofmeister effects in
water and non-aqueous solvents. A range of theoretical tools, including free
energy partitioning methods such as the quasichemical theory and the local
molecular field theory, is being employed to explore specific ion solvation in
complex environments. Three general problems are addressed: 1) computation of
ion hydration free energies at the quantum mechanical level 2) detailed analysis
of the Law of Matching Water Affinities by free energy partitioning and 3)
fundamental studies of ion solvation in non-aqueous solvents such as ethylene
carbonate and propylene carbonate with application to energy storage in lithium-
ion batteries and supercapacitors. Both classical and high-level quantum methods
are utilized in partitioning the interactions into local and far-field
components, with a particular focus on charge rearrangements and the various
contributions to the interaction energies (electrostatics, induction,
dispersion, and charge transfer).

Beck and his research group use detailed computational modeling to understand
the specfic behavior of ions in solution. Minor changes in the properties of an
ion such as size or polarizability can have major effects on behavior. A
thorough understanding of specific ion solvation phenomena has broad impacts in
a range of fields including solution phase chemistry, biophysics, and
sustainable energy storage. In addition, extensive examples from these important
areas are included in both core undergraduate and graduate courses and special
topics courses aimed at computational chemists. The PI is active in the
development of a new curriculum for the Ralph Regula School of Computational
Science in Ohio, and in mentoring under-represented undergraduates during their
capstone research projects. A new overview course on Chemistry for Sustainable
Energy is under development (aimed at a broad range of chemistry, physics, and
engineering students), as well as a web-available set of active-learning modules
for stimulating understanding of basic physical chemical principles.