* 1266295
* Collaborative Research: Multifunctional Nanocomposites with Reversible Switch and Controlled Release Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Liming Dai, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2016
* USD 180,482.00

Research Objective and Approach &lt;br/&gt;This research is a fundamental study
on surface switching and self-cleaning/release mechanisms and the development of
new design concepts for manufacturing nanocomposite-based switchable surfaces.
In this project, new multifunctional nanomaterials with surface switching, self-
cleaning and controlled release on demand will be created. The nanocomposite
materials and the associated surface dynamic behavior will be characterized
quantitatively at the nanoscale. In addition, a multiscale modeling at atomistic
and micromechanics scales is proposed to interpret experimental results and to
address how the physical, chemical and structural properties of nanomaterials
can be translated into enhanced switching performance. The modeling and
experiment will be integrated to link the nanoscale phenomena to macroscopic
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to society &lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the benefits of this research will include a fundamental understanding of
switching mechanisms for the design and development of optimized materials with
better performance of practical significance. The success of the project will
also advance a large variety of other applications, ranging from simple consumer
products to complex technological systems with surface switching and self-
cleaning/release properties. This collaborative research effort will impact the
scientific and industrial communities to understand an array of materials and
surface technologies. The major research outcome of this project is a technical
platform for the development of next generation switchable surfaces.
Furthermore, both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
emerging and interdisciplinary research. Research and education efforts will be
disseminated through conference presentations and scholarly publications that
will be beneficial to the scientific community and our society.