* 1266088
* Investigation of Electro-Plastic Effect on Advanced High Strength Steels and Its Application in Friction Stir Joining of Dissimilar Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 199,662.00

This grant provides funding for a comprehensive investigation of the electro-
plastic effect on advanced high strength steels and its potential applications
to the friction stir joining processes. In this research, microstructure
analysis will be carried out to understand the underlying mechanism of electro-
plastic effect. Basic stress strain model will be established with regard to
strain rate and current parameters. An energy coefficient considering the ratio
of the reduced deformation energy to the total electrical energy input will be
introduced. In addition, an advanced hybrid friction stir joining process will
be developed for the joining of dissimilar materials utilizing the above-
mentioned electro-plastic effect. The materials to be joined include advanced
high strength steels and aluminum alloys. Experimental results will be analyzed
considering both process parameters and joint quality and a Finite Element Model
will also be developed to predict the downward force during the hybrid friction
stir joining process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results from this
research will lead to optimized designs of new joining processes for dissimilar
materials. Dissimilar materials with high specific strength, such as aluminum
alloys, magnesium alloys and advanced high strength steels, are being
increasingly used in vehicle structures to reduce the weight of vehicles without
sacrificing desired performance due to the growing challenge of improving fuel
economy. Joining of these dissimilar materials presents a significant technical
challenge. This research will greatly widen the applications of electro-plastic
effects into various manufacturing processes, including traditional machining
and forming etc. The proposed work will also contribute to the modeling and
experimental tools available for characterizing electro-plastic effects and
hybrid friction stir processes.