* 1266217
* Synthesis And Structure-Function Relationships In Ferecrystals: New Compounds Poised Between The Crystalline And Amorphous States
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 590,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The synthesis of new inorganic compounds with designed
extended structures is one of the grand challenges in materials research. This
project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, will use a
newly developed synthetic strategy to prepare ferecrystals (from Latin fere,
meaning almost), new materials that are poised between the crystalline and
amorphous states. Ferecrystals have been shown to have unusual properties - the
lowest thermal conductivity ever reported for a fully dense solid, charge
density wave and other charge localization phenomena, and superconductivity. The
focus of this effort is to examine the dependence of electrical properties and
charge density wave transitions on nanostructure (n, m and different layer
sequences with the same number of constituent layers in each unit cell) in
[(MSe)1+d]m[TSe2]n compounds, which contain rock salt structured MSe
constituents where M is Sn, Pb, Bi or a rare earth metal interleaved with
transition metal diselenides, TSe2, where T is V, Nb, or Ta. n and m denote the
number of layers of each constituent and d denotes the degree of misfit in the
a-b plane between the components. It will be determined how properties and
structure of the constituents change within a series of structural isomers, how
changing the layer thickness from below to above the length scale of the charge
depletion region affects stability, and how charge transfer affects carrier
concentrations as the ratio of n to m is varied.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The designed synthesis of new compounds with targeted
structure is one of the grand challenges in materials research and critical to
both fundamentally understanding and exploiting structure-function
relationships. This research uses a new synthesis technique developed in Oregon
with NSF support to prepare several series of new structurally related compounds
which will enable properties to be studied as a function of nanostructure in a
manner that has not previously been possible and provide an improved
understanding of structure-property relationships. The development of new
synthetic techniques is a vital step necessary to advance fundamental science,
critical to current and future technologies and crucial to international
competitiveness. The graduate students in this research program obtain a broad
technical background in deposition technologies and thin film characterization
techniques, preparing them for future careers in high tech industries, academia
or national laboratories. Internships provide an opportunity for graduate
students to ?test drive? future careers and expand their knowledge base.
Internships result in more productive graduate researchers, facilitates the
transfer of knowledge to industry, and will increase the impact of the proposed
project. Science pub events by the principle investigator in rural Oregon will
focus on illustrating the connectivity between NSF-sponsored research, education
and national competitiveness