* 1266234
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Invasion Process: Survival, Dispersal Genetic Characterization, and Attenuation of Marine Biota on the 2011 Japanese Tsunami Marine Debris Field
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Jonathan Geller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2014
* USD 42,888.00

This project will examine marine organisms arriving on the US West Coast in
association with floating marine debris from the March 2011 Tohoku Earthquake
and Tsunami in northern Japan. The volume of debris is large and has the
potential to inaugurate a massive injection of foreign species. As an example,
in June 2012, a single, 20 m-long floating dock dislodged from the port of
Misawa on Honshu Island transported nearly 100 Asian species to the coast of
Oregon. The PIs propose to gather data on species identity, population
structure, reproductive condition, growth histories, genetics, and
parasite/pathogen presence from the rafted biota. More than just an assessment
of what is arriving, the work will be structured around evaluating a number of
parameters important for understanding the potential for long-distance rafting
and subsequent invasions. The PIs will also document genetic diversity,
providing another perspective on invasions and, where the genes are novel to
North America, providing a baseline for examining the spread of novel genes in a
new environment. Under most circumstances, the dispersal of adult stages across
large expanses of ocean is rare and therefore difficult to study. The large
debris field from the tsunami provides a unique opportunity for these studies.

Broader Impacts: Biological invasions are a major driver of community and
ecosystem change. The findings of this study will provide valuable information
on invasion processes and potential, and in the short term will provide rapid,
authoritative information on the species composition, traits, and abundance of
invaders associated with the present debris field. The work will include an
assessment of parasites and pathogens which could threaten native species.