* 1266405
* Green Chemistry, Absolute Kinetics, and Signal Amplification with Molecular Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 505,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program supports Professor
Miguel A. Garcia-Garibay of the University of California, Los Angeles to develop
robust reactivity models for reactions in the solid state using single crystal
X-ray diffraction, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance, and chemical kinetics
by laser flash photolysis. A large number of chemical processes occur with
light, and in the absence of external reagents, chemical bonds can be broken and
new bonds can be made under the rigid constraints of solid state environments.
Such reactions display levels of chemical control that compete with those
observed for reactions catalyzed by enzymes. Recent developments by Professor
Garcia-Garibay's group have shown that crystals with sizes in the ca. 200 nm
scale are ideal for the novel implementation of analytical and engineering
applications. This project also investigates quantum chain reactions in
crystals, characterized by the formation of more than one product per photon
absorbed, with signal amplification values as high as one million.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes a key contribution to green chemistry
and sustainability by demonstrating that reactions in crystals can be scaled up
to multi-kilogram scales using nanocrystals samples suspended in water.
Reactions in solids are important in a variety of circumstances. They include
the undesirable decomposition of solid pharmaceuticals and consumer products,
the degradation and aging of structural solids, and the fatigue of solid state
devices. However, the broadest scientific and technological impact of this
proposal is to help develop the intellectual and human infrastructure needed to
understand reactions in solids at a level now common for the gas phase and in
solution. The investigator has been successful attracting women and minority
students to his research group by maintaining a highly supportive and creative
environment that fosters careers in materials science and in science education.
The PI has established several collaborations with faculty at Trade Technical
College, which has a very large Hispanic and African American population in
downtown Los Angeles, and which will encourage their students to pursue careers
in chemistry and materials science.