* 1266407
* High-Accuracy Thermochemistry with Threshold and Imaging Photoelectron Photoion Coincidence Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Balint Sztaray, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2017
* USD 403,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Bálint Sztáray from the University
of the Pacific, will characterize the thermochemistry of molecules and radicals
that have combustion or atmospheric relevance. Using Photoelectron Photoion
Coincidence Spectroscopy, significant improvements will be offered to three of
the most important parameter sets in combustion and atmospheric models: accurate
experimental thermochemical data, reaction rates, and energy distributions. The
experiments will be conducted both on the lab-based instrument at the University
of the Pacific, which will receive an upgrade of a new ion velocity map imaging
setup, and on the Imaging Photoelectron Photoion Coincidence Spectroscopy
endstation at the Swiss Light Source synchrotron. Combining experimental ion
fragmentation and velocity distribution data with high-level quantum chemical
calculations, advances will be offered in the understanding of statistical rate
and energy distribution theories to improve the kinetics modeling tools used in
combustion and atmospheric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy is arguably the
most important physical quantity, affecting almost every aspect of physical,
chemical and biological processes. Chemical changes in the structure of
molecules are almost invariably accompanied by changes in the energy,
determining which chemical reactions are possible. As the primary purpose of
combustion processes is to extract energy from chemical systems, characterizing
the energy content of the various molecules and fragments involved in combustion
is the foundation on which predictive models can be built. Thermochemistry, the
study of the role of energy in chemical processes, has gone through
transformative changes in the last decade, partly due to advances in
computational methods and party due to new holistic models in which energy
changes in remotely related systems are connected in a complex web of energy
relationships. Computational methods in the past few years have approached and
even exceeded experimental accuracy and they need new and more accurate
experimental data to be tested against. The experimental methods used in this
research will provide some of the most accurate numbers on a wide variety of
systems that are involved in combustion or atmospheric processes.