* 1266331
* Collaborative Research: Physical-Statistical Modeling and Optimization of Cardiovascular System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Eric Bennett, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 01/31/2016
* USD 205,001.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop physical-
statistical models of cardiovascular systems for optimizing medical decision
making in spatiotemporal disease processes. Multi-scale computer models will be
developed to improve the understanding of disease-altered cardiac electrical
dynamics. In particular, the modeling will be done in multiple physical levels
starting with ion channels, then cells, then tissues, and finally an
anatomically realistic heart. Physics-based models will be statistically
calibrated and adjusted so as to make more realistic predictions. Furthermore,
an easy-to-evaluate statistical surrogate model will be developed for faster
approximation, prediction and optimization, thereby facilitating real-time
medical decision making. Physical-statistical models will be used in conjunction
with sensor-based data fusion to optimize cardiovascular diagnostics. The
simulation-based optimization approach provides a unique opportunity to search
the optimal medical decisions with the "virtual" heart, as opposed to
traditional "experience-based", "trial-and-error" or subjective decisions in the
real-world heart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will yield a fundamental understanding of the progression of cardiac
diseases that is so vitally needed to improve preventive healthcare services.
This research has the potential to make a paradigm shift in healthcare, i.e.,
from reactive care to preventive and proactive care, from experience-based to
evidence-based cardiac care services. The early identification of cardiovascular
diseases will decrease mortality rates, promote the timely delivery of life-
saving interventions, and reduce healthcare cost (e.g., preventive care in lieu
of expensive surgical interventions). This will positively impact cardiovascular
patients, the largest population at risk of death in the US and in the world.
This project will provide students with a unique opportunity to obtain
multidisciplinary training in industrial and systems engineering, healthcare,
statistics and optimization.