* 1266019
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Non-contact Structural Dynamic Identification with Focused Ultrasound Radiation Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Christopher Niezrecki, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 05/31/2017
* USD 301,200.00

The goal of this research project is to obtain an understanding of how to fully
characterize the dynamics of structures by using non-contacting ultrasonic
radiation force excitation. Although modal analysis has matured significantly in
the last three decades, existing empirical approaches do not effectively address
the ultrasonic frequency range (above ~20kHz) which hinders quantitative
validation of numerical structural models. This holds particularly true for
small structures, such as engine turbine blades, that have very high, closely
spaced, resonant frequencies and cannot be appropriately excited by using
physical attachment. The project will address several critical needs that are
required to move ultrasound radiation force excitation from being a qualitative
laboratory technique into a methodology that can be widely adopted by the
engineering community. One of these involves calibration and real-time
monitoring of the imparted force by utilizing interferometric methods and
innovative fiber-optic pressure sensors. Another major task involves correlation
of resonant frequencies for structures excited in air and the same structures in
water or other fluids. The combined measurement and modeling required for this
task are important since the higher intensity available for the ultrasound
radiation force excitation in water would allow shorter testing times, improved
signal to noise ratios, and the possibility of driving structures with
sufficient force to identify non-linearities for damage
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have a broad impact in a wide
range of applications since it will enable non-contact, high-frequency
characterization of structural dynamics of small components that cannot be
adequately characterized using conventional techniques. Ultrasound radiation
force excitation techniques will aid in understanding the dynamics of turbine
blades; this is of critical importance to help reduce high cycle fatigue
failure, which has relevance to companies in the aviation and power generation
industries. The techniques demonstrated will also be applied to hard-drive
suspensions, naval propulsive components, and similar applications that would
benefit from excitation without physical contact. Both graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the research will be exposed to technical and
nontechnical problems crucial to industry. A strong outreach effort will be
implemented using planned demonstrations to motivate women, K-12 students, and
underrepresented minority groups to become interested in science and
engineering. Undergraduate music students, taking a general education course,
will be exposed to the research results and have the opportunity to study
vibrations of their instruments. The Principle Investigators will be developing
a collection of videos, and corresponding curriculum guides, that will be posted
on YouTube and related sites showing vibration of musical instruments, sporting
equipment and other common objects. Outreach will also extend to national
laboratories and companies that may benefit from understanding the new
measurement approaches and analytical methods created, as well as local,
regional, and national media so as to effectively capture the imagination of the
general public.