* 1266207
* Non-Archimedean Methods in Analysis, Dynamics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Mattias Jonsson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 324,989.00

This mathematics research project by Mattias Jonsson will use techniques from
non-Archimedean analysis and geometry in order to study a range of problems in
analysis, dynamics and geometry. Jonsson will work with Berkovich spaces, non-
Archimedean analogues of real and complex manifolds. Among many specific
projects, one amounts to showing that four different notions of equisingularity
for plurisubharmonic functions are equivalent. This is a problem in complex
analysis but its solution involves doing analysis on a Berkovich space. Another
project is in arithmetic dynamics. Given a discrete-time two-dimensional
dynamical system defined by a pair of polynomials with rational coefficients,
Jonsson will investigate how the arithmetic complexity grows along orbits of the
dynamics. Here the problem is formulated using rather elementary number theory
but Jonsson will approach it using a detailed study of an induced dynamical
system on a Berkovich space. Jonsson will also study non-Archimedean analysis
and dynamics outright. For example, he aims to extend the successful analysis
obtained jointly with his collaborators Boucksom and Favre on the non-
Archimedean Monge-Ampere equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
mathematics research project by Mattias Jonsson is in the areas of Analysis,
Geometry and Dynamics which, ever since their discovery have been used in order
to understand the world around us. They are crucial to other scientific fields,
such as engineering, biology and economics. For example, the mathematical
modeling of any phenomenon that undergoes change over time (such as the
population of bacteria in a body, the stock market, etc.) can be viewed as a
dynamical system. Similarly, geometry is the basis for many current industrial
applications such as 3D printing. This project will enhance the tools available
in the aforementioned branches of mathematics. The development of geometry goes
back to the ancient Greeks, who laid down axioms, or basic assumptions, from
which all other reasonable properties could be logically deduced. The main focus
of this project is a detailed study of certain phenomena that occur when the
Archimedean Axiom, attributed to Archimedes of Syracuse, is no longer valid. The
resulting mathematics turns out to be useful even when the primary object of
study is of the usual, Archimedean, kind.