* 1266179
* Collaborative Research: Needles with High Inclination Angle Cutting Edge and Polished Surfaces for High Performance Biopsy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Hitomi Yamaguchi Greenslet, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 126,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the fundamental understanding of
needle design and manufacturing in order to enable more efficient needle core
biopsy. The tissue biopsy length will be increased by optimizing the high-
inclination-angle needle cutting edges and smoothing the needle surfaces to
reduce friction at the tissue-needle interface and thereby reduce the required
cutting forces. This project involves three tasks. Task 1 is to realize
simultaneous internal and external polishing of 18-gauge stainless steel needle
tubes using magnetic abrasive finishing. Task 2 is to design and machine (i.e.,
grind and polish) the high-inclination-angle needle cutting edges. Task 3 is to
measure the friction force between tissue and the needle interior, develop the
mathematical model of the biopsy length as a function of the needle cutting edge
and internal friction force, and optimize the needle design and manufacture to
give the maximum biopsy length possible.

If successful, the outcomes of this research will reveal the micro-machining
(deformation and cutting) mechanisms of soft tissue using the engineered biopsy
needles. Modifications to the existing metal-cutting models and observations of
new phenomena in cutting tissue can broaden the application of the traditional
field of machining to biomedical and healthcare components. Biopsy is a widely
used medical procedure in which a tissue sample is cut and removed for
examination to identify and diagnose diseases. The improvement in the tissue-
cutting efficiency will reduce pain and improve accuracy in pathology diagnosis,
and the innovative needle design and manufacturing will be translatable to any
field of medicine that uses needles. The research activities will be integrated
into graduate and undergraduate courses creating a learning environment that
engages the students in the university engineering experience and enhances their
long-term retention in engineering careers.