* 1266169
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC: Center for Solidification Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Matthew John Krane, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 01/31/2014
* USD 16,120.00

1266169 Purdue University; Matthew John M Krane &lt;br/&gt;1266050 University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Brian Thomas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
center will be a focal point of research in the science and engineering of
solidification processing, performing fundamental research while working with
industry to advance commercial metal casting practices and develop new
commercial solidification processes. Purdue University and the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are collaborating to establish the proposed center,
with Purdue University as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two
products of this proposed center will be physical research results advancing
process understanding and improvement, and human resources supplying the next
generation of casters and researchers. The work proposed for this center is a
uniquely well-integrated mix of experimental and numerical work, examining
continuum phenomena coupled across length scales from the submicron to several
meters. Research into a variety of casting processes is planned, with a mixture
of bench-top experiments, plant trials, and numerical simulations. The center
will encompass three main program areas: investment casting, continuous casting,
and electro-slag and vacuum arc re-melting processes of wrought alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center will yield technical advances across
large segments of the metals processing industry, as well as aircraft and land-
based turbine engine development, bolstering US competitiveness in
manufacturing. Expected impacts include: higher productivity and lower defect
levels in large-scale steel production, higher efficiency gas and steam turbine
engine designs, with associated reductions in emissions, for industrial and
transport applications enabled by advanced alloy processing developments, and
improved alloy and product quality across multiple manufacturing sectors. The
proposed center will also have a strong emphasis on career development for
graduate students, research experience for undergraduates, and advancing
diversity goals.