* 1266336
* Curvature-Related Problems in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Betsy Stovall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 153,999.00

This mathematics research project by Betsy Stovall will study curvature-related
problems arising in Euclidean harmonic analysis and their applications to
dispersive partial differential equations. This work will encompass two
directions. One is to prove new, curvature-independent bounds for generalized
Radon transforms defined by averages, linear and multilinear, along families of
curves in Euclidean space. Another direction will be to prove new estimates,
both linear and bilinear, for the restriction of the Fourier transform to
hypersurfaces and apply these and existing estimates to certain dispersive
partial differential equations. The study of curvature-independent bounds for
translation-invariant generalized Radon transforms and Fourier restriction
operators has been a popular and fruitful line of research during recent years.
Work performed under this proposal will generalize, extend, and sharpen some of
these results. The particular case of averages on curves has been an important
model for averages on higher dimensional manifolds, and there is a strong
potential that Stovall's work to prove curvature-independent estimates will
facilitate future research in these directions.

This mathematics research project by Betsy Stovall is in the general area of
harmonic analysis, with a focus on the study of so-called generalized Radon
transforms and Fourier restriction operators, and their relation with the
geometric notion of curvature. Both types of operators have been a significant
focus of research in the harmonic analysis community for many years, and their
study is part of a broader program to understand the effects of curvature on
some operators that arise quite naturally in engineering and physics. For
example, one of the specific classes of operators whose study is proposed, a
family of restricted X-ray transforms, is related to the (unrestricted) X-ray
transform, which is a fundamental tool used in medical imaging. In recent years,
research into Fourier restriction operators has been particularly active. This
activity is due both to intrinsic interest in these operators and because their
study has led to important advances in the understanding of equations arising in
fields such as quantum mechanics and optics. The inquiries proposed by Stovall
address both of these motivations. As part of this project, Stovall will make a
dedicated effort to increase the participation of students and junior scientists
from under-represented groups.