* 1266418
* Collaborative Research: Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) Association: Turning Disaster Into Knowledge
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 562,186.00

Documenting and learning from observations from "extreme events" are invaluable
to advancing the state-of-art in multi-hazards engineering. Recorded
observations serve as benchmarks to our understanding of the effects of these
events, their underlying causative mechanisms, and for validation of design
procedures. Capturing the key lessons learned from extreme events constitutes an
important task for advancing research in geotechnical engineering, because many
of the profession's design procedures are based on empirical methods that
require re-evaluation as important case histories emerge. The NSF-sponsored
Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) Association organizes and
supports reconnaissance efforts by geotechnical researchers and develops
techniques to capture perishable data to learn from these events. The primary
objectives of GEER include documenting geotechnical effects of important extreme
events to advance research, employing innovative technologies for post-event
reconnaissance, and advancing the capabilities of individuals performing
research based on field observations. Much of the data generated by extreme
events is perishable and therefore must be collected soon after the event. The
challenge is to develop the most effective means for documenting the results of
a full-scale experiment that has occurred without much warning, if any. Since
2006, GEER has successfully documented the geotechnical effects of 19 extreme
events, including Hurricane Gustav in 2008, the 2011 Lower Mississippi River
Floods, and the recent earthquakes in Haiti, Chile, New Zealand, and Japan. Many
GEER reconnaissance efforts have led to funded research projects, demonstrating
that GEER reconnaissance efforts are identifying important research issues that
can lead to advancements in science and engineering. Many of the innovative
techniques employed in recent reconnaissance efforts, such as the utilization of
GoogleEarthTM, GPS devices, remote sensing, and LIDAR, were initiated by GEER
members. GEER is well positioned to make similar further advancements with
respect to the use of new technology and communication approaches in
reconnaissance.

This award provides funds for continuation of GEER activities to enable quick,
responsive geotechnical investigations of natural and human-made disasters. It
is expected that two to four investigations of moderate-sized events would be
conducted each year. If a large event occurs, GEER would recommend funding of a
RAPID to an identified GEER team to respond effectively to this larger event.
Unfortunately, extreme events will happen. It would be even more unfortunate if
the engineering profession did not capture the perishable data that enables it
to understand which design procedures result in good seismic performance and
which procedures still need improvement. GEER with its willing geo-professional
participants will help turn disasters into knowledge.