* 1266097
* SusChEM: Biomimetics of the [FeFe]-H2ase enzyme active site (EAS)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Marcetta Darensbourg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Marcetta Y. Darensbourg of the Department of Chemistry at
Texas A & M University will develop synthetic analogues of the iron- and nickel-
containing active sites of hydrogen-processing biocatalysts known as
Hydrogenases. The PI's group reproduces almost precise structural models of the
unique and illusive "rotated" structure found in the diiron hydrogenase, and
displayed in the as-isolated, mixed-valent FeIIFeI state of the enzyme. In depth
analysis of the electronic structure of the models by Mössbauer, EPR (ENDOR),
and computational chemistry stimulates the design of advanced biomimetics, and
its ability to serve as hydrogen-evolving electrocatalysts will be screened by
cyclic voltammetry. Through continued collaborations, such catalysts will be
analyzed for electronic structures and for applications to dye-sensitized
photocatalysis. The PI's group is diverse and contributes to the annual
Chemistry Open House, the Expanding Your Horizons program for 6th grade girls,
and other outreach programs, such as NOBCChE.

In a broad scope, this work addresses the role of hydrogen as an energy vector--
in energy storage applications, and the need for sustainable catalysts in both
the production and utilization of hydrogen. The sustainable energy-related
research area impacts society as a whole and represents cross-disciplinary and
collaborative training opportunities for students. The research inspires
coworkers to gain a broad scientific knowledge base in chemistry, biology,
spectroscopy, theory, etc., and to be ever alert for the universal language of
science, chemistry in particular, for the solving of problems.