* 1266022
* SusChEM: Rational Design of Chiral Bipyridine N-Oxides for the Catalytic Propargylation of Aromatic Aldehydes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Steven Wheeler, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 239,636.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Steven E.
Wheeler of Texas A&M University Main Campus to rationally design highly
stereoselective catalysts for the propargylation of aromatic aldehydes. These
design efforts are facilitated by the development of a set of computational
tools for the rapid and reliable prediction of the stereoselectivities of these
reactions. The team seeks to accurately predict the stereoselectivity provided
by a given catalyst within a 24-hour time frame, which allows for the relatively
rapid screening of potential new catalysts. Propargylation catalysts are
designed based on the concept that the stereoselectivities of bipyridine N-oxide
catalyzed alkylation reactions are dictated primarily by the chiral arrangement
of ligands around a hexacoordinate silicon transition state. Notably, only
certain ligand arrangements are stereoselective, and catalysts are designed to
adopt these inherently stereoselective configurations. To maximize the impact of
these studies and to validate the computational predictions, propargylation
catalysts predicted to be highly stereoselective are synthesized and tested by
an experimental collaborator, Professor Martin Kotara of Charles University in
Prague, Czech Republic. This collaboration provides valuable feedback while also
ensuring that new catalysts developed are immediately applied in natural product
syntheses. These metal-free catalysts for asymmetric organic reactions promise
new, more environmentally friendly routes to important chiral molecules,
including natural products and pharmaceuticals and thus, represent important
efforts in sustainable chemistry. An additional outcome of this research is the
development of a computational toolkit for the prediction of stereoselectivities
of N-oxide alkylation catalysts. This project lays the foundation for a general
toolkit for computational catalyst design, which is distributed freely under an
open-source license.

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Steven E.
Wheeler of Texas A&M University Main Campus to develop new catalysts and improve
existing metal-free catalysts for valuable and sustainable chemical syntheses
used in producing natural products and pharmaceuticals. The development of new
catalysts requires a detailed understanding of the underlying reaction
mechanisms and the myriad of factors that control stereoselectivity.
Computational chemistry, by providing structural and energetic information about
not only the operative reaction pathway but also higher-lying transition states,
provides key insights into the origin of stereoselectivity of such
organocatalyzed reactions. This effort focuses on the use of computational
resources for the preparation of metal-free catalysts thereby making the
materials more environmentally friendly than previous routes. Undergraduate and
graduate students receive extensive hands-on training in computational organic
chemistry as well as more formal training in quantum chemistry and electronic
structure theory. Close collaborations with a synthetic organic collaborator
exposes the students to a broad range of topics in modern organic chemistry and
teaches them to clearly communicate their results to a non-computational
audience. The computational methods that are developed are freely distributed
under an open-source license so that others in the scientific community may
benefit.