* 1266183
* I/UCRC:  Identification Technology Research (CITeR) - UB Site
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Venugopal Govindaraju, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 05/31/2019
* USD 407,852.00

Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1266183 SUNY at Buffalo; Venugopal Govindaraju
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed site, SUNY at Buffalo, requests funding to
establish a partner site of the Center for Identification Research (CITeR)
currently comprised of the Clarkson University (lead institution), West Virginia
University and the University of Arizona as research partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed site will advance the science of biometric
technologies for both civilian and homeland security applications by integrating
pattern recognition and machine learning algorithms with sensors technology.
SUNY at Buffalo site will bring together faculty expertise, not only in core
biometric modalities such as fingerprints and face recognition, and soft
biometrics such as gender, age, mannerisms, and emotion, but also in related
areas such as advanced computer vision, robotics, cryptography, and theoretical
computer science that will allow CITeR to pursue research in the development of
innovative biometric applications. CITeR affiliates will also benefit from being
able to benchmark and assess the effectiveness of various hard and soft
biometric technologies in real applications. The proposed site's faculty
strength in Chemistry, Physics and Optics will also help CITeR pursue novel
modulaties such as odor biometrics and better sensors to assist in
identification technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed site will
further CITeR's objective to serve as a comprehensive academic center serving
the growing identification technology research, undergraduate and graduate
education, and outreach needs of the public and private sectors. This will be
accomplished by providing a mechanism for the funding of pooled
interdisciplinary faculty and student talent to address the challenges in
identification technology. Under the auspices of BEAM (Buffalo Area Engineering
Awareness for Minorities) the proposed site plans to attract the participation
of local high school and undergraduate students using innovative events built
around biometrics applications that incorporate treasure hunts and other fun
elements to educate and interest them in STEM areas. The faculty at SUNY Buffalo
are members of the NSF-AGEP (The Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate) program whose goal is to significantly increase the number of
underrepresented minorities obtaining graduate degrees in STEM areas. CITeR
meetings will also serve as an excellent opportunity for students to interact
with potential employers to understand challenges in the field.