* 1266101
* Collaborative Research:  Fundamental Mechanics and Conditional Probabilities for Prediction of Hurricane Surge and Wave Loads on Elevated Coastal Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* John van de Lindt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 140,000.00

Damage to coastal structures as a result of combined surge and wave loading has
been significant in recent events such as Hurricane Ivan (2004), Katrina (2005)
and Ike (2008) and most recently Sandy (2012). There is over $3T in built
infrastructure along the US East and Gulf coasts, and elevated structures along
coastal areas are becoming more commonplace as building stakeholders seek to
mitigate damage and risk of property and structure loss. Currently, there are no
accurate mechanics equations to compute the forces for combined surge and wave
on these types of elevated structures and no comprehensive method to
consistently account for the variability (uncertainty) in the random nature of
the incoming waves. This project will pursue research that focuses on the impact
of hurricane surge and wave loads on elevated coastal structures. The ultimate
goal is to understand and quantify surge and wave loads on buildings and
structures that can be used to mitigate damage to the coastal structures. A
theoretical approach based on physics will be used to model the interaction
between the water and coastal structure. The analytical formulation will be
validated through small scale experimental testing in a wave tank. Storm surge
and wave impacts will be formulated on a probabilistic basis. The results of the
research can lead to performance based requirements in building standards.

This collaborative project between research teams at Oregon State University and
Colorado State University will combine expertise in coastal engineering and
structural engineering to develop a fundamental understanding and modeling of
hurricane surge and wave loads on elevated structures. The goal is to mitigate
damages to shoreline infrastructures from extreme coastal storms. The analytical
formulation will be built on Goda's method for calculating surge forces on
elevated coastal structures and will be extended to incorporate wave forces. A
probabilistic approach will be taken to combine surge and wave loads.
Hydrodynamic hurricane wave and structure interaction will be used to formulate
loading on these types of structures. The formulation will be validated with
experiments on small scale structure models using a wave tank. The collaborative
project will contribute to understanding of wave and surge loads and develop
predictive equations for uplift, impact and overturning loads on elevated
structures.