* 1266323
* SusChEM: Electrophilic Carbenes: From Fundamental Studies to Applications in Synthesis and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* C. Grant Willson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 04/30/2016
* USD 136,989.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division and the SusChEM
initiative at NSF supports Professor Christopher Bielawski of the University of
Texas at Austin to develop carbene-based catalysts that transform a broad
spectrum of readily available starting materials (e.g, carbon monoxide, ammonia,
dihydrogen, etc.) into valuable chemical products. The research builds upon the
recent discovery of a stable carbene that, unlike the ubiquitous N-heterocyclic
carbenes, is relatively electrophilic and activates molecules that possess inert
bonds under mild conditions. As many of the activation processes are analogous
to that of transition metals, the development and exploration of the chemistry
of a series of electrophilic carbenes will be adapted in this research to
harness their chemical potential and to promote a broad range of new metal-free,
catalytic transformations. Beyond enriching the chemistry of carbenes while
opening a new dimension in catalysis, this project contributes to our current
understanding of chemical reactivity and structure, while establishing new tools
for synthetic chemists.&lt;br/&gt;The development of organic alternatives to
current metal based catalysts, which often require precious and/or toxic
reagents and operate under harsh conditions, is attractive from economic,
environmental, and sustainability perspectives. This project also contains a
significant teaching development component that enhances the synthetic chemistry
curriculum at the University of Texas at Austin, and promotes the mentoring and
leadership skills of involved pre-college, undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral members. In parallel with the aforementioned activities, several
diversity-oriented outreach efforts are directed toward increasing the numbers
of students pursuing careers in science, technology and engineering fields,
especially among populations that are currently underrepresented, through
engagement in summer research and other educational outreach programs. Overall,
the synergistic research, teaching, and outreach components of this project are
designed to inspire, cultivate technical as well as problem-solving skills, and
prepare future members of our nation's workforce for employment in high
technology areas.