* 1266438
* An On-Chip, Nanomechanics Platform for Lithium Storage Capacity Measurements in Single Nanowire Electrodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Arunkumar Subramanian, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2015
* USD 120,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop an experimental technique for
directly quantifying the intrinsic lithium storage capacity of an individual
nanowire (NW) electrode with attogram-scale precision. A lithium ion battery
electrode represents a nanomechanical system in which both the stiffness and
mass are modulated dynamically with charging or discharging. These dynamic
nanomechanical signatures of the battery electrode will be probed within the
experiments. Electrokinetically assembled, on-chip, single-NW electrochemical
cells will be fabricated such that the electroactive NW forms a doubly-clamped
beam and remains suspended between metallic current collectors. At any given
lithiation state, static force vs. deflection measurements using an atomic force
microscope will be employed to determine the nanomechanical stiffness of the
suspended NW electrode. Furthermore, NW resonance frequency will be measured
using in-situ electron microsopy based characterization of electrostatically
actuated nanowires. This combination of static force-deflection and in-situ
resonance measurements will enable the extraction of its lithiation / de-
lithiation induced mass change at any given charge
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort would result in a new multiphysics
diagnostic capability for energy storage systems based on nanostructured
materials and would extend the relevance / capabilities of the mechanics
community into electrochemical energy storage research in new directions. The
award will entail research collaborations with the Sandia National Laboratories
(SNL) and a graduate student from Virginia Commonwealth University will have
opportunities to perform a part of his research at SNL. An undergraduate Summer
Cadet from the Virginia Military Institute will also participate in a summer
project at the PI's lab, as a part of the VCU-VMI research exchange program, and
will perform in-situ microscopy experiments. The educational outreach activities
will bring advanced microscopy and electrochemical energy storage topics into
graduate and undergraduate curricula.