* 1266154
* A hierarchy of composite quantum chemical models for applications in materials and surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Krishnan Raghavachari, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 475,000.00

Krishnan Raghavachari is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods program to develop a set of hierarchical quantum
chemical methods for state-of-the-art applications in materials and surface
chemistry. The hierarchical concept involves the use of highly accurate
methodology on small systems to validate more approximate and computationally
cost effective methodologies for investigating complex systems. Building on
prior work in the PI's research group, Raghavachari and coworkers are developing
more sophisticated and broadly applicable methods in three areas: (1) The
"connectivity-based-hierarchy", an accurate thermochemical method for medium-
sized organic and biomolecules, will be developed for radicals and ions, and
calibrated for applications involving amino acids and peptides; (2) New energy
and gradient methods including electronic embedding and charge transfer effects
will be developed for an accurate QM/QM embedding model based on the successful
ONIOM framework; (3) Efficient analytical gradients will be developed for a
generalized multilayer "molecules-in-molecules" fragment-based method including
electronic embedding . These developments will be used in a range of
applications on silicon and silica surfaces as well as for investigating
biomolecular systems such as peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate treatment
of complex systems is one of the main challenges in quantum chemistry. The new
methods being developed will fill a critical need to treat medium-sized and
large molecules accurately, providing systematic well-tested models for the
study of materials and surface systems. The computer codes developed in this
program will be available to the scientific community as part of the Gaussian
software package as well as in a set of freely available codes on the PI's
website. The methods are expected to be widely used by a broad range of
investigators. The project involves both method development and applications,
and will provide an excellent opportunity for training the next generation of
researchers in quantum chemistry