* 1266377
* University of California Center for Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology (UC-CEIN)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Yoram Cohen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Cooperative Agreement
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2020
* USD 22,876,092.00

University of California-Los Angeles &lt;br/&gt;http://www.cein.ucla.edu/new/ind
ex.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional Partners:&lt;br/&gt;Columbia
University &lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;University of
Bremen&lt;br/&gt;University of California-Davis&lt;br/&gt;University of
California-Riverside &lt;br/&gt;University of California-Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;University of New Mexico&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas-El Paso
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award continues funding of a Center to conduct
research and education on the interactions of nanomaterials with living systems
and with the abiotic environment. The goals of this Center are to develop a
predictive understanding of biological and ecological toxicology for
nanomaterials, and of their transport and transformation in the environment.
This Center engages a highly interdisciplinary, multi-institutional team in an
integrated research program to determine how the physical and chemical
properties of nanomaterials determine their environmental impacts from the
cellular scale to that of entire ecosystems. The research approach promises to
be transformative to the science of ecotoxicology by combining high throughput
screening assays with computational and physiological modeling to predict
impacts at higher levels of biological organization. The Center will unite the
fields of engineering, chemistry, physics, materials science, cell biology,
ecology, toxicology, computer modeling, and risk assessment to establish the
foundations of a new scientific discipline: environmental
nanotoxicology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on nanomaterials and development
of nanotechnology is expanding rapidly and producing discoveries that promise to
benefit the nation?s economy, and improve our ability to live sustainably on
earth. There is now a critical need to reduce uncertainty about the possible
negative consequences of nanomaterials in the environment, while at the same
time providing guidelines for their safe design to prevent environmental and
toxicological hazards. This Center addresses this societal need by developing a
scientific framework of risk prediction that is paradigm-shifting in its
potential to keep pace with the commercial expansion of nanotechnology. Another
impact of the Center will be development of human resources for the academic
community, industry and government by training the next generation of nano-scale
scientists, engineers, and regulators to anticipate and mitigate potential
future environmental hazards of nanotechnology. Partnerships with other centers
will act as powerful portals for the dissemination and integration of research
findings to the scientific, educational, and industrial communities, both
nationally and internationally. This Center will contribute to a network of
nanotechnology centers that serve the national needs and expand representation
and access to this research and knowledge network through programs directed at
California colleges serving underrepresented groups. Outreach activities,
including a journalist?scientist communication program, will serve to inform
both experts and the public at large about the safety issues surrounding
nanotechnology and how to safely produce, use, and dispose of nanomaterials.