* 1266281
* SusChEM: Group-Transfer Reactions of Low-Coordinate Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Richard Jordan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2017
* USD 505,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program, Professor Gregory
Hillhouse at the University of Chicago will carry out fundamental studies on the
coordination and organometallic chemistry of low-coordinate first-row metals in
various oxidation states. The primary objective of this work is to develop
synthetic routes to new types of reactive late-transition metal complexes that
can be used to carry out new atom- and group-transfer reactions that will enable
efficient, atom-economical chemical transformations. These studies will help
elucidate fundamental properties of inorganic molecules, particularly those with
metal-ligand multiple bonds that stimulate novel reactivity. This chemistry will
impact both stoichiometric and catalytic synthetic organic transformations.
Group 10 metal complexes have widespread synthetic application in catalytic
coupling reactions that form new carbon-carbon (C-C) and C-X single bonds, and
this project will focus on developing useful methods for forming C=C, C=N, C=O,
and C=S bonds (or other double bonds) utilizing nickel and other first-row
metals. This research will explore, using experiment and theory, the
coordination and organometallic chemistry of very low-coordinate metal complexes
that form multiple bonds with imido and carbene ligands (LnNi=NR and LnNi=CR2),
as well as non-traditional 2- and 3-coordinate open-shell, late-metal systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a solid, fundamental
understanding of the chemistry of group transfer reactions involving metals that
will impact applied areas of synthetic inorganic chemistry and catalysis, as
well as organic synthesis and thus contribute to sustainability. In addition to
the scientific contributions, this project will contribute to the training of
the next generation of scientists and teachers by providing experience in
interdisciplinary work, honing research skills, and exposure to both target-
oriented and fundamental research that will empower coworkers to make
transformative contributions to US chemical research endeavors. Specific
activities directed toward education and outreach, with emphasis on the chemical
challenges of the twenty-first century, are planned. The research team will
include scientists at all educational levels: faculty, postdoctoral researchers,
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students. Participation of persons from
underrepresented groups, which recently have included Hispanic, African-
American, sight-disabled, and female coworkers, will be actively encouraged.