* 1266194
* Effective Management of Operating and Maintenance Activities for Wind Turbines
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Jeffrey Kharoufeh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2017
* USD 275,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop analytical and computational decision
support tools to effectively manage the maintenance activities of wind energy
systems. Degradation-based reliability models, based on specialized diffusion
processes, will be developed to explicitly account for the influence of
randomly-varying environment conditions on critical wind turbine components,
condition-monitoring systems, and time- or weather-constrained maintenance
scheduling. Subsequently, stochastic optimization models will be developed to
minimize operating and maintenance costs over the life cycle of a wind turbine
by adaptively scheduling maintenance activities under uncertain conditions. The
analytical tools will: (1) determine the optimal timing of inspections, repairs
or replacements; (2) prioritize service activities during scheduled outages; (3)
determine which spare parts to order and when; and (4) decide how operating and
environmental data should be used to assess the current and future health of
critical wind turbine components. Specialized Markov decision process (MDP) and
partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) models with mixed (discrete
and continuous) state spaces will be developed along with their associated
solution techniques. The developed degradation-based reliability models will be
validated using real wind turbine operating data, and the long-run average
maintenance costs obtained using the optimization models will be compared with
those of a computer simulation model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to improvements in the operation and
maintenance of wind energy systems that will soon supply a significant portion
of electric power in the United States. A large fraction of the cost of
producing wind energy is directly attributable to operating and maintenance
costs stemming from scheduled and unscheduled maintenance activities. The
primary goal of this work is to provide techniques that better manage
environmental and wind turbine data to make cost-effective decisions about
maintenance activities. Reducing the cost of wind energy will accelerate the
design, analysis and installation of new land-based and offshore wind turbines.
Increasing the share of electricity generated by wind resources will help
stabilize energy prices, mitigate the effects of greenhouse gases and
substantially reduce the nation's dependence on foreign natural resources.
Furthermore, the development of a viable wind energy market will help stimulate
the U.S. economy by creating jobs directly related to wind energy including
turbine manufacturing and installation, as well as permanent jobs for wind
turbine operators and maintenance workers.