* 1266402
* Design and Synthesis of Robust and Tunable Nucleic Acid-Based Oscillators for Bionanotechnology
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Elisa Franco, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 06/30/2017
* USD 355,000.00

The objective of this project is to generate robust and tunable molecular clocks
using nucleic acids and proteins. Oscillators are fundamental components both in
biology and in computation: molecular clocks synchronize a variety of cellular
processes, as much as computer clocks orchestrate the operations of millions of
silicon devices. This research will combine dynamical systems tools and recent
advances in nucleic acids nanotechnology to systematically study the design and
synthesis of biochemical clocks in vitro. An array of reaction primitives will
be generated for dynamic production, degradation and transformation of nucleic
acids and protein components. These reaction primitives will be used to build
candidate clocks, whose robustness will be evaluated in silico using structural
methods (graphical and geometric conditions) and numerical bifurcation analysis.
In particular, research will focus on creating clocks with separately tunable
frequency and amplitude. The best candidate oscillators will be synthesized by
specifying nucleic acid sequences of the primitives with available software
tools. Experimental screening will be performed with a high-throughput,
randomized experimental setup relying on
microdroplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will expand scientific
knowledge regarding the structure of robust and tunable oscillators. In
particular, this project will bridge the gap between theoretical studies aimed
at discovering periodic behaviors in biochemical networks and their systematic
experimental implementation. This bridge can be built because of the
programmability of nucleic acid networks. Our results will have an impact in two
main areas: 1) New bottom-up design principles will be validated integrating
dynamical systems theory and high-throughput experimental techniques. This
platform will be used to generate other autonomous biochemical circuits, such as
multistationary systems and complex nonlinear networks; 2) The availability of
programmable timing devices will enable the coordination of logic circuits,
molecular machines, reconfigurable nanostructures, and pattern formation. The
generated clocks will be useful in a variety of contexts including
nanofabrication, biomaterials, and drug development, because nucleic acids can
be selectively interfaced with a variety of organic and inorganic materials. In
addition, theoretical and computational results will provide novel criteria to
investigate the features of natural oscillators, and will open new avenues to
the use of programmable nucleic acid circuits for generating periodic behaviors
in cells. The results of this research will be disseminated through published
materials and international conference presentations. Interdisciplinary training
will be provided to participating graduate and undergraduate students. The PI's
group will pursue outreach activities targeting K8-12 students at local
underserved schools, including the creation of mini-courses and videos about
periodic phenomena and timekeeping in technology and biology.