* 1266279
* I-UCRC:  The University of Texas at Austin Site of the I-UCRC on Intelligent Maintenance Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Bryant, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2018
* USD 335,996.00

The University of Texas at Austin site for the I/UCRC for Intelligent
Maintenance Systems (IMS) intends to pursue and understand methods addressing
the scientific and practical challenges of condition-based and predictive
maintenance of complex engineering systems. The site plans to expand the on-
going IMS research with new ideas and foci including predictive maintenance in
semiconductor manufacturing, vehicle technologies, oil industry, renewable
energy, power plants and biomedicine. The University of Texas at Austin site
intends to complement existing IMS efforts through focus on new approaches to
diagnostics and prognostics in complex engineering systems, utilization of
advanced diagnostics and predictive maintenance methods for monitoring of
systems in a human body, and maintenance decision-making in distributed systems,
with limited availability of distributed resources and uncertain supply and
demand characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated that the US
economy spends more than $1 trillion for maintenance of critical assets, with
more than 33% of these costs being wasted on ineffective maintenance.
Optimization of these maintenance systems has the potential to greatly improve
overall industrial productivity. The University of Texas at Austin Site of IMS
intends to extend the research outcomes it brings to the center to new
industries that have formerly not benefited from predictive maintenance
research. The site plans to broadly disseminate research results through regular
meetings with industrial partners, short courses on diagnostics and maintenance
open to industry and academe, regular participation and publication in relevant
conferences, and partnerships with universities in the US and abroad. They
intend to actively promote diversity among students and researchers by
leveraging the tremendous infrastructure UT offers in this regard.&lt;br/&gt;