* 1266043
* Friction Extrusion Process and Equipment Development for Production of High Value Materials from Low-Cost Precursors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Sutton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of the friction extrusion
process and associated equipment to enable direct production of high-value
materials (such as titanium wires) from low-cost precursors (such as powders or
machining chips) with reduced energy consumption. Friction extrusion die and
process chamber design will be studied. Experiments and numerical simulations
will be carried out to develop an in-depth understanding of the scientific
principles and physical mechanisms operating in the friction extrusion process.
Friction extrusion experiments will be carried out to gain a physical
understanding of the process and equipment, such as the effect of extrusion die
and chamber design on power consumption and quality of the produced wire.
Computational models will be created to simulate the extrusion process in order
to investigate issues (e.g. full-field material flow pattern and thermal
history) not approachable experimentally. Validation and visualization
experiments will be designed and performed to provide measurements of material
position, velocity and temperature for validating simulation model predictions,
so that computational models can be utilized reliably for process design and
optimization purposes.

If successful, the results of this research can be used to enable the design,
optimization and utilization of the friction extrusion process for the energy-
efficient production of high-value materials from low-cost precursors and for
recycling machining wastes (chips). The friction extrusion process has the
potential to greatly reduce energy requirements for the production of titanium
wire feedstock by eliminating costly vacuum melting and billet casting. Wires
produced from this process could be used as feedstock for additive manufacturing
processes or as filler wires for niche welding applications.