* 1266057
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Phase I I/UCRC for Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Eric Powell, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2019
* USD 871,340.00

Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS) &lt;br/&gt;IIP-1266057; University
of Southern Mississippi; Eric Powell &lt;br/&gt;IIP-1266065; College of William
and Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science; Roger Mann
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Science Center for Marine Fisheries SCeMFiS) will
utilize academic and recreational and commercial finfish and shellfish fisheries
resources to address urgent scientific problems limiting successful management
of these fisheries during the period of intense climate change. The University
of Southern Mississippi (USM) and the College of William and Mary Virginia
Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) are collaborating to establish the proposed
center, with USM as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to seek funding to establish a new Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center (I/UCRC) entitled "Science Center for Marine Fisheries
(SCeMFiS)." The focus of the proposed center will be to develop essential
biological data on fish stocks; improved models of sampling design, population
dynamics, and fishery performance; evaluation of geographic and depth variations
in stock structure and how these relate to the genetics, physiology and sexual
dimorphism of species; and improved approaches to fishing to reduce discards
through gear innovation and modifications in fleet deployment. SCeMFiS supports
an academic program encompassing both components of the management process.
SCeMFiS' capabilities encompass the range of oceanographic, fisheries, and
marine biological disciplines essential for addressing the data resource and
analytical challenges faced by modern-day fisheries management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center would have significant impact on both
the commercial and recreational fishing industries. The research at the proposed
center will result in improved survey sampling methods, improved population
dynamics models, new approaches to discard reduction, evaluation of
geographic/depth-dependent variations in stock structure, identification of
physiological/genetic origins of stock dynamics, and other meritorious outcomes,
all aimed at the dual goals of sustainable fish stocks and sustainable fishing
industries, thus simultaneously optimizing economic benefit while optimally
husbanding the nation's fish resources.