* 1266359
* Catalytic Difunctionalization of Alkenes and Dienes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Forrest Michael, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 375,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
efforts of Professor Forrest Michael of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Washington to design and study palladium-based catalysts for the
direct addition of nitrogen-containing functional groups to alkenes and dienes
under oxidative conditions. Specific focus is directed towards reactions that
generate new C-N bonds; minimize the formation of by-products; that are tolerant
of air, water, and complex functional groups; that operate under mild
conditions; and that are highly stereoselective. For example, reactions that
result in the amination of dienes are explored, as well as a new classes of
reaction predicated on the reaction of intermediate palladium allyl complexes
with electrophiles. Additionally, the difunctionalization of alkenes is achieved
via the catalytic ring-opening reactions of aziridines. The importance of
mechanistic understanding in reaction development is an emphasis area. The
synthetic tools developed in studying these alkene and diene additions allows
for the synthesis of a wide variety of densely functionalized products from
simple starting materials. The development of new, efficient metal-catalyzed
oxidative amination reactions has significant applications in diverse fields
including the development of new materials, the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and
other bioactive compounds, and the construction of new tools and probes for
investigating important problems in biology and medicine. The potential control
of regio- and stereochemistry informs the formation of complex and biologically-
relevant compounds. Professor Michael implements Process Oriented Guided Inquiry
Learning (POGIL) techniques to encourage content retention and analytical
thinking in courses that he teaches. He also works with programs for gifted high
school students such as the Research Science Institute and the Saudi Research
Science Institute, administered by the Center for Excellence in Education, the
Accelerated Progress Program at Garfield High School in Seattle, and the Gifted
High School Program in Bellevue. In this role, he presents short lectures and
demonstrations on the importance of and exciting new developments in modern
chemistry and recruits these students into laboratory research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Forrest Michael of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Washington and his research group are engaged in chemical
research to help develop and understand ways of building complex, biologically-
relevant molecules. The research group investigates ways to incorporate
nitrogen-containing functional groups to molecules that contain double and
triple carbon-carbon bonds. Such products are important in the field of small
molecule based medicine and chemical biology and thus, new methods for achieving
such targeted molecules that are more efficient and reliable are highly
desirable. This research project provides education and training opportunities
for students at the high school, college, and graduate level, helping create a
pipeline of new scientists.