* 1266320
* Spectroscopic Studies of Microsolvation, Hydrogen Bonding, and Proton Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 12/31/2016
* USD 416,641.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Kenneth R. Leopold will elucidate
fundamental aspects of microsolvation, hydrogen bonding, and proton transfer
through microwave spectroscopy of small gas phase clusters. Toward this goal, a
new chirped-pulse microwave spectrometer will be constructed. The new instrument
will run in tandem with the existing cavity-type Fourier transform microwave
spectrometer at the Minnesota laboratory and will reduce data acquisition time
by two to three orders of magnitude. Accurate moments of inertia and nuclear
hyperfine constants will be obtained from spectra and used to determine the
structures of the complexes studied as well as the nature of the electron
distributions within the monomer units. The fundamental science will be
explored, in many cases, using molecules that are active in the Earth's
atmosphere, producing a blend of basic and applied science. The ability to
collect data rapidly will permit the sharing of resources with faculty and
undergraduates at primarily undergraduate institutions, thus expanding both the
scientific and educational impact of the new spectrometer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules have distinct preferences for how they interact
when they approach each other, and these preferences have important effects on
the macroscopic world as we know it. This research involves detailed studies
aimed at understanding how these intermolecular interactions in the microscopic
world relate to the properties of bulk matter. By studying how molecules absorb
microwaves, the distances between atoms and the angles between bonds can be
determined. Then, by forming small clusters (small groups of molecules), it is
possible to learn about the geometric features of intermolecular interactions
and how these features evolve as the molecules assemble. Such information
constitutes foundational knowledge for a wide variety of disciplines. For
example, small molecular clusters can play several roles in the chemistry of the
Earth's atmosphere, as they are involved in processes leading to atmospheric
acids and aerosols. Moreover, small molecular clusters offer microscopic insight
into the molecules dissolve in solutions, whose properties can determine the
efficacy of synthetic and industrial processes. Intermolecular interactions also
play an important role in biology through their influence on the shapes
(conformations) of molecules important in life processes. Thus, this work will
have broad impact in areas ranging from environmental chemistry, to industrial
chemistry, to molecular biology. The participation of graduate students,
undergraduates, and postdoctoral fellows adds a significant educational
component to the broader impact of this work.