* 1266273
* Travel Funds for the 12th Americas Conference on Wind Engineering; Seattle, Washington; June 16-20, 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Dorothy Reed, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 02/28/2014
* USD 43,500.00

This is a travel grant for students and junior researchers to participate in
America's Conference on Wind Engineering. American Association for Wind
Engineering holds this conference every four years. The next conference will be
held in Seattle, Washington in June 2013. Not only is it important that the
United States research community be represented at this prestigious conference
for wind engineering in North and South America, it is critical that the
students are encouraged to enter the field of wind engineering. The number of
investigators pursuing research in wind hazards and their impact are relatively
few in the country as compared to investigators in earthquake engineering.
Windstorms such as hurricanes and tornadoes continue to cause an increasing
amount of damage each year. It is important to deveoop individuals who are well
versed in wind engineering and wind hazard mitigation
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In meeting with their international colleagues,
the experienced researchers will present recent findings and discuss mitigation
strategies for extreme wind events at the conference. Participation of students
and junior faculty in this conference will broaden and expand their vision in
wind engineering. Lessons learned about how to prevent, respond and recover
during and after an extreme wind event are essential to pursue research in life
safety and mitigation of damages to civil infrastructure and to property. In
addition, climate change, urban population shifts to coastal regions, and the
federal mandate for increased renewable energy generation in the future, are
important matters for scientific and engineering scrutiny and consideration that
require a workforce familiar with wind engineering principles. It is important
to engage and sustain students and young researchers in the wind engineering
field. A concerted effort is planned to attract women and students from
underrepresented groups to participate in the conference.