* 1266152
* Structure and photoemission dynamics of negative ions via photoelectron imaging spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Andrei Sanov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2018
* USD 413,250.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Andrei Sanov from the University
of Arizona will investigate the electronic structure of stable isolated
molecules, as well as that of molecules undergoing chemical change or
interacting with neighboring species. This goal will be achieved through
targeted applications of photoelectron imaging and photofragment spectroscopy to
molecular and cluster anions. The combination of these experimental techniques
focuses on both the electron emission and anionic fragmentation processes, as
both pathways are essential for unraveling the complete picture of negative-ion
chemistry. The experiments will specifically target heterocyclic organic
radicals, diradicals (carbenes), and strong electron acceptors (such as
organocyanides). In addition, the fundamental understanding of photodetachment
processes will be advanced by contrasting the experimental observations with
predictions of theoretical models that describe photoelectron angular
distributions. The interactions with neighboring molecules will be studied using
cluster anions as well-defined microscopic solvation environments, recognizing
that the reactivity of negative ions is strongly affected by intermolecular
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical bonding is controlled by electrons,
as it is their behavior that determines molecular structures and controls the
outcomes of chemical reactions. Negative ions play important roles in many
natural and technological processes and their unique properties are vital to
understanding the chemistry of solutions, bio-, environmental, and
astrochemistry. Furthermore, the process of removing the electron from the
negative ion provides access to important neutral species, such as atmospheric
and combustion radicals and other reactive intermediates. This research will
provide knowledge relevant to several areas of physical sciences, such as
combustion and electronic devices. The methods used in this study provide
conceptual views of bonding that ultimately hold all matter together and define
a new approach for introducing students and the general public to important
concepts in physics and chemistry. These pursuits will allow student
participants to acquire specialized training in experimental physical chemistry,
preparing them for advanced careers in science, industry, and education.