* 1266015
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Cool and Warm Season Moisture Reconstruction and Modeling over North America
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Dorian Burnette, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 83,289.00

The network of nearly 2,000 North American tree-ring chronologies is an
outstanding high-resolution paleoclimate data set and has been used to
reconstruct the long-term soil moisture balance across the continent. However,
these existing reconstructions represent an average of the differing seasonal
climate signals encoded in the annual ring width chronologies and do not provide
discrete reconstructions of winter and summer conditions. The precise
seasonality of ancient droughts and wet periods needs to be specified to provide
the most realistic reconstructions of past climate and the most useful
constraints for climate model simulations. Many North American tree-ring
chronologies encode distinct seasonal climate signals that can be used for the
separate reconstruction of cool and warm season moisture amounts over large
sectors of the continent. The research will use hundreds of new and existing
tree-ring chronologies to reconstruct both cool and warm season moisture levels
across much of tropical, subtropical, and temperate North America. The seasonal
reconstructions will be developed on a 0.5Â° grid for every year during two fixed
time periods: AD 1500-present and AD 1000-present. They will be based on
existing chronologies, re-measurements of existing tree-ring collections to
derive seasonally explicit earlywood and latewood width chronologies, and
selective field collections of new chronologies.

Separate cool and warm season moisture reconstructions will not be possible
everywhere, but are likely to be most continuous over tropical and subtropical
North America where climate forcing from Pacific sea surface temperatures is
particularly strong and changes sign with latitude and season. The new
reconstructions will be used with climate model simulations to test hypotheses
concerning the ocean-atmospheric forcing of cool and warm season climate over
North America, the climate dynamics responsible for decadal droughts and wet
periods in each season, and the influence of anthropogenic trace gas and land
surface changes on seasonal droughts and wet periods. The reconstructions and
climate simulations will also be used to identify ancient analogues for the
extreme decadal droughts and wet periods witnessed during the modern era.

This collaborative research project will involve the University of Arkansas,
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, the University of
Memphis, and NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies. The research will
provide the long, spatially detailed reconstructions of cool and warm season
moisture anomalies that currently do not exist but are needed to provide more
realistic seasonal constraints on model simulations of North American climate
variability. The new reconstructions will have major interdisciplinary
applications by providing an objective exactly dated framework for evaluating
the impacts of seasonal climate extremes on social and ecological change during
the prehistoric, colonial, and modern eras. The reconstructions will be served
on a web-based interface with interactive analytical capabilities to leverage
the widest possible use of the seasonal reconstructions [the North American
Seasonal Drought Atlas (NASDA)]. Students will be provided with authentic field
and laboratory experience in scientific research and publication. This project
will support an early career scientist, will initiate a new collaboration with
NASA scientists, and will strengthen a long-term collaboration with the Mexican
Forest Research Service (INIFAP, Torreon, Mexico).