* 1266049
* Dynamical Spin Pumping in Graphene-based Spintronics Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Enrique del Barco, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 77,681.00

This project aims to develop an integrated experimental and educational
framework for the study, understanding, and dissemination of dynamical spin
pumping, spin injection and the generation and identification of pure spin
currents in graphene-based spintronics devices. For this, the PI and his
graduate student will spend two months at National University of Singapore (NUS)
during the Summer of 2013, where they will develop on-chip integrated
FMR/transport devices to enable the study of dynamical spin injection in
graphene-based systems by means of the direct measurement of the inverse spin
Hall-effect (ISHE) electric potential generated as a result of the pure spin
currents generated in the graphene layer. In particular, graphene-based
ferromagnet/non-magnetic (FM/NM) bilayers will be integrated together with
Âµ-CPWs on a single chip. The comparison of the FMR linewidth broadening and the
ISHE voltage between different graphene(Gr)-based FM/NM bilayers (e.g. Py/Gr)
will provide insight on the spin relaxation mechanisms taking place at the Py-
graphene interface, and help identifying the potential of graphene-based
spintronic devices in emerging technologies. The resulting technical expertise
will be transplanted upon return to the US, to make use of the existing
nanofabrication facilities at University of Central Florida (UCF), to obtain new
devices for extending the collaboration into the future.&lt;br/&gt;The project
defines the creation of an international collaboration between University of
Central Flor-ida (UCF) and the Graphene Research Centre at the National
University of Singapore (NUS) for the understanding, generation and control of
pure spin currents in graphene-based spintronic devices, where the unique
electronic properties of a purely two-dimensional layer of carbon atoms (i.e.
gra-phene) will likely provide novel functionalities which could result in
groundbreaking in regards to widely extended technologies, such as in magnetic
random access memory devices (MRAM). The proposed studies may lead to graphene-
based spintronics devices enabling novel applications, with a possible immediate
impact in society. The proposed research plan is timely considering that the Eu-
ropean Union has recently announced one billion euros for research dedicated
exclusively on gra-phene, granted to a network formed by numerous European
research groups. In this regard, the pro-posed international collaboration
between the US PI and a worldwide recognized graphene research center will
enable studies of this material that could not be pursued independently, and
enhance UCF visibility in such a highly competitive and fervent scenario. In
addition, the graduate student involved in this project will directly benefit
from his stay in one of the most advanced centers for re-search in graphene. The
knowledge acquired during the collaboration visit at NUS in summer 2013 will be
transplanted into UCF allowing the continuation of the proposed international
collaboration in subsequent years, from which a number of undergraduate and
graduate students with a high representation of underrepresented sections of the
student population will greatly benefit.