* 1266298
* Charge Delocalization and Mobility in Ground and Photoexcited States of Conjugated Pi-Systems Incorporating MM Quadruple Bonds (MM=Mo2, MoW and W2)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Malcolm Chisholm, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Malcolm Chisholm of the Ohio State University to
synthesize new molecular materials for photon harvesting and photovoltaic
applications. The syntheses will incorporate metal-metal quadruply boded unit
units (M = Mo or W) into conjugated organic units, with the ultimate intent that
the materials will absorb sunlight across the entire visible and near-infrared
region of the solar spectrum by metal to ligand charge transfer. The photo-
excited states will be investigated by ultra-fast spectroscopy to determine the
lifetimes and charge distributions in the singlet and triplet states.
Computational methods will be employed in the design of the new materials and
their characterization will employ detailed electrochemical studies to aid in
the elucidation of electron and hole mobility. Finally, the application of these
new materials for photovoltaic devices will be explored through collaborations
with colleagues in the Departments of Physics and Electrical Engineering.

Photon harvesting to make electricity is an important emerging technology. It is
already greatly influencing the energy market place as a sustainable and greener
alternative to the use of fossil fuels. The use of solid-state inorganic
materials is a rapidly maturing area, while that of devices employing
inexpensive organic materials is one that is emerging over the past decade to
compete with efficiencies now reaching better that 12%. It is to this emerging
area that the new materials from this research will contribute. The work to be
carried out by graduate students will give them a demanding training in
syntheses and spectroscopic techniques as well as being part of a
multidisciplinary program in photovoltaics involving collaborations with persons
in physics and electrical engineering. The topic of solar energy harvesting is
one of great public interest and in addition to publications in scientific
journals we will engage high school students and the general public in
demonstrations and talks.