* 1266401
* SusChEM: Oxide-Derived Metal Nanoparticles for CO2 Electroreduction Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Matthew Kanan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 325,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the National Science
Foundation, Professor Kanan and his students will develop and study
heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the conversion of CO2 into fuels and
synthetic building blocks. The research will focus on a new class of catalysts
called "oxide-derived metal nanoparticles". These catalysts are prepared by
electrochemically reducing bulk metal oxide precursors to form metallic
nanoparticles, which exhibit dramatically improved energetic efficiency for CO2
reduction and resistance to deactivation. The surface structures will be probed
by a combination of electrochemical techniques, spectroscopic methods and high-
resolution electron microscopy, which are complemented by electrokinetic
measurements to illuminate mechanistic features of CO2 reduction. Concurrent
with their experimental activities, researchers in this project will perform
high-level comparative analyses of electrochemical, photoelectrochemical and
chemical approaches to CO2 recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longstanding
reliance on fossil fuels as the principal energy source for society has boosted
the atmospheric CO2 concentration to an unprecedented level, which necessitates
recycling CO2 into fuels using renewable energy inputs. The proposed research
addresses one of the greatest scientific hurdles to this vision: the development
of energy-efficient and selective CO2 reduction catalysts. These catalysts could
be incorporated into an electrolytic device that produces carbon-based fuels
when powered by a photovoltaic or wind turbine.