* 1266314
* RUI: Synthesis of Highly Functionalized N-Alkyl 2-Pyridones and Their Analogues
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Carolyn Anderson, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2017
* USD 230,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Carolyn Anderson of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Calvin College will explore the development of facile methods
for the synthesis of structures containing N-alkyl pyridones and their further
transformation into targets of importance. These targets include a unique class
of amino acid homologues, which will subsequently be used to expand our
understanding of the helical structure of peptides containing these subunits.
The development of asymmetric variants of these methods will also be pursued.
These methods are based on the conversion of readily available 2-alkoxypyridine
substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work could lead to a suite of chiral and
achiral methods for preparing highly functionalized N-alkyl 2-pyridones. Such
chemistry will make these and their related analogues available to the broader
chemical community. In addition, basic knowledge related to asymmetric gold(III)
catalysis is also expected to be garnered during these studies. Successful
development of these methodologies and targets will have an impact on the
synthetic community as well as those involved in the development of organic
materials, medicinal leads, and asymmetric transformations. In addition, these
efforts will provide excellent training for undergraduate research collaborators
and an opportunity for pre-college students, especially those from historically
underrepresented groups, to gain hands-on experience in the chemistry
laboratory.