* 1266288
* Meso-Scale Behavior Characterization of "Tunable" Clay-Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Angelica Palomino, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 180,271.00

Soils are natural materials. As such, their properties can vary greatly from
location to location. This variability makes it difficult to predict or control
the behavior of soil as a construction material. One approach to minimize this
variability is to engineer a soil such that it performs in a predictable manner.
This grant provides funding to investigate "tunable" clay-polymer composites in
which the interparticle and/or interlayer spacings are controlled via a pH and
ionic concentration-responsive polymer. This research will test the hypothesis
that the pH- and ionic-concentration-induced manipulations previously observed
at the particle level are also manifested at the meso-scale. The particular
polymer used in this research is polyacrylamide, which is a widely available and
inexpensive polymer often used for water treatment purposes. Meso-scale
characterization of the clay-polymer composites will include measurement of
swelling capacity; impact of repeated pH and ionic concentration cycling on
hysteresis; changes in hydraulic conductivity with permeant pH and ionic
concentration cycling; consolidation and shear wave velocity response under
selected pH and ionic concentrations; and, shear strength under selected pH and
ionic concentration conditions. The expected results from this work are: (1) a
relationship between selected pH and ionic concentration environments and the
degree of swell or shrink; (2) a relationship between selected pH and ionic
concentration environments and response time of the material; (3) the composite
response with selected pH and ionic concentration fluid cycling and any
potential hysteresis; (4) demonstration of the "tunability" of the composites
through hydraulic conductivity; (5) the relationship between the selected pH and
ionic concentration environments and composite compressibility and shear wave
velocity; and (6) shear strength properties of the composites when subjected to
selected pH and ionic concentration conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this work will contribute to the establishment of a
novel field of research: engineered soils using functional polymers. The
development of tunable polymer-clay composites whose properties can be modified
to maximize their efficient use will improve the performance of barrier systems,
clay liners, filters, and contaminant removal systems. These engineered soils
can be designed for specific applications, and improve performance of structures
such as filters, impervious barriers (water or gas), and contaminant barriers.
In terms of their economic impact, the overall cost of producing these clay-
polymer composite soils is likely to be relatively low since both the production
method and the polymer are inexpensive. If improved chemical and hydraulic
stability is shown, then application in waste barrier systems could lead to
reduced leachate and infiltration contamination. Polymer-clay composites may
also be a more sustainable material for stabilizing impervious system
applications. Increasing the lifespan of such structures would reduce energy
needs related to re-building failed systems.