* 1266389
* Spatial Ecology of Predator-Prey Relationships in East Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Lynne Isbell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2016
* USD 303,479.00

Active predation has been considered a powerful selective pressure for at least
500 million years, ever since animals evolved eyes, teeth, and jaws. Traits
which have been proposed to be evolved adaptations to predation pressure in
primates and early human ancestors include alarm calls, large body size, large
group size, group-living itself, increased vigilance, avoidance of high-risk
habitats, and greater cognitive abilities. Empirical evidence to both document
actual predation pressure on primates and to then assess evolved and co-evolved
traits in the context of predator-prey relationships, however, has been
extremely difficult to acquire. A number of significant predators for primates
are active at night, limiting data acquisition, and the presence of human
observers studying primates in the wild likely discourages predation during
other times.

Recent advances in remote sensing technologies, such as the use of GPS-tracking
collars, now provide a mechanism to systematically and more fully document the
interactions between predators and prey. This research will utilize these
technological innovations to assess predator-prey behavior and interactions
between two primates, baboons and vervet monkeys, and their likely major
predator, leopards, in East Africa. These primate species are terrestrial and
occupy savannah-woodland habitats, conditions relevant to much of the developed
theory on adaptations to predation, and they are frequently utilized in
reconstructions of early human ancestral lifeways. Spatial data from the GPS
collars on individuals of all three species, along with data from voice-
activated recorders that document nocturnal attacks at primate sleeping sites,
will generate unprecedented and detailed records of the frequency of predator-
prey interactions, predation rates, prey vulnerability, and prey responses.
Because baboons and vervets differ in body size, group size, habitat use,
ranging behavior, and types of alarm calls, these data will enable us to test
long-standing but heretofore untested hypotheses about these presumed, evolved
adaptations to predators.

This project provides research and training opportunities for a US postdoctoral
researcher and a Kenyan graduate student. Its broader impacts are further
expanded by being based at Mpala Research Centre, a facility jointly maintained
by US and Kenyan organizations. It strengthens collaborative relationships
between US and Kenyan organizations and aids local community conservation and
education efforts through its contributions to Mpala. Finally, the data from
this project will inform conservation efforts to better protect carnivore and
primate species.