* 1266256
* Development of Generalized-Ensemble Algorithms and their Application in Protein Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Ulrich Hansmann, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2017
* USD 410,000.00

Ulrich Hansmann of the University of Oklahoma is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to
develop theoretical and computational approaches aimed at overcoming limitations
of generalized-ensemble and replica-exchange techniques in protein folding
studies. For this purpose, the replica exchange protocol is reformulated to
enable its efficient use in multiscale and explicit solvent simulations; and an
automatic procedure is established for designing ensembles that maximize the
sampling of folding/unfolding transitions. These techniques are then used to
explore the utility of a multi-funnel concept for describing the role of
mutations, changes in environment, or interaction with other molecules on
protein folding. For this purpose, mutation-induced changes in the folding
landscape of the A and B domain of protein G and the inter-conversion between
the two functional forms of lymphotactin are studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at overcoming sampling
difficulties that hold back the use of atomistic molecular dynamics or Monte
Carlo simulations for complementing experiments in exploring the molecular
machinery of cells. New techniques are developed and applied to study the
folding mechanism of especially interesting proteins, in order to obtain a more
complete view of protein folding and cellular processes. In order to broaden the
impact of the project an annual workshop "From Computational Biophysics to
Systems Biology" is organized; and summer internships are offered to
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.