* 1266249
* Collaborative Research: Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Stephen McCarthy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 01/31/2014
* USD 11,500.00

1266159 Iowa State University; David Grewell &lt;br/&gt;1266249 University of
Massachusetts Lowell; Margaret SobkowiczKline &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the proposed center are: to improve the basic understanding of the synthesis,
processing, properties, and compounding of bioplastic and biocomposite
materials; to develop reliable material characteristics data for industrial
partners; and to support large-scale implementation of renewable magterials.
Iowa State University and the University of Massachusetts Lowell are
collaborating to establish the proposed center, with Iowa State University as
the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed work lies in the creation of transformative new materials and
processing technologies and the necessary reliable, comparable material data to
allow efficient and profitable industrial use of biorenewable alternative
materials. This will reduce dependence on petroleum and the release of harmful
greenhouse gases. The team of researchers includes experts from the fields of
polymer processing, polymer chemistry, materials science, and crop utilization.
It combines a wide breadth of experience and expertise allowing a well-rounded
interdisciplinary approach. The proposed center's vision is to develop the
knowledge that will allow the production of an array of high-value products,
including plastics, coatings, adhesives, and composites, from agricultural
feedstocks that are compatible with current manufacturing systems at attractive
scales and thereby promote rural-based economic development and sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center will have positive impacts on the
environment and the economy. The knowledge generated through research at the
center will accelerate the demand for bioplastics, promoting a substantial,
sustainable workforce that is less likely to be outsourced. Because much of the
research will be conducted by undergraduate/graduate students and postdoctoral
research associates, this center will train and educate future scientists and
engineers. The center will also prepare web-based videos targeted at K-12
teachers that will provide instructions on how to make simple and easy off-the-
shelf bioplastics in the classrooms. By leveraging existing activities on the
various campuses, the center will strive to achieve 50% recruitment of under-
represented students. In addition, by working with the same organizations and
using a similar approach, the center will strive to retain 90% of these
students.