* 1266147
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: I/UCRC Program Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Sushil Jajodia, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 05/31/2019
* USD 549,999.00

The center seeks to establish a new Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) in order to conduct research to improve configuration analytics
and automation capabilities in order to enable their integration for efficient,
accurate and timely operations, management and defense of complex networked
information technology (IT) systems and environments. By addressing the
challenges of configuration analytics and automation, the center intends to
improve enterprise IT system and service manageability, performance,
assurability, security and sustainability. The effort plans to apply innovative
analytics and automation to complex networked systems including: enterprise
networking of clouds and data centers, software defined networking, hybrid and
cyber-physical systems, smart critical infrastructures, mission-oriented
networks (sensor-actuator networks), virtual overlays, social networks and
mobile systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future system complexity and the potential
of misconfiguration is likely&lt;br/&gt;to increase significantly as technology
progresses toward "smart" cyber infrastructure and ?open? configurable platforms
making configuration analytics and automation essential for realizing continued
productivity and competitiveness improvements from the cyber-economy. Working
with its Industrial Advisory Board, the center plans to have a significant
impact in this area and provide a source of talented graduates to industry. The
center plans to have a strong educational component that includes training
undergraduate and graduate students in this area, creating a new
multidisciplinary certificate on Configuration Analytics at UNCC, and involving
minority and under-represented students through courses, seminars, workshops and
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;