* 1266365
* Novel Approaches to Heterocyclic Synthons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jon Njardarson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jon T. Njardarson of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at The University of Arizona will develop useful new heterocyclic
reactions. The proposed new reactions fall into two reaction classes: 1) new
catalytic ring expansions and 2) new anionic cascades. Asymmetric variations of
the most significant reactions will also be studied. In addition to delivering
useful new methods, the proposed research will make contributions to the
emerging field of chiral counterion catalysis as well as expanding the knowledge
of what makes an ideal anionic hopping group and how to most effectively use it
for anionic cascades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterocyclic compounds are one of
the more important structural scaffolds found in pharmaceuticals while also
playing key roles in numerous other material applications. The proposed new
heterocyclic methods will provide researchers in the pharmaceutical industry and
other fields as well as academia with new and complementary approaches for
building important structures. In addition, this project will provide excellent
training of undergraduate and graduate students. Particularly noteworthy
deliverables, which the students associated with these projects are involved in,
are unique freely accessible educational/research tools such as Disease Focused
Pharmaceutical posters, Top200 Drug posters and the free app/website Chemistry
By Design. These new internet tools provide access to learning about organic
chemistry and its importance to society.