* 1266184
* Creativity through Collaborative Human-Machine Interactions: A Formal Approach to Design Crowd Sourcing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Yi Ren, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2017
* USD 642,574.00

This research project will create a theoretical and computational infrastructure
to design new technology using creativity from crowds and individuals in
combination with machine learning. A crowd could be a collection of experts
within an organization, a classroom of students, or a large number of people
online. Earlier research used machine learning working with individual engineers
to help with simple design problems. This research will extend the earlier work
to more complex configuration design problems, and will add crowd sourcing.
Design representations will be graphs instead of vectors, and the design space
will not be defined ahead of time. Machine learning may prove to be an important
improvement over design evolution methods, and will provide insight into which
design features are important. Machine learning also generates a model of
subjective human judgment and preference, leading to more efficient and perhaps
more innovative design synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will provide a platform for new models of innovation with input from
multiple stakeholders: A machine supported by crowd-sourced knowledge and real-
time interaction with humans will be able to produce unique and creative
structures that were beyond the imagination of the humans involved. This
research will also result in algorithmic advances in inference, learning, and
related optimization techniques in representation learning for structured data
and interactive human-machine collaboration. It will also provide a mathematical
framework for innovation in massive system design problems involving thousands
of designers such as the design of a jet fighter. The technology developed will
be possible to implement in a variety of environments from complex engineering
system design decisions to ideas for new products on commercial sites. In an
educational context, this research, if successful, will allow students and
teachers to experiment with design tools, individually, as part of a classroom
experience, or as a national endeavor to both learn and possibly to generate new
design ideas collectively.