* 1266167
* New Methods for the Synthesis of Hindered Quaternary Carbons
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Tarek Sammakia, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2017
* USD 425,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Tarek Sammakia of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at The University of Colorado will explore the development of
methods for the stereoselective formation of hindered carbon-carbon bonds,
including all-carbon quaternary and tertiary centers. The general reaction to be
developed proceeds by a cascade of cycloaddition and rearrangement reactions.
This reaction is mechanistically novel, and as such studies are proposed to
further elucidate the mechanism and to render it asymmetric using stoichiometric
methods.

While some methods exist for the synthesis of quaternary carbons, they are
limited in scope and this new method allows for the preparation of structural
motifs that are not available by existing methods. The overall transformation is
the equivalent of an oxidative cross-coupling of two enolates, thereby preparing
1,4-dicarbonyl compounds. There are currently no methods that directly
accomplish this transformation in a stereoselective fashion bearing such
hindered carbons and the major aim of this work is to provide a new and more
efficient method for the preparation of this class of molecules. This will lead
to a significant reduction in step-count for the synthesis of this structural
motif, and the greater efficiency means less waste and fewer by-products.
Successful development of this method will have an impact on many synthesis
activities including the synthesis of pharmaceutical agents and new materials
that bear this motif. In addition, this project will provide excellent training
of undergraduate and graduate students, including those from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences. Finally, the incorporation of these methods
into undergraduate organic chemistry laboratories will be considered as this
reaction is facile and cycloadditions and sigmatropic rearrangements are not
commonly encountered by undergraduates.