* 1266284
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Dual-Pulse Laser Ablation and Plasma Amplification (LAPA) Process for Drilling Non-straight Holes with Arbitrarily Varying Diameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Benxin Wu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2016
* USD 105,254.00

This grant provides funding to study a novel dual-pulse laser ablation and
plasma amplification (LAPA) process for drilling non-straight microholes with
diameters varying arbitrarily with depth. Such kinds of microholes have been
increasingly needed by many important applications. However, their precise and
efficient drilling still remains a big challenge. The research objectives are to
(1) test the hypothesis that in LAPA the amplification of nanosecond-laser-
generated plasma by a second picosecond laser pulse can realize controlled and
precise material removal from a microhole sidewall through plasma-sidewall
interactions and (2) understand the fundamental physics associated with LAPA.
The specific research tasks include: (1) Establish an experimental set-up for
LAPA. (2) Establish theoretical models for LAPA, which can simulate laser
ablation and plasma generation, and laser-plasma-sidewall interactions. (3)
Measure the plasma properties to verify the models and understand the
fundamental physical processes in LAPA. (4) Perform a feasibility experimental
study under the guidance of the verified models. The pump-probe, fast imaging
and emission spectroscopy techniques will be used in plasma property
measurements. The nonlinear Schr√∂dinger equation and two-temperature
hydrodynamic equations will be solved and coupled with a molecular
dynamics/Monte Carlo module in modeling the laser-plasma-hole sidewall
interactions during LAPA.

LAPA is a novel manufacturing process proposed by the PI. Its essential physical
process is the interaction among picosecond laser pulse, plasma (generated by a
prior nanosecond laser pulse), and microhole sidewall, which has been rarely
studied and is still poorly understood. This project will provide a good,
fundamental understanding of this interaction by combining multiscale modeling
with comprehensive experiments. The research work will build a solid scientific
foundation crucial for LAPA's practical applications. It will also improve our
understanding of laser-plasma-material interactions in the general sense, which
may improve other existing or inspire new laser and/or plasma-assisted
manufacturing processes.