* 1266381
* Land System Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought: A Multi-Scalar, Comparative Analysis of Public and Private Lands in the American West
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Peter Kedron, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 04/30/2018
* USD 365,762.00

Agriculture drives environmental change. Landowners who do not manage their land
effectively may experience large losses in production, especially in the face of
environmental change. Drought over time decreases agricultural production even
more, making farmers increasingly vulnerable to change. Such is the case in
Oklahoma's Cimarron County and New Mexico's Union County. Both locations are
nationally important cattle and agricultural producers. Yet, drought, changing
cattle and agricultural markets, governmental policies, and invasive plants that
compete with native grasses threaten cattle and agricultural production and
other land use. Since 2000, the region has been experiencing an "extreme" (D3)
to "exceptional" (D4) drought. These are the most severe categories of droughts
possible. Land managers have to make increasingly difficult land use decisions
in order to sustain production, and to feed their families, as well as the rest
of the country. This study explores how land users' respond and rebound under
such extreme environmental conditions. The study will use a mixed methods
approach including surveys, observations, focus groups and oral histories to
understand what is currently happening to farmers and ranchers in Cimarron
County and Union County. Researchers will also develop a Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) database with historical and census data to map out how land uses
change over time, and how these changes impact farm families. The research team
will include graduate students to help with the study. In addition, forty
undergraduate students will also get the opportunity to experience fieldwork in
the region and to study land use changes too. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Land users
must become more resilient when facing increasingly harsh environmental
conditions. The study will look at which land users become vulnerable, as well
as why and when they are subject to a loss of or decrease in the quality of
their livelihoods. Likewise, the study will also look at how land users adapt to
extreme drought conditions and what factors make some land users less vulnerable
than others. Results will reveal the ways in which land users become more
resilient or able to bounce back. Given that such drought conditions are
expected to continue, the project will create usable and timely findings. The
study results will be given out to local land users, policymakers, and
researchers. User-friendly results will be disseminated to local communities and
policy makers in Oklahoma and New Mexico. Copies of the land maps created by the
team will be shared with the local County Assessors Offices.