* 1266390
* Nanomechanics of Bone Fragility
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Xiaodu Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2017
* USD 374,000.00

The research objective of this award is to provide a mechanistic explanation on
the relationship between the ultrastructural (i.e. mineral and collagen) and
bulk (tissue level) mechanical behavior of bone and to elucidate the
ultrastructural origins of bone fragility fractures. To do so, a novel
synchrotron X-ray diffraction based approach will be developed to fully capture
the in situ behavior (e.g. strain tensors, residual strain status, damage
accumulation, and viscous response) of mineral crystals and collagen fibrils in
bone under load. Since the in situ behavior will be obtained simultaneously with
measurements of bulk properties of bone, the relationship between the
nanomechanics and bulk behavior of bone can be readily established under
different loading conditions. Studies under this award will apply X-ray
diffraction, crystal physics and biomechanics tools to distinguish the in situ
behavior of individual group of crystals and collagen fibrils and its
correlation with the bulk behavior of bone samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this study would enable us to identify the ultrastructural origins
that dominate the bulk deformation/failure processes of bone. This will provide
a rigorous foundation for accurate prediction of bone behaviors at
ultrastructural levels and benefit for multiscale modeling of the tissue. The
methodologies of this study may be readily extended to studying pathological
changes of bone in animal models, thus providing a unique opportunity to study
the interplay between bone biology and biomechanics in different bone disorders.
This in turn may help develop the therapeutic regimens that specifically target
the ultrastructural causes of bone fragility fractures. The educational plan is
focused on student raining at graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels,
course development in Skeletal Tissue Mechanics and Advanced Biomechanics, and
recruitment of underrepresented students to participate in interdisciplinary
research programs in cooperation with the Research Center for Minority
Institutions at UTSA.