* 1266442
* SusChEM: Carbonylative Polymerization of Heterocycles and Heteroalkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Li Jia, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Li Jia of the
University of Akron for the investigation of the transition metal-catalyzed
carbonylative polymerization of heterocycles (e.g., aziridines and epoxides) and
heteroalkenes (containing carbon-oxygen and carbon-nitrogen double bonds). The
research encompasses two major objectives: 1) a comprehensive understanding of
the mechanism of the cobalt-catalyzed carbonylative polymerization of aziridines
and 2) the development of a novel class of zwitterionic nickel (Ni) and
palladium (Pd) catalysts for the carbonylative polymerization of epoxides and
aldehydes. The mechanistic study utilizes a combination of complementary
experimental approaches, including in situ infrared spectroscopy, synthesis of
model compounds for catalyst resting states, and a kinetic study of the
catalytic process. The novel zwitterionic Ni and Pd catalysts are rationally
designed on the basis of the existing mechanistic knowledge obtained from known
cobalt catalysts. The polymerization reactions developed in this project are
powerful tools for the synthesis of polyamides and polyesters. Polyamides are
specialty polymers with applications in antifouling coatings and as physical
crosslinkers in high-performance thermoplastic elastomers. The polyesters are
environmentally-degradable plastics for commodity applications. This project
falls under the SusChEM initiative as it utilizes non-petroleum based starting
materials (e.g., CO) as well as some non-precious metal catalysts (e.g., nickel)
for the production of potential commodity-scale
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the
efforts of Professor Li Jia of the University of Akron for the investigation of
a catalytic polymerization reactions. Carbon monoxide serves as the raw material
for the polymers (plastics) produced by the catalytic polymerizations; carbon
monoxide can be obtained from biomass and from the conversion of carbon dioxide
(a greenhouse gas). These chemical processes are more environmentally
sustainable than those that rely on fossil feedstock. The products of the
polymerization are also aimed to benefit the environment. One type of the
polymers can be used as an antifouling coating and can potentially replace the
tin and copper biocides currently applied to marine vessels to prevent marine
fouling. Another polymer product can be used as an ingredient for recyclable
thermoplastic rubbers that replace the non-recyclable thermoset rubbers. The
polyesters produced by the present catalytic polymerization are "green" plastics
that degrade into harmless substances in the environment. The graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will gain important environmental
perspectives as well as experience in industrially-relevant areas of research.