* 1266013
* I/UCRC:  Collaborative Research: Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution, Phase II
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Scott Mason, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2016
* USD 146,968.00

Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) IIP-1266013; Clemson
University; William Ferrell IIP-1265999; Virginia Tech; Kimberly Ellis

This is a proposal to renew the participation of Clemson University and Virginia
Tech in the Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) for
another five years (Phase II). The lead institution is the University of
Arkansas (Phase III), and at present also includes the Oklahoma State
University, the University of Missouri, Arizona State and the University of
California, Berkeley.

The Center for Excellence in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) is an NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) that works with its
member organizations to address complex research problems in logistics and
distribution. The mission of CELDi is to enable member organizations to achieve
logistics and distribution excellence by developing meaningful, innovative, and
implementable solutions that provide a significant return on investment. CELDi
delivers on the I/UCRC promise of high-yield results by exploiting leveraging
and synergy in multiple funding sources like individual member organizations, a
pool of member organization fees, and competitive funding from the NSF to
conduct both specific and generalized, basic research. In addition, CELDi
provides the foundation and structure for educating the next generation of
engineers in logistics and distribution systems.

There are two important broader impacts of CELDi. The first is that the Center
has developed a model for applied research conducted within member facilities
and focused on operational issues that produce academically relevant scholarship
and successfully transfer results to assist the members in achieving logistics
and distribution excellence. The second is the impact on students. The Center
has created a number of mechanisms to develop student researcher skills
including one-on-one mentoring sessions, group mentoring sessions, a best-poster
contest judged by the Industrial Advisory Board (IAB), and ensuring more
informal interactions occur between students and the IAB by pairing for lunch
and roundtable discussions. The Center also intends to continue its efforts to
increase the pool of talented students from under-represented groups by actively
recruiting and engaging such students.