* 1266032
* Ionic-Liquid Surface Structure: Informing Applications through Dynamical Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Timothy Minton, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 422,611.00

Prof. Timothy K. Minton (Montana State University) is supported by the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program of the Division of Chemistry and the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) as the Principal
Investigator of joint USA-UK team of investigators who represent a unique
combination of established expertise in the chemical synthesis and catalytic
applications of ionic liquids (ILs) and liquid-crystalline materials (Dr. John
M. Slattery and Prof. Duncan W. Bruce; York, UK), experimental measurements of
scattering dynamics using laser-based (Prof. Kenneth G. McKendrick and Dr.
Matthew L. Costen; Heriot-Watt, UK) or molecular-beam scattering (Minton)
methods, and theoretical modeling of gas-liquid interactions (Prof. George C.
Schatz; Northwestern, USA). The UK researchers are supported through a parallel
grant issued by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, and
Prof. Schatz is an unfunded collaborator. This proposal aims to enhance the
fundamental understanding of IL surface structure and to relate this new insight
to key sustainable applications of ILs. Inelastic and reactive scattering of
atoms and molecules from liquid surfaces will be developed as a new, chemically
specific analytical probe. Two distinct and complementary experimental
approaches will be pursued, based on laser-photolysis, laser-spectroscopic
probing and molecular-beam scattering. The laser-based method is well matched to
higher-throughput screening of surface composition of a range of samples, while
molecular-beam scattering will provide additional information on surface
structure for selected liquids. In combination, they will probe the degree of
surface segregation in custom-synthesized, high-purity ILs of recognized
practical interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
new insight that will be generated is most likely to be exploited for societal
benefit through its enabling role in the design and optimization of IL materials
for numerous environmentally friendly applications. The most direct impact will
be on processes involving transport through the gas-liquid interface, including
various forms of catalysis. The students and post-docs involved will receive
diverse training in modern research methods. They will have ample opportunities
to develop broader, transferable skills and enjoy the cultural benefits of
international exchange, equipping them to contribute to the future growth or
creation of high-technology companies. Outreach will be actively promoted
through the creation of a new website and associated YouTube channels. These new
resources will promote both the results of the proposed research on ILs and
their broader uses in general. Downloadable objects will be suitable for
tutorials and other teaching tools, with the goal of enriching researchers,
teachers, students, and the lay public.