* 1266307
* CDS&amp;E:  Tools to facilitate deeper data analysis, exploration, management, and sharing of ensembles of molecular dynamics trajectory data
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Thomas Cheatham, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Thomas Cheatham, of the University of Utah is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods in the Chemistry Division to
develop a software framework and set of tools to facilitate data analysis and
management across scales and cyberinfrastructure resources. Cheatham and other
researchers are now able to run large ensembles of Molecular Dynamics
simulations including those exchanging information for enhanced sampling with
multidimensional replica-exchange and with data saved at different levels of
resolution. An important goal of this project is to provide an easy means to
deeply inspect the data generated from these simulations, visualize the results,
and ultimately guide the simulation workflow. The Computational and Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) programs in the Chemistry Division and in
the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure cofund this award. The project
involves the development of two complementary software environments,
specifically iBIOMES and the MD trajectory analysis code cpptraj. iBIOMES
provides a framework that allows automatic annotation, analysis, searching, and
display of the simulation results The ultimate goal is to extend and generalize
these environments to provide the means to allow anyone to search, explore, and
analyze the raw data, derived data, and/or subsets of the data. The program
cpptraj will be further developed by providing new ways of thinking about the
analysis of MD trajectories and the management of the data with a focus on
deeper analysis of the data, including more "interactive" analysis
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomolecular simulations provide detailed
insight into biomolecule structure, dynamics, interactions and function. With
access to tremendously powerful computational resources, the community is being
flooded with raw data from these simulations. Not only is managing and
processing this data difficult, understanding the meaning of the data is
challenging. Through further software developments we aim to make it easier to
manage and analyze the data, and ultimately annotate, search and disseminate the
data to the wider community.