* 1266230
* 3D Assessment of Particle Morphology and its Influence  on Friction, Dilatancy, and Fabric Evolution of Sheared Granular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Khalid Alshibli, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2017
* USD 273,005.00

Strength properties and deformation characteristics of uncemented granular
materials are to a large extent derived from the fabric or geometry of the grain
structure and inter-particle friction. Particle morphology (surface roughness,
roundness, and sphericity) and micro-properties play a significant role in
influencing the engineering behavior of granular materials. Quantitative
description of morphology, fabric, and particle interaction of granular
materials in 2D is well understood and has been a subject of extensive research
since the early 1970s; however, similar measurements in 3D are still very
limited. The literature lacks a systematic 3D study that experimentally
investigates the effects of particles sphericity, shape, and surface roughness
on friction, dilatancy, and fabric evolution of sheared granular materials. In
this research, accurate quantitative measurements of particle shape and
sphericity will be obtained from high-resolution 3D synchrotron computed
tomography (SCT) images and surface roughness of natural silica sand particles
complemented by in situ 3D SCT imaging of particle interaction within triaxial
specimens. These measurements will be used to assess the influence of particle
morphology on fabric, friction, dilatancy properties, critical state, and strain
localization of granular materials.

This research will provide critical experimental measurements to calibrate and
validate models allowing a better understanding of the behavior of granular
materials. Also, it will answer key fundamental questions about intrinsic
particle properties that affect strength properties of granular materials. This
increased understanding will spur the development of new theories dealing with
predicting the engineering behavior of granular materials. The research, besides
enriching the Civil and Environmental Engineering program, (i) will provide much
needed experimental measurements to calibrate models that deal with the behavior
of sand; (ii) will impact the research community and promote technology
transfer; (iii) will involve minority/female undergraduate students in
conducting cutting edge engineering research; (iv) will provide an enriching
research experience for undergraduate civil engineering students; (v) will help
engage the next generation of scientists by involving high school students in
our research, to spark their interest in the field of civil engineering and help
contribute to the quality of the next generation of civil engineering educators
and professionals; and (vi) will produce new, cutting-edge educational materials
tailored for middle and high school students.