* 1266140
* CONVEX POLYCYCLES:   SYNTHESIS, STRUCTURE, AND CHEMISTRY OF HETEROTRIQUINANES
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Mark Mascal of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of California Davis will explore the fundamentals of molecular curvature and
electronics by synthesizing organic polycycles that enclose volumes of space,
from concave, to hemispherical, to completely closed shell bodies. The research
program revolves around the triquinane molecular framework, a rigid, bowl-
shaped, fused tricycle. Key features of synthetic interest are the oxidation of
heterotriquinanes to nonplanar aromatic hemi-fullerene fragments, and the
prospect of building out such structures into heterododecahedranes. The
triquinane platform stabilizes chemical species that are normally seen only as
reactive intermediates, such as tertiary oxonium salts, oxonium ylides, and
tetravalent oxadionium ions.

In addition to the fundamental scientific impact, this project has the potential
to contribute substantially to applied material science, in view of the
continuing interest in curved aromatic surfaces in the area of nanotechnology.
The broader impacts in terms of training and diversity lie in the program's
interdisciplinary nature, encompassing at various points organic synthesis,
noncovalent bonding, coordination chemistry, reactive intermediates,
hypervalency, issues in aromaticity, crystallography, theoretical chemistry, and
aspects of nanotechnology. Principal educational deliverables are the
incorporation of research into undergraduate chemistry laboratory courses and
the promotion of undergraduate research, particularly involving under-
represented groups, through the involvement in dedicated, university-sponsored
programs. Outreach involves participation in the ACS Project SEED, the UC Davis
Youth Scholars Program, and the UC COSMOS program.