* 1266092
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Center for Electrochemical Processes and Technology (CEProTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* P. Ramachandran, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 12/31/2013
* USD 11,500.00

1265974 Ohio University; Gerardine Botte 1266092 Washington University; Venkat
Subramanian

The proposed Center will be will be dedicated to the improvement of chemical and
biological processes utilizing novel, electrochemically-focused approaches. Ohio
University and Washington are collaborating to establish the proposed Center,
with Ohio University as the lead institution.

The proposed Center (CEProTech) will focus both on the classical electrochemical
engineering applications (chloro-alkali and aluminum processes, batteries,
hydrogen production, etc.), as well as the development of more radical and
transformative applications: utilizing electrochemical systems and approaches
for conventional processes that typically forego electrochemical methods
(remediation, advanced synthesis, production of specialty gases & chemicals, and
hemodialysis, among others). CEProTech envisions that through the diverse
applicability of the electrochemical science, the comprehensive collection of
resources assembled for the Center, and the aid of its strong assortment of
industry supporters, the Center will have significant impact across a variety of
market sectors.

The proposed research conducted at CEProTech has the potential to increase
national economic security through improved energy independence, environmental
protection, and job creation. With the support of our diverse assortment of
industry members, the Center hopes to sustain a holistic portfolio of novel,
advanced and industrially applicable research. CEProTech intends to have an
experienced multi-disciplinary team, including a significant percent of
underrepresented groups of faculty, research scientists, and numerous
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post-docs. The proposed Center
also plans to expand an already strong platform of educational activities
(graduate courses, topical workshops, and outreach programs) to provide
interdisciplinary education and training in the field of electrochemical
engineering, through specialized workshops, international conferences (with
selected papers published in the Journal of Applied Electrochemistry), industry
oriented seminars and conferences, webinars, long-distance education and
workforce development for manufacturing electrochemical devices. The Center will
encourage a broad dissemination of learning through its continuing education
activities to assist engineers in industry, as well as engineering students, in
acquiring knowledge of electrochemical processes and systems to better prepare
them for careers and career advancements in the industry.