* 1266089
* Wave Control via Phononic Crystals with Adaptively Relaxed Cell Symmetry
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Stefano Gonella, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 05/31/2017
* USD 289,389.00

The objective of this award is to introduce a family of crystal-like
metamaterials with adaptively relaxed cell symmetry (ARCS) and demonstrate their
applicability as tunable acoustic manipulators. The virtue of ARCS crystals lies
in their ability to operate in relatively low-frequency regimes, where the
performance of wave management methodologies relying exclusively on phononic
bandgaps is compromised. The investigation of the ARCS concept will be conducted
using a prototype honeycomb with a periodic population of beam resonators
instrumented with patches of piezoelectric material. The cell symmetry is
relaxed through the modulation of the local effective stiffness of a selected
cluster of resonators, which results in the establishment of a non uniform
distribution of effective mechanical properties in the medium. The property
tuning is enforced through the activation of appropriate sequences of
piezoelectric elements of the activation cluster, according to the desired
degree of symmetry relaxation. The investigation will be verified by a set of
experiments performed using a 3D scanning laser vibrometer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will provide a strategy to
achieve versatile acoustic control devices that are immune to some major
drawbacks that affect metamaterials based approaches, such as passivity and
drastic frequency limitations. The technological applications that would greatly
benefit from the ARCS concept include isolation systems, mechanical filters and
directional actuators and sensors. The methodology for laser-enabled wave
reconstruction that will be specifically developed for this work will provide
new general protocols for the experimental characterization of synthetic
structural materials at large. This work will open new avenues for research in
energy harvesting, towards the design of fully autonomous wave control devices.
It will also provide a platform and implement a plan to realize partnerships
with local middle and high schools for thematic projects aimed at promoting
science and engineering among children and teenagers.