* 1266282
* Classification problems in hyperbolic dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Andriy Gogolyev, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 124,000.00

The proposed project is a broad program that aims at advancing our understanding
of the structure of Anosov and partially hyperbolic systems. These dynamical
systems are the prime examples of chaotic dynamical systems and, by now, we have
good understanding of their statistical properties. On the other hand the
topology of the underlying spaces of hyperbolic dynamical systems is not well
understood. For example, all known examples of Anosov diffeomorphism live on
infranilmanifolds, but the outstanding classification problem of Anosov
diffeomorphisms is still open. The PI proposes a wide-ranging program to
approach classification questions in hyperbolic dynamics. This program includes:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) search for higher homotopy obstructions to existence of Anosov
diffeomorphism; &lt;br/&gt;(2) search for geometric obstructions (such as
presence of negative curvature) to existence of Anosov diffeomorphism;
&lt;br/&gt;(3) construction of expanding maps and Anosov diffeomorphisms on PL-
exotic infranilmanifolds; &lt;br/&gt;(4) search for new examples of partially
hyperbolic diffeomorphism; &lt;br/&gt;(5) classification of partially hyperbolic
diffeomorphisms according to their action on cohomology; &lt;br/&gt;(6)
classification of partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms according to the induced
dynamics on the space of center leaves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chaotic dynamical
systems are abundant. The examples include: the motion of the double pendulum,
free motion of elastically colliding hard balls in a rectangular box (ideal
gas), atmospheric convection (the famous Lorenz attractor). The study of the
examples that arise from the nature is extremely challenging and there are still
many mysteries. Hyperbolic dynamical systems that the PI proposes to study are
simplified mathematical models of chaotic dynamical systems that arise from the
nature. Statistically the long term behavior of hyperbolic systems is relatively
well understood. However, the structure of the underlying spaces for hyperbolic
dynamical systems is poorly understood. The PI proposes a wide-ranging program
that will advance our knowledge of spaces that support hyperbolic systems.
Potentially this research may have impact in physics, biology, chemistry,
engineering and other areas where chaotic dynamics arises.