* 1266366
* Utilization of Microbial Biofilms for Soil Improvement:  Roles of Biofilm-mineral Interactions in Geomechanical Behaviors of Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Balasingam Muhunthan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2017
* USD 301,209.00

One of the key concerns of Geotechnical engineers has been how to improve soil
behavior to mitigate geo-hazards. This research addresses the utilization of in-
situ microbial biofilm formation on mineral surfaces as a means of soil
improvement. Despite extensive research efforts on biofilms in a wide range of
engineering applications, current knowledge of biofilm-mineral interactions in
geologic materials is still in its infancy. The objectives of the proposed
research are to quantify the interactions between biofilms and soil minerals,
and to identify the effects of such biofilm-mineral interactions on the
mechanical properties of soils. The primary emphasis is to explore the
hypothesis that the biofilms produced by soil bacteria coat soil minerals and
increase the mechanical strength and stiffness of soils, the extent of which
will be dependent on physicochemical properties of the soil mineral, pH and
ionic strength of pore water, as well as confining stress. This research will be
among the first efforts to investigate biofilm associated soils from a
geomechanical point of view, and will use various multi-scale experimentation
techniques such as atomic force microscopy, X-ray computed microtomography,
geophysical monitoring, and triaxial strength testing. The combination of those
techniques will allow examination of the effects of mineralogy and pore water
chemistry on adhesion forces of biofilms to minerals, biofilm growth patterns in
pore spaces, and shear behavior of soils undergoing biofilm growth. Therefore,
the specific aims of the proposed research are to select a model bacterium via
characterization of the composition and structures of biofilms grown on mineral
surfaces; to quantify the interactions between model bacterium biofilms and soil
minerals at the nanoscale; to visualize the three-dimensional morphological
patterns of biofilm growth in pore spaces of soils at the microscale; and to
identify the effect of biofilm formation on geomechanical behavior of soils at
the macroscale. Success of the proposed research will advance the understanding
of the roles of biofilm formation in enhancing soil behavior, by identifying the
most relevant factor related to mechanical behavior, investigating the extent of
enhancement of soil strength and stiffness, and providing experimental data for
development of a theoretical mechanistic model of biofilm-associated soils.

Society will benefit from the advancement in understanding of biofilm formation
in geo-media and the development of the intelligent use of microbial biofilms to
improve ex-situ and in-situ soil properties. The use of biofilms may improve
hydrologic engineering barriers; controlled bio-remediation methods of
contaminants, and sustainable soil improvement methods for mitigating of soil
erosion, debris flows, and slope instability. Moreover, the outcome of the
research will have broad impact related to engineering applications to natural
and engineered porous media, such as biomass accumulation in near-surface soils
of agricultural/farm lands, bio-clogging during natural oil and gas production,
microbial enhanced oil recovery using selective plugging, biofilm development in
microbial fuel cells, or biofuel processing. The cross disciplinary nature of
this research gives graduate and undergraduate students unique experiences and
opportunities that integrate bioscience, surface physical chemistry, and
geophysics with geotechnical engineering. In addition, the proposed educational
and outreach activities with high school teachers will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups and minority students in engineering, strengthen
their scientific and engineering foundation, and stimulate their interest in
engineering. The research and educational results will be broadly disseminated
to the public and scientific community through publications at peer-reviewed
journals and professional conferences, exhibition of demo hands-on modules with
the high school teachers at regional conferences, and dissemination of the
description of the demo hands-on modules through university websites.