* 1266064
* Collaborative Research:  Solving Large-Scale, High-Fidelity Workforce Planning Models That Recognize the Potential of Human Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Barrett Thomas, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2017
* USD 218,675.00

The objective of this award is the development of optimization models, solution
methods for those models, and insights that will enable organizations to perform
workforce planning while recognizing the near and long-term effects of human
learning. These optimization models will be based on descriptive, quantitative
models of human learning. Developed by the organizational psychology community,
the (nonlinear) shape of these learning models makes them a challenge to use in
optimization. This work overcomes this challenge by encoding the nonlinear
relationship between experience level and learning into a parameter that can be
computed outside of the optimization. Having mitigated the challenge of the
learning curves, the work will develop more realistic optimization models that
recognize operational considerations, the potential of training and cross-
training activities, and uncertainty in learning parameters and future tasks to
be performed. The improved realism of our workforce planning models will bring
new computational challenges, and the research will develop new solution
methods. Computational experiments and analysis will be performed to derive
insights into how learning impacts workforce planning and strategies for using
these insights for maximum benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will produce tools that organizations can use to enhance their
competitiveness in the near term and to position their workforce to take
advantage of future opportunities. These tools will help organizations make
decisions involving hiring and training activities, as well as understand the
tradeoffs between hiring and training/re-training. Further, developed solution
methods, particularly those related to linearizing nonlinear functions, are
applicable in other contexts. The multi-disciplinary nature of the project,
which if successful, will yield publications in both operations
management/research and organizational psychology journals could bridge the gap
between those disciplines.