* 1266333
* Mechanistic Studies Directed Toward Universal Ligands and Catalytic Reactions of Samarium Diiodide
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Robert Flowers, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2017
* USD 335,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program supports Professor
Robert A. Flowers of Lehigh University to carry out mechanistic studies on the
chemistry of samarium diiodide (SmI2). SmI2 is an important reagent in organic
synthesis due to its versatility in mediating numerous, fundamentally important
reactions in organic synthesis including reductions, reductive couplings, and
cascade reactions. One of the important features of SmI2 is that the addition of
cosolvents or additives can be used to control the chemo- and
diastereoselectivity of reactions. There are two scientific objectives of this
work. The first objective is to carry out mechanistic studies that define the
impact of the affinity of solvents, proton donors, and coordinating or chelating
additives for Sm(II) reagents. The relationship between these variables and the
reactivity of Sm(II) will be applied to the development of alternative
approaches for the reduction of functional groups by SmI2 using readily
available, inexpensive, and non-toxic additives. The second objective of this
work will focus on mechanistic studies designed to examine known SmI2-based
catalytic systems and employ the information gleaned from these studies to aid
in the development of catalytic reactions employing SmI2 and other Sm(II)-based
reductants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high degree of sophistication of many
organic reactions that proceed through the transfer of electrons is based on our
mechanistic understanding of anions, cations, radicals, and related radical
ions. The ability of chemists to interconvert these intermediates through the
use of metal-based oxidants and reductants has led to the development of
reactions that utilize one or more reactive intermediates in bond-forming events
to synthesize complex molecules of great societal importance. The most widely
used single electron reductant is SmI2, but the roles of additives in these
reactions are not well understood. The experiments carried out within the
framework of this project are designed to provide a mechanistic understanding of
Sm(II)-based chemistry and the role of additives that can be extrapolated and
applied to a range of important and useful processes including the development
of catalytic reactions. Studies utilizing this mechanism-centered approach are
likely to provide longer-term benefits to the scientific community than the
demonstration of a single synthetic application.