* 1266416
* State-Resolved Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Chemical Transients
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2017
* David Nesbitt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 03/31/2017
* USD 530,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. David J. Nesbitt from
JILA/University of Colorado will use state-of-the-art chemical physics methods
to investigate fundamental problems involving highly reactive molecular
transients, ranging from atmospheric chemistry at the marine boundary to
chemistry in the interstellar medium. The overall goals of this experimental
program are threefold: i) exploit high sensitivity direct absorption IR laser
methods for study of fundamental jet cooled molecular ions, clusters and
molecular ion clusters in slit supersonic discharge expansions, ii) develop and
implement novel spectroscopic tools for quantum state-resolved collision studies
at gas-ionic solution and gas-liquid microjet interfaces, and iii) utilize the
powerful combination of time resolved fluorescence microscopy and laser
"nanobathtub" heating methods for fundamental chemical physics studies of
temperature and viscosity dependent RNA folding/unfolding at the single molecule
level.

The way molecules interact to form a liquid or a solid is generally driven by
relatively weak forces, which can be studied in detail by laser spectroscopy of
small clusters of these species. In a similar vein, these spectroscopic tools
can also be extended to probe the interactions of molecules colliding at the
gas-liquid interface, specifically investigating with what probability they
dissolve in the top liquid layer and how often they simply "bounce" back into
the gas phase. In a very real sense, these studies permit one to interrogate the
chemical composition of the molecules at the gas-liquid interface. Finally, we
have built instruments that can focus laser pulses in a microscope lens down to
a small enough spot size to illuminate a single fluorescent label (i.e., the
Donor) in a doubly labeled RNA biomolecule with a second fluorescent label
(i.e., the Acceptor). By monitoring the color, time, and polarization of the
light that gets reemitted, we can learn about the proximity of the two dye
labels, which allows us to watch in real time (i.e., msec to sec to minutes),
for example, the kinetics for forming double stranded DNA from single strands,
or the folding of a single protein into a competent, enzymatically active
structure. This work will enable the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced areas of chemical physics (e.g., quantum optics, lasers,
plasmas, and electronics), while furthering the discovery of fundamental new
research knowledge. The results of these studies will provide opportunities for
student participation in national professional meetings, outreach through
scientific open houses, mentoring with the local high schools, as well as
operation of the "CU Wizards" Science Outreach Program for elementary and middle
school students.