* 1266306
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Additive Manufacturing for a Highly Efficient Artificial Photosynthesis Device with Multi-Layer Interconnected Channels and Micro-Porous Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Parkson Chong, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2016
* USD 35,000.00

The research objective of this award is to fabricate an artificial
photosynthesis device that is capable of receiving and then converting sunlight,
CO2 and water into sugars/glucose for the production of biofuels. Additive
manufacturing (AM) enhanced by high-resolution heterogeneous material printing
technology and multi-function nozzle array will be investigated to design and
build the innovative device with multi-layer interconnected channels and micro-
porous structures. In the channels, a water-insoluble hydrogel embedded with
photosynthesis dark-reaction required compounds will be printed for CO2
fixation. On the top of the device, a layer of triblock polymer film will be
created and function as the light reaction mesophyll layer similar to a real
leaf. This research will enable manufacturing and deployment of large-scale
solar conversion systems that not only mimic the natural process of
photosynthesis for the production of biofuels, but also make these reactions
independent of the life of nature plants.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to a new technology for
designing and manufacturing an artificial photosynthesis device, which will help
realize the vision of affordable bio-based energy manufacturing. Economically
viable manufacturing of biofuels will greatly benefit the U.S. economy and
energy security, as well as the society and environment in general. In the
project, a long-term relationship with nScrypt, Inc. will be extended to
encompass development and transfer of new technologies. Two doctoral students
and up to six senior design teams will be trained. Three project-based learning
modules will be created to strengthen the undergraduate engineering curricula in
design, manufacturing and energy engineering. The project will also leverage
specially designed outreach workshops for local high school and community
college students, including many underrepresented minority students in
Philadelphia, PA and Raleigh, NC areas, to showcase AM technology,
photosynthesis process and green energy. The research finding and results will
be disseminated through seminars, conferences, journal publications and various
communication channels.