* 1266060
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Formation of  new MAST Center Site at the University of Arkansas
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 01/31/2014
* USD 14,312.00

1266060 University of Arkansas; Ranil Wickramasinghe

The proposed site, the University of Arkansas Fayetteville, requests funding for
a planning meeting to establish a partner site of the Membrane Science,
Engineering & Technology (MAST) Center that is currently comprised of the New
Jersey Institute of Technology (lead institution) and the University of Colorado
at Boulder, as a research partner.

The addition of the University of Arkansas site to the current MAST Center will
bring new areas of expertise and complement existing expertise. A particular
focus of the new site will be the application of membrane based separations for
sustainability and in the manufacture of food and beverages. The presence of
strong departments in food science and poultry science at the University of
Arkansas will enable the MAST Center to grow its research program in these new
areas. In addition to these new areas, the faculty at the University of Arkansas
has expertise that complements existing strength in the core areas of membrane
formation, modification, characterization and performance. Faculty members from
across the University of Arkansas have been identified who would have strong
potential interest in participating as MAST Center researchers.

Establishing the proposed MAST site would lead to the education and training of
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows for the membrane and related
industries. The director of the Arkansas MAST Center site will work with the
Arkansas Research Alliance to introduce the MAST Center to local industry.
Numerous Arkansas based companies have been identified that could directly
benefit from graduate students and postdoctoral researcher who have been trained
in membrane science and technology. Further industry mentorship of research
projects at the proposed site provides a unique opportunity for graduate
students to hone their communications skills and learn to work effectively in
teams in addition to the technical skills required by the research projects. The
site director plans to work with existing programs on campus to attract students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering to the MAST Center; and,
advances in the applications of membrane separation technologies will be
incorporated in the undergraduate courses in separations, reactor design and
chemical engineering laboratories.