* 1266251
* Collaborative Research: Digitally Addressable and Scalable Laser Fabrication of 3D Gradient Index Nanostructures and Nanophotonic Circuits
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Yuankun Lin, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 310,256.00

This grant provides funding for the integration of advanced numerical tools with
laser nano-manufacturing techniques. The numerical tools, called transformation
optics, will be used to calculate three-dimensional structures with pre-
determined optical functions. The designed structures will be fabricated by
multiple laser beam-enabled patterning techniques. The three-dimensional laser
patterns will be controlled by a mini liquid crystal display (LCD) with very
high numbers of pixels. The numerical information will be displayed to encode
the laser beam pixel by pixel. This will enable high-precision and rapid
production of nanostructures with pre-designed optical properties. A large
number of functional nanostructures will be produced by rapidly changing the
numerical coding information displayed on the mini LCD. The above techniques
will also be used to fabricate optical circuits by adding light paths and
controlling the light inside.

The results of this research will lead to improvements in the design of optical
devices and the development of an advanced laser fabrication capability. These
new digital design and fabrication tools will enable the rapid design,
verification, and fabrication of functional nanostructures and devices for
telecommunication, sensing, and imaging applications. The digital display-
enabled laser fabrication technique will drastically simplify the laser nano-
manufacturing process and improve the process control. The single laser exposure
and large-volume patterning process will reduce the manufacturing cost, making
the process industrially and technically attractive. This research will also
provide educational opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students.