* 1266399
* Shaping the Development of EarthCube to Enable Advances in Data Assimilation and Ensemble Prediction Workshop; Boulder, Colorado; December 17-18, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 11/30/2013
* USD 41,225.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Data intensive science has rapidly emerged as the
Fourth Paradigm of scientific discovery after empirical, theoretical, and
computational methods. This is particularly true in the area of data
assimilation and ensemble prediction. Yet, significant barriers exist in using
the data efficiently or integrating them into data assimilation or ensemble
prediction systems as the scientific community lacks easy-to-use common
cyberinfrastructure frameworks. By some estimates, researchers may spend 80
percent of their time dealing with data discovery, access, and processing, and
only 20 percent "doing science" by way of interpretation, synthesis, and
knowledge creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the National Science
Foundation's EarthCube initiative is to transform the conduct of research by
supporting the development of community-guided cyberinfrastructure. It is
critical that EarthCube is both shaped by as well as benefits the different
scientific communities to which it is targeted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will fund a workshop to bring the research, education, and information
technology communities together to discuss some of the science, technology and
cyberinfrastructure issues related to distributed but shared mesoscale modeling,
data assimilation, and ensemble prediction. The title of the workshop, which is
planned to be held 17-18 December 2012 in Boulder, CO, is "Shaping the
Development of EarthCube to Enable Advances in Data Assimilation and Ensemble
Prediction."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of the workshop is to shape
the development of EarthCube and help in building a cyberinfrastructure and work
toward a scientific ecosystem in which "data friction" is reduced, and data
transparency and ease-of-use are significantly increased. We believe achieving
the workshop goals will help mesoscale ensemble prediction and data assimilation
communities to work toward a transformation in the conduct of data-centric
research and education. To that end, we would like to assemble a team from
across the country to develop a multi-institutional, multi-model, multi-data-
assimilation regional scale ensemble prediction and analysis system that is
capable of real-time forecasts, as well as historical reanalysis. It is
anticipated that workshop participants will come from U. S. universities, NCAR
and UCAR, NOAA, NSF, and other research
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent
need for educating and training the next generation of students in mesoscale
modeling, data assimilation, ensemble and probabilistic forecasting in the
United States. The workshop will engage students pursuing careers in the
aforementioned three areas of research. It is envisioned that the products from
the planned data assimilation and ensemble prediction systems will be readily
accessed by a broad community of university researchers, students and educators
for exploring dynamics, physics of the atmosphere, as well as for educating the
next generation of students to gain knowledge and expertise in advanced
numerical weather prediction topics. The real-time ensemble prediction system
can be used as a complementary tool by operational forecasters, especially in
terms of probabilistic forecasting of severe weather and tropical cyclones.
Finally, this workshop will help build capacity among the community of
researchers and users of ensemble prediction and data assimilation and will
foster further collaborative efforts to advance research in mesoscale
meteorology.