* 1266118
* Land Use and Chronology and GeoPolitical Processes Among Late Prehistoric Communal Bison Hunters, Montana
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Jesse Ballenger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 28,508.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Maria Nieves Zedeño, in
partnership with the Blackfeet Tribal Historic Preservation Office, will build a
chronology of Late Prehistoric bison driveline systems and kill sites, as well
as associated campsites located on the Two Medicine River, Montana. The
objective of this chronology is to ascertain whether multiple driveline systems
and kill sites were used by interacting generations and, if so, whether the
management of these sites and the surrounding environment led to the formation
of territories among seasonally mobile communal bison hunters. More broadly,
this research will refine the understanding of big-game hunter geopolitics and
its material imprint in the landscape prior to the arrival of European goods and
people into the northwestern Plains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sites to be
incorporated in the valley-wide chronology were surveyed and mapped by Zedeño
and team in 2009-2012 as part of the Kutoyis Archaeological Project, which has
been partially funded by NSF (BCS 0918081). The survey produced abundant
evidence of planning, construction, and maintenance of fourteen bison driveline
systems. These sites are large (9-16 km sq) funnel-like arrangements of surface
stone features that connected bison gathering basins to a cliff or "jump." While
there is strong empirical evidence that these sites were built under the same
template and architectural tradition, it is yet unknown whether their use-span
overlapped. The proposed research will (1) obtain optical lumenescence dates
from architectural features, (2) obtain radiocarbon dates from bison bone
exposures associated with the driveline systems and from hearths and, (3)
establish the chronology of two paleo-fire assessment sites in the heart of the
survey area, to determine whether fire was used in grassland management at the
same time as the bison hunting sites. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hunter-gatherer
territories and territoriality are among the most enduring topics in
anthropology. The proposed chronology will expand the understanding of land
tenure among pedestrian big game hunters, and answer questions about how
communal bison hunters maintained continuity of use and occupation of their
prime hunting grounds while being away one-half of the year. The spatial and
temporal scales that will be used to link diverse archaeological, chronological,
and paleo-ecological data have not been previously applied to the late
prehistory of this region and thus this project will stand as a conceptual and
analytical model to be tested, or contested, in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception, the Kutoyis Archaeological Project
has been explicitly committed to placing archaeology at the service of the
Blackfeet Tribe so that their traditional knowledge may be complemented and
enriched with scientific data. This project will help to establish the antiquity
of the Blackfeet's presence in the valley and to assert their rights to protect
cultural resources. This project remains committed to providing archaeological
training to students, tribal para-archaeologists, and local residents of the Two
Medicine Valley and to inspiring Native American youth to select archaeology as
their future career.