* 1266193
* Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Design and Advanced Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics for Ubiquitious Diagnostics
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Abraham Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence A. Hornak
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,625.00

1266193 University of California-Irvine (UC-I); Abraham Lee &lt;br/&gt;1266195
University of Cincinnati; Ian Papautsky &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
center will develop low-power, automated, self-contained, mass-produced micro-
devices capable of multi-step biochemical assessments. University of California,
Irvine (UC-I) and the University of Cincinnati (UCINN) are collaborating to
establish the proposed center, with UCI as the lead institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed Center is to develop advanced
manufacturing technologies for ubiquitious diagnostics and assessment of the
environment, agriculture, and human health. The goals of this proposed Center
will be achieved via three coordinated basic and applied research thrust areas:
Manufacturable Processes and Materials, Sample Processing and Detection, and
Integration and Control Systems. This Center would result in (a) advances that
can be transferred to industrial stakeholders for product development, (b)
technologies that feed into government laboratories for further application-
specific development, and (c) the education and training of a cadre of
specialized scientists and engineers skilled in low-cost manufacturable
microfluidic biochip innovation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include
competitive recruitment mechanisms and attractive cross-disciplinary
collaborative graduate research opportunities to engage excellent students,
including members of underrepresented groups. In addition to traditional and
conferences, knowledge dissemination includes an open-source "microfluidic
function library" containing design specifications for microfluidic circuits and
interchangeable components organized by application and chip manufacturing
processes. Scalable prototyping processes also will be disseminated to academia
and industry, including established companies and entrepreneurs, with a goal to
dramatically reduce the learning curve and streamline the idea-to-product
process.