* 1400783
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate 2014-16 at UMCP
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP), with the University of Maryland, Baltimore County as the
lead institution, seeks to establish its ninth cohort of Bridge to the Doctorate
(BD) Fellows at the University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP). The goal of
USM's BD Program is to increase the number of underrepresented students earning
Ph.D. degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields.
Through the BD program, USM has strengthened both the undergraduate and graduate
education pipelines and has created an expanded community of scholars within
these disciplines. USM's BD Program advances knowledge and understanding of
graduate recruitment, retention, and persistence of underrepresented students in
STEM fields. As a result, this program has provided and will continue to provide
the country with well-trained, highly-skilled STEM professionals who will have
core competencies in their disciplines and excellent training in research. Since
the first USM BD cohort matriculated in 2005, 97 BD Fellows have enrolled in
STEM graduate programs within the USM LSAMP. Ninety-seven percent of the
individuals in the eight cohorts are currently persisting or have completed at
least one graduate degree in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2014-2016 BD program at UMCP will broaden participation of underrepresented
students in STEM Ph.D. programs and in STEM research, by providing financial,
academic, professional and social support to a cohort of 12 graduate students.
Through BD community meetings, advising, counseling and follow-up, BD Fellows
will experience a smooth transition into graduate education and become engaged
in a supportive community comprised of students, faculty and staff.
Additionally, Fellows will expand their research and professional training
through numerous opportunities to participate in scientific meetings and
research symposia. This project expands students' access to professional and
personal development resources through a series of activities in collaboration
with the UMCP Sloan Scholars Program, the UMCP GEM Fellows Program, and the
Maryland Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) Program.
This program will continue to enhance the current USM initiatives to retain,
graduate, and expand opportunities for students. In addition to the two years of
BD funding, UMCP will ensure that Fellows receive sufficient additional support
to complete terminal degree programs. Building upon past program assessments, a
2014 program evaluation that includes in-depth interviews and focus groups will
be conducted to better understand the factors that contribute to student success
and the barriers that impede progress towards degree completion. Furthermore,
evaluation results will be used to inform and adjust practices and programs for
the 2014 cohort.