* 1400100
* Bio-inspired Fiber-Optics System based on Crayfish Escape Response for Ultrafast Adaptive Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Mable Fok, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Sensor systems are facing significant transmission bandwidth, energy, and data
storage constraints caused by the vast amount of resources needed to maintain
sensing accuracy in a dynamic environment. This situation is exacerbated when
the sensor is highly mobile or when the sensor site is hostile, as it is very
difficult to manually reconfigure a sensor to accommodate any dynamics in the
environment. Current sensor designs are either non-adaptive or require large
storage resources and, as a result, only a small fraction of the data be
conveyed at a sufficient quality level to be useful for applications. If it is
possible for the sensor system to intelligently adapt to the rapidly changing
environment, then information from previously collected data can be used to
instantaneously guide sensor configuration and the selection of data without the
need to store and process the data offline. This project is a new neural-
inspired approach to enable real-time adaptive sensing, such that the overall
bandwidth usage, power efficiency, and sensor accuracy of the sensor system will
be improved. Accurate real-time adaptive sensing can significantly reduce
property damage due to natural and manmade disasters. It can also improve
national security by identifying intentional terrorist actions, as well as
providing an intelligent real-time large bandwidth adaptive sensing system for
security applications. The educational impact of this work comes from its multi-
disciplinary foundation, broadening students' views and encouraging them to
think outside the box.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project borrows the Crayfish
Tail-flip Escape Response and the Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity from
physiological circuitry, and aims to implement it with photonics. The focus of
this project is to design and develop a photonic neural crayfish circuit,
capable of real-time learning and adapting to rapid changes, and to incorporate
the photonic crayfish circuit for real-time adaptive control in a sensor system.
This initiative is an interdisciplinary integrated device and systems design
study involving basic research from the standpoint of neuromorphic processing.
The project aims to exploit physical processes in photonic devices, and to solve
the problem of fundamental real-time adaptive control in a dynamic and complex
modern sensor system. This fundamentally novel approach is a neural-inspired way
to solve the problem by eliminating the computing bottleneck and providing high
fidelities and large bandwidth processing ability that is needed for real-time
adaptive sensing.