* 1400914
* Hindcasting the Ocean radiocarbon history of the past 25,000 years
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Axel Timmermann, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2017
* USD 168,705.00

Understanding and simulating the magnitude and timing of the rise in atmospheric
carbon dioxide levels at the end of the last ice age has been a major challenge
for the Earth Science research community. At the same time, a well-informed
long-term societal response to climate changes requires a detailed understanding
of climate-carbon cycle feedbacks on a variety of timescales. This project
addresses these challenges through an in-depth study of the evolution of the
marine carbon cycle over the past 25,000 years and its relation to ocean
circulation changes and carbon reservoir exchanges. The information gained from
this project will be beneficial for assessing the performance of earth system
models under past, present and future climate conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a series of transient earth system model
experiments with time-varying boundary conditions, the research team will
identify deglacial ocean circulation scenarios that reproduce the existing
paleoceanographic tracers, with special focus on radiocarbon. By including other
age tracers into the proposed model simulations, the fidelity of various
radiocarbon-based "ventilation" age methods, such as the projection age and the
benthic-planktonic age difference method will be tested. The proposed numerical
experiments will provide deeper physical insights into the dynamics of climate-
carbon cycle feedbacks. Specific questions that will be addressed include:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How did the time-varying signal of atmospheric
radiocarbon production rates "propagate" into the deep ocean? &lt;br/&gt;2. How
did ocean circulation changes during the last glacial termination affect the
three-dimensional structure of radiocarbon anomalies in the world's oceans?
&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the potential carbon storage capacity of the Arctic Ocean
under glacial periods?&lt;br/&gt;4. What is the spatial and temporal variability
of reservoir ages over the course of Termination 1 and into the Holocene?