* 1400531
* Increasing the Number of Women in Technical Careers: Online Professional Development of Leadership Teams at Community Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Donna Milgram, Institute for Women in Trades, Technology and Science
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,193,813.00

The Institute for Women in Trades, Technology &amp; Science (IWITTS) provides
online professional development about evidence-based practices in outreach,
teaching skills and learning to increase enrollment and retention of women in
community college STEM courses. This project focuses on professional development
of leadership teams from community colleges with ATE projects and centers that
support technician education in emerging technology fields of vital importance
to the US. Webinars are being developed to help colleges assess their present
efforts in recruiting and retaining female students in STEM disciplines and how
to form and maintain a leadership team. In an online, twenty-five hour,
professional development sequence, the teams learn about evidence-based
practices and are mentored in developing and implementing Recruitment and
Retention Plans. An electronically-scored Institutional Assessment Tool helps
teams in pinpointing what practices they need to carry out to close the gap and
broaden participation. The Women in STEM Toolkit includes easy-to-use checklists
on recruitment and retention, resources for online recruiting, and a
bibliography of off-the-shelf curriculum resources that educators can
incorporate into their classes to better reach female students. Dissemination is
to community college STEM educators via national conferences that disseminate
literature on women in STEM, webinars, social media, and peer-reviewed papers or
articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A National Advisory Committee supports and
offers input to the project and provides formative feedback on project
implementation. An external evaluator provides information on the percent of
teams that find the information useful, develop plans, implement them and
increase enrollments of women. Surveys after the training and six months later
are used to determine the components of the training that proved the most
useful. A case study methodology is used to look in-depth at a sample of
colleges that have successfully implemented their recruitment and retention
plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Women in STEM Broadening Impacts
Project provides evidence-based mechanisms to increase the number of women in
technical programs in community colleges. The mechanisms can be applied to other
disciplines and educational institutions as well.