* 1400993
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: InvertEBase: Reaching Back to See the Future: Species-rich Invertebrate Faunas Document Causes and Consequences of Biodiversity Shifts
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Andrew Deans, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 195,280.00

The rapid biodiversity change in North America has significant effects on
essential ecosystem services, from impact on soil health and nutrient cycling,
to agriculture, forestry and water quality. Exploding populations of invasive
species threaten fresh water and terrestrial habitats and potentially impact the
natural resources of the nation. Easy access to robust, expertly vetted baseline
data for species occurrences, abundances, and distribution ranges, and
monitoring how these parameters have changed through time, will facilitate the
protection of the nation's natural resources, and vastly improve the capacity
for effective restoration, land management planning, and conservation
management. Numerous undergraduate students will receive training in
digitization technologies and a modular exhibit will be developed to engage
public interest in biodiversity changes.

Effective monitoring requires easy electronic access to historical specimen
baseline information for temporal and regional species diversity comparisons
that can facilitate informed land management decisions. Vast amounts of specimen
data are housed within the nation's natural history collections, but most of
these data are not readily accessible from digital resources. Size and
complexity of scientific specimen collections require major technological
advances in capturing specimen data. The goal of this four-year collaborative
project is the rapid digitization of >2 million specimens and their locality
data from ten arthropod and mollusk collections housed at six major US museums
in six states (Il, OH, AL,MI, DE, PA). This project will significantly automate
specimen data capture by utilizing optical character and voice-recognition
technologies. The digitized data from this project will be immediately deployed
for habitat-based distribution modeling and analyses.This award is made as part
of the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).