* 1400868
* Puerto Rico LSAMP Senior Alliance (2014-2019):  Expanding Opportunities for Underrepresented College Students in 2-and 4-year STEM Programs
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Jack Allison, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 07/31/2021
* USD 4,385,873.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014-2019 Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP) program under the leadership of the University
of Puerto Rico, includes three new members in the alliance from the private
higher education sector in Puerto Rico to recruit STEM students in 2-year
programs and promote their transfer to 4-year programs and advanced degrees in
STEM fields. The alliance is comprised of: (1) the University of Puerto Rico
System: two graduate campuses - Río Piedras and Mayaguez and six 4-year campuses
- Aguadilla, Arecibo, Bayamon, Cayey, Humacao, and Ponce; (2) the Pontifical
Catholic University of Puerto Rico; and (3) the Ana G. Méndez University System
- the Universidad Metropolitana, Universidad del Este, and Universidad del
Turabo. The three new partner campuses of the Ana G. Méndez System offer ten
2-year degrees in a variety of STEM disciplines. In addition, during the project
duration, PR-LSAMP increases its scope to include the ten 2-year programs
offered at University of Puerto Rico institutions - Aguadilla, Arecibo, Bayamon,
and Humacao. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PR-LSAMP impacts a large cadre of
underrepresented college students in 2-year programs by expanding their
opportunities to engage in undergraduate research and continue studies in 4-year
and graduate institutions. The students' world view of science is broadened
through research experiences at international and national research centers. It
is anticipated that the efforts of PR-LSAMP improves families' opinion of STEM
careers and increase the number of underrepresented students that choose STEM
careers, thus contributing to a diverse STEM workforce. The long-term impact
will be significant as PR-LSAMP contributes at least 20% of undergraduate
Hispanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and faculty in the 2-year programs
participate in PR-LSAMP activities that will be modified to promote student
completion of 4-year STEM degrees through mentored undergraduate research and
faculty development through research projects and Learning Science Education
Groups. The long-term goal of PR-LSAMP is to build a highly competitive STEM
education and research enterprise and to assist in meeting the national need for
a diverse STEM workforce. To reach this goal, the objectives of PR-LSAMP are to:
1) promote the efforts of students from 2-year programs, with particular
emphasis on underrepresented college students, to continue and complete their BS
degree in a 4-year institution; 2) increase the high rate of BS degrees
conferred in STEM fields from PR-LSAMP institutions; 3) increase the number of
students who enter a graduate degree program in STEM fields; 4) increase the
number of students who complete a PhD program in a STEM field; 5) maintain and
enhance the direct student support strategies, such as undergraduate research
experiences and mentoring; 6) promote mentoring activities and institutionalize
the exchange of successful teaching and learning strategies through PR-LSAMP
STEM faculty collaboration; 7) promote faculty scholarly studies and improved
STEM education through and Learning Science Education Groups; and 8) meet with
high school counselors and send brochures to families to inform them about
academic preparation and career opportunities in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PR-
LSAMP provides a model for a seamless pipeline to increase the number of
underrepresented groups that complete a PhD in STEM fields. It documents and
disseminates the effectiveness of the replicable undergraduate research
mentoring strategy to increase the number of underrepresented students that
continue on to graduate studies and contribute to the diversity of the nation's
STEM workforce. Furthermore, it disseminates and applies concepts of Learning
Science to improve learning and teaching in STEM disciplines in a transformative
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five-year grant period, PR-LSAMP will
reach almost 30 thousand underrepresented STEM students to promote its goals.