* 1400268
* GOALI: Influence of Length-Scale on Diffusion During FAST (Field-Assisted Sintering Technology)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Enrique Lavernia, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Titanium and its alloys represent an important family of materials providing
energy efficiency along with mechanical and environmental advantages but have
seen only limited application primarily due to the high cost of production.
Electric field-assisted sintering technology, sometimes called spark plasma
sintering, is a novel process for the consolidation of powders or particulates
that offers cost advantages over conventional approaches. The team of this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will contribute
to the fundamental understanding of molecular diffusion behavior during field-
assisted sintering for titanium and titanium powders that will enable cost-
effective manufacturing of these materials while maintaining material attributes
such as high strength, low density and environmental inertness. The findings
will impact both the automotive and aerospace industries. The collaborative
university-industry research team will educate university students as well as
provide outreach activities to attract high school students to engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of diffusion data in multicomponent
systems has been scarce due to the complexity of diffusion analyses and the
dependence of interdiffusion coefficients on composition. This has prevented
accurate modeling of the kinetics of sintering for ternary or higher order
systems encountered in commercially important materials. The research team will
generate ternary interdiffusion coefficients for titanium-aluminum-niobium
systems, an important material system for automotive and aerospace applications.
In the presence of an electric field during field-assisted sintering, the phase
equilibrium can be altered giving rise to new phases or eliminating certain
phases during processing. The effects of an imposed electric field and
microstructural length scale will be assessed through a set of experiments and
simulations that will provide insight into the thermodynamics and kinetics of
the interdiffusion and phase equilibria/transformation for the chosen material
system. With this insight, titanium alloys can be designed and manufactured with
desired properties at lower cost than is available today.