* 1400571
* Partnership for Advanced Career Education in Mechatronics Engineering (PACE ME)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniel Horine, Virginia Western Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 787,849.00

This project at Virginia Western Community College will increase the number of
American mechatronics engineers. Mechatronics engineering concerns systems that
integrate electrical, mechanical, and computer technologies. Many modern
technologies such as manufacturing, robotics, and automated equipment involve
mechatronics design and maintenance. Developing and maintaining a sufficient
workforce of highly skilled mechatronics engineers and technicians is a vital
factor in a sustaining a strong United States economy. Virginia Western
Community College (VWCC) is conducting a project called the Partnership for
Advanced Career Education in Mechatronics Engineering (PACE ME). This effort
will improve the degree of collaboration between community college faculty,
technical educators, and industry to help achieve effective mechatronics
education. Mechatronics engineering is an area with a growing need for
appropriately-skilled engineers and technicians. The project addresses gaps in
diversity in this field and develops a structure to build awareness of
Mechatronics Engineering Technology to help increase the number of people
pursing this career path. The project involves a diverse population of students
and is designed to produce innovative engineering technicians with critical
thinking and adaptive learning skills.

The project will utilize innovative student-focused strategies to achieve the
project goals for student retention and success in producing mechatronics
engineers and technicians. Mechatronics demands the application of
multidisciplinary skills. To create a program to develop these skills educators
will collaborate with industry partners to create opportunities for experiential
learning. Industry is also engaged through integrated internships and stackable
credentials. Industry involvement will also help student training to keep pace
with rapidly changing intelligent systems. This project embraces the importance
of enhancing the capability of faculty to support student understanding of
mechatronics technologies by providing professional development of course
instructors. PACE ME will establish a modern fabrication laboratory to support
both secondary and postsecondary technician training and to strengthen industry
alliances. Through the fabrication laboratory PACE ME implements industry-
relevant projects and problem-based learning. The project monitors key outcomes
including the number of underrepresented students exposed to mechatronics
engineering, the rate of change in enrollment of mechatronics related courses,
and the number of industries serving as contributing partners. PACE ME includes
an organized effort to disseminate the effective practices and outcomes
resulting from the project.