* 1400167
* Combining Optimality and Correctness in Control Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 07/31/2019
* USD 349,999.00

Optimal control is an area of engineering focused at maintaining systems close
to desired behaviors, while at the same optimizing certain costs. Examples
include driving a vehicle along a trajectory while minimizing fuel consumption,
controlling a set of thermostats in a building to follow a desired temperature
profile while maintaining electricity consumption to a minimum, etc. Formal
verification is an area of computer science focused at proving the correctness
of system designs. The systems are computer programs and digital circuits, while
correctness specifications include safety (making sure nothing bad happens) and
liveness (making sure something good eventually happens). With the increasing
integration of physical and digital systems into safety critical cyber physical
systems, there is a need for computational tools that combine optimal control
and correctness requirements. This project establishes a connection between
optimal control and formal verification and impacts a large number of areas
where correctness and optimality are crucial, such as air traffic control
(design safe minimum-energy paths for airplanes taking off and landing in a
crowded airport), vehicle autonomy (e.g., persistent surveillance for disaster
relief), medical robotics (optimality and safety are fundamental in the robotic
needle steering problem), etc. The education and outreach plan includes related
courses at the undergraduate and graduate level, the involvement of
undergraduate and high school students in research, collaborations with
elementary school robotics teams, and the involvement of the Principal
Investigator in high school summer internship programs.

The results of this project will include formulations and solutions to optimal
control problems with correctness requirements expressed as temporal logic
formulas for both finite and infinite systems, in both probabilistic and non-
probabilistic setups. The systems under consideration are finite-state
transition systems and Markov decisions processes, and infinite-state discrete-
time (stochastic) linear systems and piecewise affine systems. Correctness is
specified as formulas of Linear Temporal Logic. The optimization objectives
include classical average costs per stage and quadratics over state and control
variables, as well as some special costs induced by particular specifications.
Central to the approach are receding-horizon implementations of the optimal
control strategies. The main application area is autonomous vehicle control for
search and rescue in disaster relief scenarios.