* 1400050
* Crowdsourcing for Engineering Systems Design: Theoretical and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Karthik Kannan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,580.00

The research objective of this award is to establish how the design of a
crowdsourcing tournament affects its outcomes in engineering systems design. The
objective will be achieved by extending game-theoretic models from contest
theory, and performing lab experiments based on behavioral game theory. The
research activities include a) analyzing the effects of different tournament
design options on the outcomes for individuals, pre-defined teams, and self-
organized teams, b) comparing the predictions from analytical game theoretic
models with observed contestant behaviors within experimental settings. The
overall expected outcome include a theoretical framework and lab experiments to
facilitate tournament design. Specific outcomes include non-cooperative games of
crowdsourcing tournaments considering unique aspects of engineering systems
design, and lab experiments to identify the limits of theoretical models and to
guide further theoretical developments.

The results of this research hold promise to enable systems engineers and
managers to systematically design crowdsourcing tournaments, a new and growing
venue for product design, by considering different tournament design options and
their potential impacts on the outcomes. The proposed research will advance the
state of the art in engineering design involving strategic decisions, where only
analytical models of games have been used. The outcomes of the research are
being integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses. The activities are
fostering collaboration among researchers in engineering design and experimental
economics, and providing broader exposure to the graduate students. The lab
experiments, software tools, and data generated as a part of this project are
being disseminated through Purdue University Research Repository (PURR), journal
publications and conference presentations.