* 1400432
* Electron Spin Effects in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Xinyu Liu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 817,332.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently an intense
worldwide movement to explore the role of the electron spin (a quantum-
mechanical magnetic property of the electron) in addition to the electron's
charge in contemporary electronics, with an eye on increasing the functionality
of electronic microchip devices, particularly in the realm of computation. This
award supports a project aimed at addressing this issue by employing state-of-
the-art techniques to fabricate and characterize a series of novel semiconductor
nanometer scale structures in which the role of the electron spin is enhanced by
incorporating magnetic ions. By training graduate and undergraduate students in
cutting-edge semiconductor fabrication techniques as well as in designing multi-
functional materials, the project is expected to have broad impact far beyond
its immediate purely scientific goals. Skills in these areas of materials
science are in wide demand in U.S. Industry, National Laboratories, and
Academia. Additionally, the Notre Dame team collaborates with many scientists
(currently with more than thirty-five other institutions) either by providing
research samples or by carrying out joint experiments. This activity of
dissemination and sharing of results and know-how (which has the added benefit
of exposing students to inter-institutional and inter-disciplinary team
collaborations) is expected to further expand as new spin-based electronic
materials are developed in the course of the present project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports a project that focuses on two new but complementary areas involving
spin phenomena in low-dimensional magnetic semiconductor systems. (a) The study
of changes in the properties of ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductors as their size
approaches nanometer dimensions; and (b) exploratory research on growth and
properties of phosphide-based FM semiconductors, such as GaMnP and InMnP. Area
(a) is motivated by the expectation that, as the physical size of a magnetic
semiconductor such as GaMnAs approaches the nanometer scale and becomes
comparable to, e.g., the width of ferromagnetic domain walls or the free carrier
depletion length, its magnetic properties will significantly change. This
becomes especially important as one considers applications of FM semiconductor
devices in nanotechnology. Using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) followed by
lithographic techniques, the Notre Dame team proposes to explore the
consequences of such reduced size by magnetization measurements, magneto-
transport, magneto-optical studies, and ferromagnetic resonance. Area (b) is
focused on developing comprehensive research on MBE growth of phosphide-based
ferromagnetic semiconductors, followed by a systematic investigation of their
spin-based properties. Although the spin properties of alloys such as GaMnP,
InMnP and GaMnAsP are expected to be highly promising, and offer a range of
important new opportunities, surprisingly little work has been done on this
family of materials as compared to the effort given to, e.g., the GaMnAs or
InMnAs alloys. Extending the proposed studies to this new family of FM
semiconductors is expected to significantly advance the understanding of
ferromagnetic semiconductors generally. &lt;br/&gt;