* 1400466
* The Innovation Cycle of Engineering Design Teams: Computational Modeling Using Situated Social Cognitive Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2018
* John Gero, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 09/30/2018
* USD 443,535.00

Engineering innovation is one of the foundations of wealth generation.
Innovation increasingly occurs through the activities of engineering design
teams rather than through individuals. The objective of this research is to
develop computational models of the innovation cycle of engineering design teams
that allow for the study of the effects of varying parameters on improving
innovation across development cycles. A computational model is used since it is
very difficult and prohibitively expensive to study the effects of varying team
parameters that might improve innovation in engineering design teams directly
within organizations. Given the exigencies of the day-to-day activities of
organizations it may not be possible to vary team parameters. Members of teams
are modeled computationally and are provided with the ability to change and
develop experience based on their interactions with other team members, social
media interactions outside the team and feedback from the consumption behavior
of consumers of their products. Consumers are also modeled computationally and
develop experience based on their interactions with products produced by design
teams and their social media interactions with other consumers.

The results of this research project include a computational laboratory where
parameters that have the potential to affect innovation performance can be
studied. With this computational laboratory it will be possible to test
strategies that are claimed to improve innovation over multiple cycles of
product development. By running a range of experiments it will be possible to
identify interventions that improve the innovation cycles of engineering design
teams.