* 1400052
* Enhancing Efficiency of Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 485,000.00

Polymers are used in a wide range of products including household appliances,
furniture, automotive components, electronics, medical devices, and
pharmaceuticals. Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) is an important
method for synthesis of well-defined polymers. ATRP is already commercially used
by several companies world-wide and therefore, it is critically important to
enhance efficiency of the polymerization process and minimize its environmental
impact. The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division supports research of Prof. Matyjaszewski of Carnegie-Mellon
University (CMU) to increase our fundamental understanding of the correlation
between structure and activities of ATRP catalysts. The results of this research
could lead to more efficient catalysts and new catalysts in benign media, such
as water, and affect commercial production of well-defined polymers made by
ATRP. The generated information is disseminated via timely publications, at
(inter)national meetings, and at CMU web-site. The knowledge gained is also
shared with industry through the Controlled Radical Polymerization (CRP)
Consortium. In addition, this project provides education and research training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them for careers
in academia or polymer industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
activities include design, synthesis and evaluation of new highly active,
selective and stable copper(Cu)- and iron(Fe)-based ATRP catalysts. The project
encompasses computational modeling, kinetic and mechanistic studies, and polymer
synthesis and characterization. The mechanism of reduction
(comproportionation/disproportionation) and activation processes by Cu(0) and
Cu(I)in aqueous media are investigated. Improved livingness and efficiency of
new catalyst in benign media can impact various areas of polymer science by
giving access to complex (co)polymers with better controlled architecture. New
active iron-based catalysts should be less expensive and less toxic than copper-
based systems, and potentially can also expand range of polymerizable monomers
and open new avenues for synthesis of well-defined polymers for advanced
applications.