* 1400247
* Effects of Reduced Mechanical Loading on Bone Microarchitecture and Cell Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Luis Cardoso, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 10/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Decreased physical activity can cause bone loss in many conditions, including
long-term bed rest, weightlessness, and paralysis. The manifestations of this
bone loss have been quantified primarily by assessing bone mass at a macroscale,
above the level of the osteocyte, the most abundant bone cell. Osteocytes form
an interconnected network throughout bone tissue, and when bone is mechanically
loaded during physical activity, fluid in the small pores surrounding osteocytes
is forced to flow. This load-induced fluid flow is believed to play a role in
bone's biological response by translating whole body forces to the cellular.
Recent studies demonstrate that the osteocyte can actively alter its local bone
architecture. The research goal of this project is to investigate whether
reduced mechanical loading causes the bone cells to alter the bone porosities
and environment, such that bone's ability to detect mechanical loading is
diminished. Such a disruption could be an important contributing factor to the
overall degradation of bone strength in reduced loading conditions. Results from
this work will make a significant contribution to understanding how reduced
mechanical loading affects bone strength and may enable the development of
targeted clinical approaches that eliminate the bone loss that occurs in disuse
osteoporosis. In addition to supporting graduate students in the research, high
school students will also be involved and new teaching modules will be created
and incorporated into undergraduate classes.

This work will assess bone microstructural and cellular-level changes due to a
mechanical challenge of decreased loading. A rat disuse osteoporosis model will
be used to investigate the effect of reduced mechanical loading on osteocyte-
level parameters temporally using high-resolution microscopy. A non-invasive
mechanical loading device will then be utilized to assess functional changes in
interstitial fluid movement using injected tracers to quantify the effective
osteocyte pericellular matrix pore size. High-resolution micro-CT analyses will
also be performed to assess bone microarchitectural changes due to disuse,
including vascular porosity changes. Then the microstructural measurements will
be input into poroelastic models to calculate cellular-level strains for disuse
and controls. The application of mechanical loading to counteract bone loss from
disuse will also be evaluated to test whether tissue structure can be restored
if osteocytes experience their usual mechanical input. By investigating the
influence of in vivo mechanical forces on cell and matrix biology in the
maintenance of bone tissue, this high-resolution experimental and computational
study will yield important details about bone mechanotransduction.