* 1400494
* Pathways of Applied Career Experiences (PACE) Science Program in Biotechnology and Chemical Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Keri Flanagan, County College of Morris
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 199,999.00

The Pathways of Applied Career Experience (PACE) Science Program provides
opportunities for students enrolled in the Biotechnology and Chemical Technology
programs to complete internships and other applied industry experiences to
supplement student learning. Partnerships with Industry Alliance Committee
members are increasing student internship offerings and utilizing industry
feedback to align key courses with industry needs and therefore establishing a
feedback mechanism that continually improves student outcomes. Increasing
internship participation rates for all students and aligning key courses with
industry needs contributes highly trained entry-level employees into the local
technology economy. The PACE program addresses students in need of remediation
and improves the retention of all students by using Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning (POGIL) activities in selected courses. POGIL activities engage
students in higher levels of thinking and collaborative group learning. It is a
proven pedagogy that promotes many skills employers seek: teamwork,
communication, problem solving, strong work ethic, analytical approach, taking
initiative, critical thinking and time management. By implementing POGIL,
technology students are more active in their learning and are better equipped
with useful skills to enter the workforce. The PACE Science Program allows CCM
to meet the needs of the STEM economy and the alliance with local industries
demonstrates the success of the project by the number of prepared technicians
produced and successfully employed.