* 1400815
* 2014-2019 Wisconsin Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation-WiscAMP - Senior Level Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Gail Coover, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders.

The Wisconsin Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (WiscAMP), led by
the University of Wisconsin(UW)-Madison, consists of 13 four-year UW campuses
(Eau Claire, Green Bay, La Crosse, Madison, Milwaukee, Oshkosh, Parkside,
Platteville, River Falls, Stevens Point, Stout, Superior and Whitewater); 4
private (not for profit) schools (Alverno College, Beloit College, Lawrence
University and the Milwaukee School of Engineering); and 2 two-year institutions
(Madison Area Technical College (Madison College) and UW-Rock County, 1 of 13
UW-College campuses managed as a single institution in the UW-System).

As a senior alliance, WiscAMP capitalizes on its momentum toward achieving the
twin goals of broadening participation in advanced STEM degree career pathways
and transforming WiscAMP institutions to support and sustain diversity across
and throughout the alliance through the following program objectives: (1)
doubling the current number of URM students who graduate with STEM baccalaureate
degrees, (2) doubling the current number of WiscAMP students who enter STEM
graduate programs, and (3) tripling the number of STEM faculty in the alliance
who adopt evidence-based broadening participation practices in their research
mentoring and/or classroom instruction. Undergraduate students, including
community college students, participate in STEM recruitment and retention
interventions such as faculty-mentored undergraduate research, graduate school
preparation, summer research experiences, including international experiences
abroad as appropriate. Faculty are involved in producing evidenced-based
broadening participation research to increase the body of knowledge in retaining
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields.