* 1400725
* FMCC TECH-Lane NSF ATE Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jeremy Spraggs, Fulton-Montgomery Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 397,673.00

Creating career and technical education pathways to develop our middle skills
workforce requires creative strategies in the middle and high school years. The
TECH-Lane project is expanding the STEM student pipeline by recruiting and
assisting motivated but underrepresented, at-risk 8th grade and early college
high school students. The project accelerates students from high school, through
college and into the semiconductor/nanotechnology workplace. Using partnerships
between educational institutions (high school, 2-year and 4-year colleges) and
regional high technology industries, TECH-Lane is creating curriculum focused on
innovative and transformative instruction using project-based learning (PBL) and
integration of career and technical education. Replicable, accelerated early
college high school courses in Electrical Technology, a one week summer STEM
camp curriculum for 8th grade students and professional development workshops
for high school STEM faculty in the design, delivery and incorporation of PBL
are being developed. The intellectual merit of the project lies in the focused
impact on workforce preparation in an area of national importance. Technical
early college high schools are being established across the U.S. to answer the
nationwide need for a well-trained high technology workforce. Project based
learning models have been shown to be highly effective in replicating real-world
workplace problems and teaching students to think critically and creatively to
solve them. TECH-Lane is aligning with these initiatives by providing
accelerated pathways for students and PBL training for their high school STEM
teachers. The TECH-Lane curriculum, disseminated widely through a detailed
monograph and a project website, allows the early college high school/community
college community across the nation to duplicate this model and assist in
filling the need for high-tech workers ready for the 21st century workplace.
Dissemination efforts and the ability to replicate the proposed program are
among the significant broader impacts.