* 1400784
* A Grammar-Based Approach to Visual-Haptic Object Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Robert Jacobs, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,049.00

People can perceive the shape of objects accurately and reliably but how this
occurs is not yet understood. This ability may stem, at least in part, from our
use of both visual information and haptic information (information obtained when
an object is touched or grasped). Moreover, if we learn to recognize an object
based on visual information, we can often recognize the same object when our
eyes are closed but we are allowed to grasp it. Similarly, if we learn to
recognize an object based on haptic information, we can often recognize the
object when we see it but cannot touch it. In other words, we exhibit cross-
modal transfer of object shape information. How does information from the eyes
and hands link up in the brain to yield a coherent representation of object
shape? Insights obtained from this research can contribute both to our
understanding of how humans perceive object shape using vision and/or touch and
to development of improved robotic and other artificial intelligence systems
operating in multi-modal settings in industrial, medical, military, and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project develops a theory of
visual-haptic object shape perception in which people's notions of object
similarity are not based on sensory features but rather on latent or hidden
variables that represent object parts and their spatial relations in an
abstract, modality-independent format. Object representations are formalized
using a probabilistic "shape grammar" with Bayesian inference used to infer
grammar-based object representations when an object is viewed, when it is
grasped, or both. The model is tested using data obtained from behavioral
studies of visual, haptic, and visual-haptic object shape perception by humans.
The investigators will explore the types of representational change that
underlie the transition from perceptual novice to expert (e.g, radiologists) and
will assess whether perceptual expertise is well characterized as category
learning, grammar learning, both, or neither. The research program will also
develop a large public database of code for re-creating both visual and haptic
features of complex objects. This will allow other researchers to fabricate the
objects using a 3D printer, enhancing complementarity and comparison across
research sites. Finally, training undergraduate and graduate students in the
emerging field of computational cognitive science will contribute to a new
generation of multidisciplinary scientists working across traditional boundaries
between cognitive science and computer science.