* 1400528
* Cybersecurity: New Pathways to Meet National Security Needs
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Daniel Vogel, Hagerstown Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2018
* USD 713,996.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. In this project, the investigators will enhance the cybersecurity
curriculum at Hagerstown Community College (HCC), offer more opportunities for
students to engage in hands-on learning, and recruit more students (especially
women and minorities) into the program. In particular, the college will launch
an innovative partnership with the Johns Hopkins University Information Security
Institute to offer extended research opportunities to community college students
in cybersecurity. These students will gain hands-on training in the context of
real research problems and will work with graduate students and faculty at the
university. Topics to be emphasized in both the research experiences and the
related curricular changes include cloud computing and mobile-device security.

Four goals guide the project: 1) Create new and updated curricula that optimize
the use of NetLab and address emerging needs in cybersecurity; 2) Develop and
offer new mentorship and technician-level research opportunities, producing a
model for other associate degree programs; 3) Ensure that HCC graduates enter
the workforce or transfer to four-year institutions, increasing the diversity of
the regional and national cybersecurity workforce; and 4) Build upon and develop
sustainability strategies. Towards the first goal, the investigators will
develop new courses in "Security in the Cloud" and "Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
Security," provide professional development for instructional staff to complete
VCA-Cloud and VCP-Cloud training through VMWare, mentor students as they create
new BYOD security policies and procedures, and put into place a new
cybersecurity course as part of the Summer Bridge program for secondary school
students and teachers (which enables students to make a smooth transition from
high school to the college). To reach goal two, the project will incorporate
research experiences into the new courses described above, provide research
opportunities for students in partnership with the Johns Hopkins University
Information Security Institute, and create a detailed "lessons learned" guide
for community colleges that want to implement similar initiatives with
university partners. To achieve the third goal, the research team will create
new training scenarios (using the existing penetration testing lab) that enable
the assessment of cybersecurity skills, strive to increase the number of women
and minorities enrolled in cybersecurity and information systems courses by 50%,
and add at least five new internship sites for students. Finally, towards the
fourth goal, the investigators will build relationships with new business and
industry partners and increase the use of the penetration testing lab for
research, coursework, contests, and activities with those business/industry
partners. The project will study factors such as students' performance in and
satisfaction with the new and revised courses; the effects of the research
experiences on students' persistence in cybersecurity; enrollment and completion
rates in courses and the program; the mapping of the new training scenarios to
defined cybersecurity Knowledge Units; the number of students placed in
internships; the growth and engagement of business/industry partners; and
utilization of the penetration testing lab by individuals and organizations
outside the college. Findings are expected to broaden the knowledge base
regarding the effectiveness of expanding access to research environments for
community college students and the circumstances under which such access
translates into increased learning and workforce development opportunities for
the students.