* 1400433
* ATE Biomedical Equipment Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Randy Libros, Community College of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Rupa Iyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 510,449.00

Advances in medical devices, medical instrumentation and information technology,
coupled with reforms in patient care and record-keeping, have created a demand
for electronics technicians with specializations in the installation,
maintenance and repair of biomedical equipment and devices and the computer
networks that connect them. Working with an advisory board made up of
representatives from hospitals, clinics, health systems and educational
institutions in the greater Philadelphia area, the Community College of
Philadelphia (CCP) will establish a program in Biomedical Equipment Technology
(BMET). The BMET program will provide students with multiple entry and exit
points by offering a curriculum composed of two stackable (sequential)
proficiency certificates that can lead to attainment of an associate's degree.
Students will be prepared for direct entry into the workforce by completing
either of the proficiency certificates or the associate's degree. Graduates of
the associate's degree program will also be qualified for transfer into a
baccalaureate program. One particularly key transfer pathway option is the
bachelor's program in Biomedical Engineering Technology at Drexel University,
also located in Philadelphia and one of the academic institutions participating
on the BMET program advisory board. As CCP is a Predominantly Black Institution,
the BMET program will enhance STEM workforce diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will advance knowledge and understanding in the emerging field of BMET
education through the development and evaluation of the program, with its two
stackable proficiency certificates and associate's degree options. Establishing
the BMET program will include modernizing an existing curriculum for an
Electronics Engineering Technology program by infusing learning experiences that
emulate the highly networked environment of medical equipment, medical devices
and computers in hospitals and other healthcare environments. Program
development will include creating the four new courses of Digital Electronics,
Semiconductor Devices, Medical Devices and Medical Devices in a Networked
Environment. Through formal coursework, laboratory exercises and internships,
students in the BMET program will gain hands-on experiences with state-of-the-
art medical equipment and devices. Project outcomes will be evaluated by
utilizing a variety of methods. Institutional data gathered from course level
student learning outcomes and the annual Quality and Viability Indicators review
that all CCP program undergo will be combined with appraisal by the advisory
board to evaluate the impact of the program on students and the institution.
Surveys of employers and tracking of program graduates will provide information
regarding the impact of the program to provide students pathways into technical
career and in meeting the needs of the workforce.