* 1400957
* SusChEM/GOALI: Efficient Thermoelectricity with Low-cost Natural Minerals: a Synergistic Computational, Experimental, and Device Development Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lilia Woods, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 380,315.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Thermoelectric energy conversion allows for waste-
heat recovery and it is an environmentally-friendly process; however,
thermoelectric materials typically contain toxic elements. This aspect is
problematic for large-scale applications and detracts from the benefits of using
this technology. Therefore, finding ways to generate energy from non-toxic and
low-cost materials is a high priority for thermoelectrics. This project seeks to
develop methodologies for achieving high thermoelectric efficiency in systems
composed of earth-abundant and environmentally safe elements. Advancing current
fundamental understanding of such materials is beneficial in the development of
effective strategies for enhanced thermoelectric properties. Device-related
R&amp;D towards prototype manufacturing helps move the thermoelectrics industry
towards low cost processes. Results from this research may also be useful for
solar cells and photovoltaics, since quaternary chalcogenides are also of
interest in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: A major
component of this project relies on the predictive power of computational and
theoretical methods for materials design. The particular class of quaternary
chalcogenides and related derivatives are targeted. Modeling and first
principles calculations are directed towards understanding electronic structure
features due to chemical and structural features, as well as nanostructuring, to
control the transport in a beneficial way. In addition, state-of-the-art
synthesis and characterization efforts serve as a benchmark for the proposed
theory and as conceptual input for advancing the research further. The
partnership with Marlow Industries, Inc., a world leader in commercial
thermoelectrics applications, provides additional experimental capabilities for
materials and device testing and facilitates work towards a prototype device
whose commercial potential can also be evaluated. This synergistic project
involves graduate students and it is especially suitable for the USF's PhD
program in Applied Physics, the only such doctoral program in the state of
Florida. Outreach activities and summer teaching modules for high school
students are also a part of this project.