* 1400625
* Compositional, temperature, and pressure controls on structural order, dynamics, and properties of multicomponent borosilicate glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Borosilicate glasses are widely used in
technology, with applications ranging from heat- and chemical-resistant
glassware and reaction vessels, to reinforcement fibers in 'fiber-glass', to
computer, television and smart phone display screens and solar-cell substrates.
Many of these are central to multi-billion dollar U.S. industries. The atomic-
scale structure of these materials controls their properties, which must be
tailored to improve performance in their diverse uses. This project seeks to
understand general principles of how variations in the glass composition, the
way that it is heat-treated during manufacturing, and the pressures that can
occur during bending and cracking, change the glass structure, to allow desired
properties to be more easily predicted and engineered. The results of these
studies should have more general interest as well, in other fields of science
where glasses (and the liquids that form glass on cooling) are important,
including geosciences and condensed-matter physics. Education is central to this
project, since most of the research will be undertaken as part of the training
of graduate and undergraduate students on their ways to careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the professor and his students are synthesizing several series of glasses with
systematic variations in composition, and then measuring how the glass structure
changes. The most important experimental approach that is being used is solid-
state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which provides quantitative
details about the structure around many of the components common in
technological glasses, including boron, aluminum, silicon, and oxygen. By
varying the thermal and pressure treatments of the glasses, they can look for
important, but still poorly-understood, effects. They are analyzing their
findings with thermodynamic-based reaction equilibria to facilitate prediction
of properties. Effects of 'non-traditional' components with unusually small
and/or highly charged cations are being emphasized. Much of the current
development of improved and new types of glass materials comes from trial-and-
error experimentation; thus, it is an important goal to develop more fundamental
understanding of structure-property relationships to efficiently explore
parameter spaces. Success with this goal could lead to more effective ways of
thinking about designing glass compositions for new or specific applications.
Given the major efforts in glass science in other countries, and the importance
of manufacturing high-tech glasses in U.S. industry, it seems particularly
urgent for US-based researchers to make progress in the more fundamental
understanding of these materials and remain as leaders in this field.