* 1400942
* Nanotechnology Education Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Hailemichael Seyoum, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,989.00

Nanotechnology is an emerging technology that enables many of the US industries
that keep the US globally competitive. This project is supporting the
development of an associate in applied science degree and certificate course
offerings in nanotechnology at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC)
and UDC-Community College (UDC-CC). UDC is one of 35 Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU) in the US. The project is impacting underrepresented
minorities at UDC-CC of whom 60% are females, a population which needs to be
more strongly directed to opportunities in STEM. This nanotechnology education
workforce (NEW) development project is also leveraging the expertise and
resources of the ATE National Center Nanotechnology Application and Career
Knowledge (NACK). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, courses in nanotechnology
are being offered as interdisciplinary courses to students in all disciplines.
Faculty and students are learning about the fabrication of nanomaterials and
conducting research in nanomaterials. Seminars and distance learning offerings
in nanotechnology are being supported. The project is fostering ongoing
collaborative educational workforce development between UDC, UDC-CC and area
university professors and researchers at government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project evaluation is designed to assess the
degree of program development and implementation, student learning and skills
competency, and program effectiveness.