* 1400424
* Controlled Manufacturing of Lightweight, All-Carbon High Performance Materials Using Low-Cost Solvent Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Cary Pint, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

Materials composed of carbon nanostructures have extraordinary promise for
lightweighting, ultra-strength, and high conductivity with diverse applications
ranging from active components in rechargeable batteries to reinforced
structural composites. However, macroscopic materials that retain the inherent
properties of carbon nanostructures, such as mechanical strength one hundred
times greater than steel, thermal properties of diamond, and electrical
conduction better than metals, have remained elusive due to required
manufacturing precision at the scale of individual carbon nanostructures or
molecules to achieve such properties, a scale not achievable with conventional
manufacturing. This award supports fundamental multi-disciplinary research to
understand and control the mechanisms behind forming three-dimensional
structures of carbon-based materials designed at the molecular level to exhibit
tailored mechanical, electrical, thermal, and chemical properties. The outcome
of this effort will be a new large-scale manufacturing approach to enable high
throughput, low-cost three-dimensional manufacturing of lightweight next-
generation carbon-based materials. These materials are broadly applicable to
diverse areas of structural and energy storage materials, and will specifically
be assessed for their performance in batteries capable of replacing gasoline in
transportation systems. This award will support research that directly benefits
the US economy and society, while also integrating an educational and outreach
component aimed to open a window between the research laboratory and the
classroom, stimulate interest in high school students through local outreach
programs, and aggressively drive participation from underrepresented and
minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach utilizes electrophoretic
deposition, a technique using electric fields generated between two conductive
electrodes to drive the motion and deposition of carbon nanoparticles dispersed
in stable solvents. This effort is focused on understanding and exploiting the
control achievable in this technique to fabricate hybrid assemblies of diverse
carbon nanostructures, including graphene, carbon nanotubes, and carbon
nanohorns, to enable nanostructure-controlled tunable physical properties. This
focuses on the science behind (i) the development of surfactant free, pristine
hybrid carbon nanomaterials from low-cost solvents that have potential for
reusability in continuous manufacturing and (ii) the mechanisms governing
deposition into three-dimensional structures and on low-cost plastic or
insulating materials. This effort ultimately leads to the development of a roll-
to-roll electrophoretic deposition system that can both improve the precision of
electrophoretic nanomanufacturing and also seed low-cost, large-scale
fabrication processes for functional carbon materials relevant to diverse
applications, and specifically next-generation batteries and supercapacitors.