* 1400968
* Decoding the Complex Cellular Information Flow by Multiplexed Chemosensing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bo Sun, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 361,302.00

This project will significantly improve our understanding of cellular
information flow in the presence of complex environment cues. Cells respond to
external stimuli through a cascade of events involving messenger elements that
transduce information at diverse scales. Despite the progress in revealing
individual signaling pathways, the fact that most signal transducers are shared
by multiple pathways challenges our current understanding of cellular
information flow. Compared to telecommunication systems, cells are excellent
multiplexing (MUX) and demultiplexing (DEMUX) devices handling huge amount of
information within an interweaving signaling network. In particular, as one of
the most multitasking messenger elements, intracellular calcium engages in many
aspects of cellular functions. However, existing models of information routing
have either limited applicability in calcium signaling or may underestimate its
information capacity.

Inspired by his recent findings of the calcium homeostasis during collective
chemosensing, the PI hypothesizes that the non-linear dynamics of cytosolic
calcium allows mammalian cells to encode complex information on both the single
cell and multicellular levels. The PI proposes to test the hypothesis by
studying the multiplexed chemosensing of a genetically engineered model cell
line. As an essential step of the PI's long term goal to understand the physics
of cellular information processing, the project will not only provide insight to
the calcium-mediate MUX/DEMUX mechanisms, but also pave the way of realizing its
engineering potential to build cell-based biosensors and biocomputational units.
The PI will develop a diverse educational and outreach program that is closely
integrated with the research program. Specifically: (i) Utilizing existing
programs at Oregon State University (OSU), the PI will design a series of lab-
based research training projects to engage female and minority high school
students, summer undergraduate interns as well as senior undergraduate students
working toward their thesis. (ii) Results and data generated in the project will
be used to develop quantitative biology curricula to be offered at OSU from the
winter term of 2014. This class is designed to discuss biological systems from
information processing perspectives. (iii) Industrial outreach will benefit from
the PI's existing industrial partnership and the proposed outreach activities,
such as site visits and graduate student internships to disseminate the research
outcomes.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.