* 1400450
* AURA Management and Operation of the National Solar Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2024
* Valentin Martinez Pillet, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carrie E. Black
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,450,257.00

Under terms of this Cooperative Agreement, the Association of Universities for
Research in Astronomy (AURA), Inc. will manage and operate the National Solar
Observatory (NSO) and its associated facilities on behalf of the National
Science Foundation and the national solar and space physics research
communities. The mission of the NSO is to advance human knowledge of the Sun,
both as an astronomical object and as the dominant external influence on the
Earth. The NSO operates the world's largest collection of ground-based optical
and infrared solar telescopes and associated instrumentation allowing solar
physicists to probe all aspects of the Sun, from the deep solar interior, to the
photosphere and chromosphere, to the outer corona and its interface with the
interplanetary medium. These same assets also provide data to space weather
researchers in their efforts to understand solar eruptions and their effect upon
the Earth, and to apply that knowledge to the protection of satellites,
astronauts, land-based power systems, and Earth's climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the observatory includes the operation of
cutting-edge facilities, the continued development of advanced instrumentation,
the conduct of solar research, and outreach to the general public. The NSO
provides scientific and technical leadership in helioseismology, synoptic
observations of solar variability, and high-resolution studies of the Sun at
visible and infrared wavelengths. The NSO leads a vigorous program in education
for public visitors to its facilities, undergraduates interested in solar
physics, graduate students conducting dissertation research on the Sun, and
postdoctoral researchers needing access to its facilities. With the construction
of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST), AURA and the NSO will lead a
transformation of current U.S. ground-based solar capabilities into a new era.
When it becomes operational, the DKIST facility will be the largest and most
powerful solar observatory in the world providing the unprecedented sensitivity
and resolution to allow solar scientists to answer some of the fundamental
questions in the field, namely: Why does the Sun have a magnetic field? How does
the Sun produce cycles of varying activity? What causes sunspots? How does the
Sun produce violent explosions? While the DKIST facility will provide the high-
resolution means to study the smallest details of the Sun, the NSO?s synoptic
program provides the long-term, full-disk, monitoring capability necessary to
place DKIST observations in context to allow transformative research in solar
and space physics.&lt;br/&gt;