* 1400248
* Integrable Systems, Integral Operators, and Probabilistic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Harold Widom, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Natural phenomena are complex. The purpose of mathematical modeling is to study
admittedly simpler versions of what one sees in nature and extract exact results
which could help explain, and sometimes predict, events in the real world. There
are "nonequlibrium processes", in which the system is evolving, and "equlibrium
processes" which model the behavior of the system after it has settled down.
This project studies one of each, the "Ising model" (an equlibrium process) and
the "asymmetric simple exclusion process" (a nonequlibrium process). The first
is the simplest (although still quite complicated) description of
ferromagnetism. It is the two-dimensional model that is studied, in particular
its thermodynamic properties (in which the number of particles gets infinitely
large). Magnetism and magnetic materials are pervasive throughout technology, so
it is important to achieve exact mathematical results for them. The asymmetric
simple exclusion process is the simplest model of phenomena in which particles
interact with each other. Precisely, no two can occupy the same site at the same
time. The model has far-ranging applications in nonequilibrium statistical
physics, engineering, and biological systems. The one-dimensional case is what
is studied (think of electrons flowing in a wire). Theoretical results of the
principal investigator and collaborator have been confirmed by recent
experiment. This project will result in a deeper understanding of this process
and related random models in statistical physics.

The asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP) is one of the simplest,
nontrivial stochastic models in which to study transport phenomena as it models
processes far from equilibrium. ASEP is closely related, in a certain scaling
limit, to the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation, a nonlinear stochastic partial
differential equation that is expected to describe a large class of
stochastically growing interfaces. Recent work by Sasamoto, Spohn, Amir, Corwin
and Quastel, using results of Tracy and the PI, have rigorously established this
link between ASEP and the KPZ equation. This project builds on the work of Tracy
and the PI and involves: (i) the rigorous operator-theoretic underpinnings of
asymptotic results for ASEP with an open boundary; (ii) the study of a discrete
time version of ASEP; and (iii) the role of Weyl groups in classifying
interacting particle systems solvable by a Bethe Ansatz.