* 1400887
* Fifth International Conference and School: Geometry, Dynamics, Integrable Systems -- GDIS 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Vladimir Dragovic, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard
* 03/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

The 2014 meeting of GDIS: The Fifth International Conference and School
Geometry, Dynamics, Integrable Systems - GDIS 2014 will be organized at the
International Center for Theoretical Physics "Abdus Salam" in Trieste, Italy, on
June 16-27, 2014. The meeting is devoted to the bicentennial of the Great
Poncelet Theorem. The meeting will focus on the most recent developments on the
crossroad of geometry and dynamical systems, with a special focus on integrable
systems and applications in classical mechanics and nonholonomic dynamics. The
two-week event will be organized in two parts. The first week is devoted to the
school. The second week is devoted to the conference. The school part will focus
on recent developments in interrelations between geometry and dynamical systems,
with special attention to integrable systems. The school will provide a
background in algebraic geometry, theory of measured foliations and flat
surfaces, interval exchange transformations, the discrete integrable systems,
2-2 correspondences, and the QRT maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of the GDIS 2014 Conference and School is threefold. First, the organizers will
provide a stimulating atmosphere for the invited speakers to present the latest
developments in the fields of geometry, dynamics, integrability, and their
applications to mechanics. Second, researchers at the postdoctoral level, as
well as PhD students, will be encouraged to make contributions and present their
results. The third aim is to prepare graduate and undergraduate students through
the school part -- a series of mini courses -- to follow the conference part
more effectively and help them to trace their path to the current state-of-the-
art level of science. The conference will bring together scientists from all
over the world including the five continents, both from developed and developing
countries, minorities, women, and it will provide an opportunity for researchers
and students to share their latest ideas and to collaborate with each other.
Since the conference and school GDIS 2014 focuses on relationships between
several popular areas of research, it has potential to attract young
mathematicians, encourage minorities and women to participate in exciting cross-
disciplinary research and look for new applications of their research in other
fields of science. The knowledge obtained on this occasion will be disseminated
by participants literally throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://cdsa
genda5.ictp.trieste.it/full_display.php?smr=0&amp;ida=a13202