* 1400354
* Next Generation Multi-craft Manufacturing Support Technician
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Dick Bickerstaff, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 814,694.00

Manufacturing is a major component of the Ohio economy and is ranked sixth in
the nation in manufacturing's percentage of total jobs. From now to 2020, eight
manufacturing subsectors are expected to grow in Ohio: food manufacturing,
beverage and tobacco products, wood products, plastic and rubber products,
nonmetallic mineral products, fabricated metal products, transportation
equipment, and furniture and related products. This growth creates an increased
demand for multi-craft maintenance support technicians.

Columbus State Community College will collaborate with Miami University, two
Worthington City high schools, Honda North American Services LLC and several
manufacturing companies to expand the supply of next-generation multi-craft
manufacturing support technicians to address this growing shortage in the
Central Ohio Region. The technicians will have skills in electrical (AC and DC),
programmable logical controllers, pneumatics, hydraulics, mechanical drive
systems, welding, troubleshooting, and safety. The multi-craft manufacturing
support technicians will design, install, troubleshoot, and maintain a variety
of types of equipment within manufacturing and process control operations. The
project will integrate an Advanced Automation Institute summer bridge program,
with classroom instruction, and paid work study into a seamless pathway from
high school to a baccalaureate degree. Planned laboratory improvements will
include upgrading welding facilities, additions to a self-paced Integrated
Systems Technology facility, and creating a remote site laboratory to serve
students in rural areas. A key feature will involve specific methods to reach
out to and serve under-represented populations. There will be a wide
dissemination of the program model through publications, conferences, and
partnerships.

Project evaluation activities will address the program impact on students and
their employability, the quality of the learning materials developed, and the
impact on faculty and the institution of the multi-craft maintenance support
technician career pathway.