* 1400237
* Apollonian Circle Packings
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Alina Bucur, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2016
* USD 27,204.00

This grant funds the participation of US-based lecturers, organizers, and
students in the Apollonian Circle Packings Summer School at the Institut Mittag-
Leffler, Stockholm, during June 23-27, 2014 (co-hosted by the European Women in
Mathematics association and the European Mathematical Society as the 6th
European Women in Mathematics Summer School). The summer school will feature
lecture series by Dr. Elena Fuchs (Berkeley) and Prof. Hee Oh (Yale University)
on Apollonian circle packings and related concepts such as orbits of thin
groups, geometric group theory, equidistribution, the affine sieve, strong
approximation and expanders. This area is on the cutting edge of current
mathematics; many of the major breakthroughs have occurred in the last 5-7
years, and at least 17 papers on these subjects have appeared since 2011.
Graduate students and postdocs will benefit from learning about these methods in
a unified presentation that ties all of these ideas back into the irresistible
beauty of Apollonian circle packings. Further information may be found on the
summer school webpage: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.ucsd.edu/~alina/ewm
/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This summer school will have potential for broad impact
on the worldwide community of young number theorists, as it will provide an
entry point to this fast-paced area of research, and will enrich the skills of
graduate student and postdoc participants. In addition, due to its structural
focus on gender parity, this summer school will serve a key role in retaining
women who are already engaged in number theory, as well as in attracting more
female researchers to the field. By highlighting the research of the two
featured female lecturers on the international stage, the summer school will
increase their visibility, particularly for younger researchers in the field.
The school will also give participants the chance to gain specialized knowledge
on fascinating new developments in number theory as well as an awareness of
current open problems in the field. Finally, participants will learn about
connections between number theory and other parts of mathematics while enlarging
their mathematical toolboxes, thus supplementing their educations and aiding
them in starting successful independent research programs.