* 1400073
* Dirac-type problems for hypergraphs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Yi Zhao, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,476.00

Although Combinatorics is as old as human's ability to count, its most
impressive growth has been seen only in recent decades, mainly due to the rapid
development of computer science. Extremal Combinatorics deals with the problems
of finding the maximum or minimum value of a function over a class of finite
objects. Such problems are often related to other branches of mathematics and
other fields of science, including biology, chemistry, computer science,
information and coding theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
concentrates on extremal problems for hypergraphs. Since hypergraphs have more
complicated structures than graphs, generalizing results from graphs to
hypergraphs is usually far from straightforward and frequently gives rise to new
phenomena. For example, there are multiple ways (depending on how to define
degrees and cycles in hypergraphs) to extend the classical result of Dirac on
Hamilton cycles to hypergraphs -- none of them has an easy proof. The Dirac
problems, and related matching and packing problems have received considerable
attention lately. Modern tools, e.g., the absorbing method and the regularity
method, have helped to generate new results, and yet many fundamental problems
in the area remain unsolved. The PI plans to tackle many outstanding problems in
the area, developing the extremal theory of hypergraphs.