* 1400169
* Fractal Mechanics of Stretchable Piezoelectrics for Mechanical Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* YongGang Huang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2019
* USD 299,994.00

This investigation will produce wearable renewable power sources that will
eliminate or reduce (1) waste streams associated with battery disposal/recycling
in personal/wearable systems and (2) surgical procedures required for battery
replacement in implantable electronics. A strong education program, tightly
coupled to research, will train students to become next-generation leaders on
sustainable energy. The education program includes 1) involvement of a large
number of undergraduate students in research, which reflects the strong appeal
of this research to the younger generation; 2) development of courses related to
mechanics design of energy harvesting; and 3) strong outreach activities to
K-12, college students, and general public. This stretchable mechanical energy
harvester is expected to serve as a compelling tool for introducing the public
to the STEM fields, such as through interactive museums
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to combine
the advanced engineering design principles and basic research on fundamental
aspects in materials, mechanics and manufacturing to develop personal-scale
sources of renewable power, which will play critical roles in the sustainable
growth of personal/wearable electronics and implantable biomedical components,
both of which are quickly emerging as key support technologies for the rapid,
global expansion of an aging population. The specific systems involve high
performance, stretchable mechanical energy harvesters, capable of mounting on
nearly any surface (e.g., glass, paper, biological tissues, textiles,
automotives, building structures) in nearly any configuration (e.g. flat,
curved, dynamically deformed) and at nearly any scale (e.g. micro to macro).
Studies conducted under this award will develop enabling technologies, and
optimize the system to realize the specified performance goals such as high-
areal coverage, large stretchability, and precise control of strains in devices.