* 1400256
* Geometric Optimal Control for Locomotion of Biologically Inspired Robotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Erik Verriest, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 295,988.00

Animals, and their analogous biologically-inspired robots out-perform
traditional robots (e.g., cars, planes, boats) in many environments and for many
tasks. Unfortunately, control of biologically-inspired robots differs from that
of traditional robots, preventing their adoption. Achieving control of
biologically-inspired robots with the same ease as traditional robots would
markedly transform the field of robotics. The main challenge is that locomotion
requires time-varying periodic control inputs, known as gaits, to achieve
movement. The discrete nature of the gaits and their time-varying structure
means that standard control strategies do not apply. It is critical that this
class of robots be as simple to control as traditional robots if widespread
adoption is to occur. This award supports fundamental research into a
mathematical framework that will lead to simpler formulations for control of
these robots. The simpler formulation will be of value to society as
biologically-inspired robots are envisioned to be of great practical use for a
variety of robotic application domains, such as search and rescue, defense,
surveillance, and plant integrity inspection. Furthermore, biologically-inspired
robots are quite popular with youth and the public. We will capitalize on this
appeal to increase and broaden participation in engineering and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologically-inspired robotic systems are
typically nonholonomic systems that require time-varying control inputs, making
optimal control-based design of trajectories challenging. Further, these systems
rely on families of parametrizable, time-varying control inputs, called gaits,
to generate movement. Gaits are disjoint controls, in that applying one gait
precludes the use of another. Thus, not only must the control input be time-
varying, but the reachability properties are gait-dependent and may require
switches of control modes for some navigation goals. On account of these
challenges, the development of a framework for trajectory generation and
planning of these systems is still an open problem. Drawing on concepts from
differential geometry, geometric mechanics, and averaging theory to exploit the
geometric and temporal symmetries of these robotic systems, a reduced optimal
control formulation will be derived. The connection of these concepts to multi-
mode, multi-dimensional control systems will be delineated to resolve the
switched, optimal control problem associated to systems with multiple gait
strategies. To generate initial trajectory estimates for the optimal control
solver, we will specialize a kino-dynamic path planning algorithm to incorporate
the geometric and multi-gait properties of biologically-inspired robotic
systems.