* 1400142
* Enabling Nanomanufacturing via Fast Optical Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Rajesh Menon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2019
* USD 559,231.00

Top-down nanopatterning is the most effective approach for creating
nanostructures of complex geometries and therefore, usually the first step in
nanomanufacturing. Unfortunately, conventional approaches to nanopatterning are
extremely slow compared to pattern replication. This award supports research
that combines a massively parallel architecture and a new method that allows
light to define nanostructures far smaller than is otherwise possible. The
result is to achieve fast nanopatterning of structures as small as a large
molecule. When fast pattern generation is combined with fast pattern replication
(such as roll-to-roll nanoimprint lithography), a new paradigm for
nanomanufacturing arises. This paradigm has the potential to enable entirely new
material and device functionalities as it provides exquisite control of
structure at the nanoscale in conjunction with such control over macroscopic
areas. When brought to fruition, this technology will enable new classes of
devices and applications, e.g., light-trapping for thin-film solar-cells, large-
area self-cleaning surfaces, anti-microbial surfaces, and large-area
metamaterials (e.g., cloaking materials). This award will provide essential
training in research that draws upon expertise in multiple disciplines including
optics, chemistry, electrical engineering and materials science. The fundamental
knowledge generated during this research will be widely disseminated via the
commercialization of the new nanopatterning technology. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The far-field diffraction limit is a fundamental physical barrier
that limits the size of a focused optical beam to approximately half its
wavelength. When applied to nanopatterning with visible light, this limit
prevents the generation of structures below ~200nm. This project will overcome
this limit by using photochromic molecules that can be toggled between two
isomeric forms. By exposing a monolayer of such molecules to a spatially varying
intensity distribution, a chemical pattern of the two isomers is first formed.
Using a stepping stage with nanometric precision, the substrate is then moved
relative to the optics. A second exposure to the same illumination toggles the
photochromic molecules. By appropriate displacement of the stage, it is possible
to leave arbitrarily small regions of molecules (down to the single-molecule
level) in one isomeric form compared to the surrounding region. A subsequent
locking step may then be used to selectively modify this isomeric form such that
it is no longer photochromic. Since everything else on the surface is
photochromic, the entire sequence of steps can be repeated to create geometries
of arbitrary complexity in a "dot-matrix" fashion. This award will support
fundamental research into the design, synthesis and characterization of
appropriate photochromic molecules, a new optical system, and related processes.