* 1400982
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring convergence within pitcher plant microcosms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,970.00

Understanding the factors driving community formation within a host or habitat
has implications for global climate change, human health, and microbial ecology.
As host species shift location, can other symbionts substitute for those from
the original habitat? Pitcher plants have modified leaves that collect water and
microbes, and trap insects that are digested for nutrients. These pitchers can
be thought of as plant analogs to the human gut, and studying how their
microbial communities form, interact with each other, and assist with host
digestion could inform our understanding of our own gut inhabitants. The project
will involve training opportunities for American and Malaysian students, and
will foster cooperation and networking with scientists in Malaysian Borneo. The
researchers will work collaboratively to create educational exhibits for the
Malaysian research center, and the complex ecology of pitcher plants will be
shared with children and adults through a Harvard Museum of Natural History
family program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergence of form and function is common
in all domains of life, because similar selective forces in geographically
distant locations shape evolutionary change. Pitchers of carnivorous plants are
exquisite examples of convergent evolution: pitcher plant morphology and
function has evolved separately in three distant plant lineages in different
biogeographic regions. This study investigates whether the organisms associated
with pitchers show similar patterns of convergence in the nature of their
ecological interactions. It will compare community pattern and function across
four different kingdoms, within convergent hosts. With two genera of pitcher
plants, Sarracenia in North America and Nepenthes in Southeast Asia, the
microbial community composition across different pitcher plant species and
collecting sites will be determined by DNA sequencing of the fungal, bacterial,
and protist inhabitants. The ability of pitcher plant insects and microbes to
colonize a convergently evolved host will be investigated by placing Nepenthes
plants in a Sarracenia habitat, along with artificial controls, to see if and
how insects and microbes colonize unfamiliar hosts. A laboratory experiment will
compare native and convergently evolved microbial communities in facilitating
the nutrient-limited pitcher plants in nitrogen uptake from prey. Finally, to
determine if community patterns of inhabitants are similar across convergent
hosts the similarity of taxa, community patterns, and factors structuring
communities in Sarracenia and Nepenthes insect and microbial associates will be
tested using metagenomic analyses to examine community functional capacity
within convergent pitcher plant hosts by statistical and phylogenetic analyses,
and with null models.