* 1400387
* GOALI: Improving the Reliability of Aluminum Structures During Fire Through Computational Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Michael Shields, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 359,148.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to construct a probabilistic computational framework
for modeling response of aluminum structure in buildings subjected to fire. The
results can have a profound impact on the design and analysis practices for
aluminum structures (and ductile metal structures in general) by enabling
probabilistically informed standards that account for variability in nonlinear
material responses. Current methods employing simplistic safety factors apply a
large penalty to account for fire risk. The processes developed through this
work can result in significant cost saving for numerous industries ranging from
civil structural design to automotive, aircraft, and naval vessel design. The
research will also afford unique educational opportunities to high school
students in the Baltimore area through joint academic-industry mentorship.
Graduate students involved in the project will benefit from professional
exchange through internship at the industry partner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will serve to enhance understanding of the material response of aluminum
under simultaneous stress and high temperature by quantifying the uncertainties
associated with both the materials and the fire events. The research plan
includes assessment of uncertainties at the material level as well as
uncertainties related to temperature rate and fire exposure time. The goal is to
develop probabilistic reliability analysis that can be incorporated in to finite
element software. The program will couple state-of-the-art deterministic
computational tools developed by the industry partner which have been shown to
accurately model the creep rupture and elastoplastic failure of ductile metals
with uncertainty quantification, stochastic simulation, and structural
reliability methods developed at the institution. Validation of the analytical
model will be done using the previously conducted experimental data available
from other sources.