* 1400593
* Center for Advanced Automotive Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Chih-Ping Yeh, Macomb Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2019
* USD 2,383,697.00

The NSF-funded Center for Advanced Automotive Technology (CAAT) advances the
mission of the ATE program by connecting industry and academia to ensure that
education programs meet the needs and expected outcomes for technicians within
the many sectors of the automotive industry. As the automotive industry
continues its radical transformation, fuel efficiency, minimized environmental
impact and safety are the driving factors surrounding new car design. These
newly developed features are shifting the skillset for technicians sought after
by employers. CAAT expands its existing framework to include additional
technology areas by seed funding other colleges to create and implement new
curricula. The CAAT is building an automotive technology learning environment
that extends well beyond the campus at Macomb Community College. The Center
advances life-long educational attainment, working with a range of age groups to
engage people in advance technology - increasing awareness of high school
students to consider technician education, encouraging certificate and degree
attainment at the community college, promoting transfer to four-year
institutions and supporting professionals who desire more training. CAAT also
serves as a convener of business and educational institutions meetings and
provides professional development to community college and high school
educators. CAAT provides a smooth transition to the Wayne State University
Electric Transportation Technology program and Wayne State is constructing the
Advanced Technology Education Center (ATEC) on the Macomb South Campus which
will house an Advanced Battery Systems Laboratory jointly developed by the two
institutions.

CAAT's Industry Advisory Council requested consideration of the following
actions: continuing the vehicle electrification focus; increasing educational
resources on diesels; strengthening curricula in the advances being made in
internal combustion engines and homogeneous charge compression ignitions;
training existing technicians in electrical and software applications of
automotive vehicle features; and emphasizing the need to utilize total systems
thinking for diagnosis and problem solving of modern vehicles.

The formative and summative evaluations emphasize strategic linkages between
organizational planning and evaluation, specific goals and outcomes for the
purpose of measuring impact, and data use for continuous improvement. As the
evaluation moves from awareness/reaction to impact (using the Kirkpatrick model)
it measures the extent to which the work of CAAT is consistent with their
proposal, that the work is meeting or exceeding the target numbers of products,
participants, contributions and that the work is positively impacting the
desired audiences. Each measure has target goals, such as 90% of participants in
professional development found that the workshop provided techniques, skills or
materials of value to them; 75% of participants believe that their teaching
knowledge and skills are improved; and 30% apply the ideas and report positive
impact on their students. The data will be gathered through surveys, site
visits, telephone interviews and evaluations of workshops. The data are used to
revise the interventions.

CAAT's demonstrably successful program is focused on Associate Degree level,
middle-skills jobs in advanced automotive technologies. This automotive
technology education has been so impactful in the Great Lakes region and beyond.