* 1400962
* Research Initiation Award - Spatial and Temporal Modeling of Mercury Fate and Dynamics in Tennessee Watersheds
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Maruthi Sridhar Balaji Bhaskar, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 239,995.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
project at Texas Southern University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to develop a comprehensive understanding of
the landscape factors on mercury loading and distribution in the East Tennessee
watersheds of the Oak Ridge Reservation. This project will also enhance the
research experience and training of undergraduate and graduate students at Texas
Southern University.

The three specific objectives of the project include: characterizing the spatial
and temporal trends of mercury bioaccumulation in watersheds; identifying and
analyzing the influence of land use and land cover changes on the mercury
dynamics in the watersheds; and investigating the fate and transport of mercury
across the landscape. The first objective will be achieved by acquiring,
assembling and interpreting both the spatial and long-term analytical data of
all the sample media of the watersheds that drain the Oak Ridge reservation.
Spatial and temporal analysis of the data will be conducted to identify the
mercury concentration and bioaccumulation trends. The second objective will be
achieved by quantifying the land use and land cover changes using time series
aerial and satellite imagery. Quantitative relationships between the changes in
landscape factors to mercury bioaccumulation will be established. The third
objective will be achieved by superimposing and analyzing the hydrologic flow
paths with watershed delineations, soil and sediment erosion rates, wetlands and
other landscape factors with the available long term mercury analytical data.