* 1400789
* California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* tasha inniss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 987,000.00

University of California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists universities and
colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their efforts at
significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully completing high
quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming STEM education
through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and experiences in
support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM programs leading
to the STEM doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of California-
Los Angeles (UCLA) is the host site for the 2014-2016 (Cohort IX) BD program
that supports a graduate student cohort of 12 underrepresented minority (URM)
STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP campuses across the nation. The BD Activity
provides extensive training in specific STEM disciplines as well as professional
development and guidance that promote peer mentoring and leadership in the
scientific community. Students receive rigorous academic and research training
experiences that support completion of the Ph.D. and the transition to a
competitive career in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
strengthens the connections between existing LSAMP undergraduate programs and
UCLA?s STEM graduate programs with the goal of permanently increasing the number
of URMs in the pipeline leading to doctoral programs at UCLA. The activity
provides a robust set of graduate student development opportunities that promote
mentoring and leadership in STEM communities. The BD students are engaged in
mentoring CAMP undergraduates and transfer students to increase excitement and
retention in URM STEM majors at UCLA. Linkages to the NSF Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) programming and institutional resources
provides support for the participants following the two-year project
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Best practices for recruitment and retention of
graduate student researchers are implemented and built upon lessons learned from
previous LSAMP BD host sites. The UCLA BD findings, lessons learned, and impact
of the activities are disseminated through publications and presentations at
national meetings, and data sharing processes with NSF-affiliated initiatives
and diversity consortiums. To date, the California Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (CAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate activity has supported 93
underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students in in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics [STEM] disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term impact of the BD activity is reflected in America's STEM
workforce,&lt;br/&gt;both in academia and in industrial research and
development. By nurturing the future&lt;br/&gt;professoriate, as well as the
scientific workforce, the value added is seen in the&lt;br/&gt;visibility of
minorities in science and engineering, increasing representation
and&lt;br/&gt;providing role models and motivation for the next generation.