* 1400991
* Research Initiation Award: Methanogenic Waste Digestion for Tetracycline Degradation
* EHR,HRD
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Samuel Darko, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member?s research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benedict College will
research how to remove tetracycline from waste streams because antibiotic
resistance associated with tetracycline in these wastes is increasing, and may
result in more antibiotic-resistant pathogens to humans and other ecological
receptors. The approach of this study is from a process engineering perspective,
to use harvested swine and municipal waste cultures in small batch reactors,
modifying parameters such as pH, operating temperatures, and solids retention
times to optimize performance in terms of tetracycline degradation and methane
production rates. The goal of the RIA project is to utilize anaerobic biological
waste digestion in an attempt to maximize biological degradation of
tetracycline, and also to capitalize on the methanogenesis that occurs in these
waste streams. Biologically degrading tetracycline-containing waste in the
context of methanogenesis has the added advantage of using the methane for
operational energy use, or as a combustible fuel to heat-treat the effluent for
thermal abiological destruction of tetracycline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational impacts of this research are to train underrepresented minority
students in cross-disciplinary research, combining engineering with
microbiology, and training them in emerging contaminant removal and clean and
renewable energy engineering. Emerging&lt;br/&gt;contaminant removal and
renewable energy research and engineering are both strong growth sectors of the
economy and increasingly important to meet future energy and environmental
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RIA expands knowledge on the extent to which
biological degradation of pharmaceuticals like tetracycline can be achieved, as
well as understanding of the extent of tetracycline degradation that can be
achieved in a complex matrix. The research is therefore important because it
addresses the above issues, benefitting the global society, while helping to
train and place under-represented minorities in these growing research and
employment sectors. Students will gain hands-on research skills in microbiology,
analytic chemistry, and renewable energy engineering, making them attractive
candidates for graduate-level study in the environmental field or in industry.
As an Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
jurisidction, the project broadens participation geographically by potentially
increasing research capacity and capability statewide.