* 1400973
* GOALI: Addressing Corn Stalk Breakage: An Engineering Approach to an Important Agronomical Problem
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Douglas Cook, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 366,156.00

Corn is the world's leading grain crop. In the U.S. alone, more than 250 billion
tons are harvested annually, generating twice as much revenue as any other crop.
Corn is deeply rooted in our economy, being used in over 42,000 different
applications, including the production of consumer goods, foods,
pharmaceuticals, livestock feed, and fuel. The demand for corn continues to rise
each year, fueling efforts to increase production. Unfortunately, 10-20 percent
of the corn crop is lost every year due to breakage of the stalk before harvest,
typically due to wind-induced stalk failure. These losses significantly reduce
productivity of farms, negatively impact individual farmers, and decrease
national production, thus affecting the cost of consumer goods, commodities
trading, fuel, food, and the broader economy. Because so much corn is grown
annually, even a relative small improvement in corn stalk strength could have a
dramatically positive affect on total production and farm productivity. While
biologists have worked for many years to address this problem, this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports a new
approach: involving structural engineers working closely with industrial
biologists. The combination of engineering with biology will support the
development of stronger varieties of corn, and provide additional insights into
crops, including the development of strategies and approaches for similarly
strengthening other crops. The project will also expose undergraduate students
to a meaningful and interdisciplinary research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address corn stalk failure
using engineering failure analysis techniques. First, in-field observations of
natural failures will be performed to describe the nature of stalk failure, both
qualitatively (physical description and appearance), and quantitatively
(location and orientation). Properly describing and quantifying the types and
distributions of failure patterns will allow subsequent research to focus on
regions of weakness hypothesized to reside near stalk nodes. Laboratory tests
will then be performed in order to collect additional geometric and strength
data in a controlled environment using several types of corn stalks. Following
these test, measurement of corn stalk tissues will be performed to assess
stiffness, strength, and chemical composition. Finally, these various aspects
will be combined to perform statistical analyses, and to create engineering
models of corn stalk behavior. The overarching goal of this project is to
identify aspects of the corn stalk which are associated with failure, seeking
candidate features which could be modified to produce stronger stalks. This
study constitutes the first engineering failure analysis of corn stalks, and
will provide a wealth of valuable information regarding the structural
characteristics of this important crop, thus supporting and contributing to
efforts to develop stronger varieties of corn.