* 1400027
* Topics in Dynamical Systems: Attractors, Dimension, Lattice Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Yakov Pesin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 244,000.00

The proposed research deals with problems in the theory of smooth dynamical
systems and their applications to mathematical and statistical physics as well
as to areas in geometry. The main subject of study is hyperbolic dynamical
systems, systems exhibiting "deterministic chaos" phenomena; that is, the
appearance of irregular chaotic motions in purely deterministic dynamical
systems. Many global properties of a dynamical system with sufficiently strong
hyperbolic behavior can be deduced from studying the linearized approximation
system along its orbits. The study of this phenomena originated in seminal works
of Smale, Anosov and Sinai. Such systems possess a high level of
unpredictability and exhibit strong chaotic behavior. In the proposal the PI
considers the weakest (hence, most general) form of hyperbolicity known as non-
uniform hyperbolicity. It was introduced and studied in earlier work of the PI
and is based upon the theory of separation of close orbits over time, called
Lyapunov exponents. The goal of the proposed research is to develop a set of
analytic tools for the subject and to construct some natural invariant measures
with rich statistical properties.

There are several main topics in the proposal: 1) Thermodynamic formalism for
non-uniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems -- that is to establish existence and
uniqueness of equilibrium measures and study phase transitions for systems with
nonzero Lyapunov exponents; 2) Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen (SRB) measures for non-
uniformly hyperbolic systems - that is to construct "physically natural" classes
of invariant measures for dissipative systems with nonzero Lyapunov exponents;
3) Gibbs and equilibrium measures for non-uniformly hyperbolic systems
constructed via a new approach that does not rely on symbolic representation of
the system; 4) Essential coexistence of hyperbolic and non-hyperbolic behavior
-- that is to complement the famous Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory by
constructing particular examples of systems with coexistence of areas with
nonzero Lyapunov exponents and areas with zero topological entropy.