* 1400837
* 2014-2016 Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Bridge to the Doctorate at the University of South Florida
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree.

The University of South Florida (USF) is the host site for the 2014-2016 (Cohort
XII) BD program for the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation under the leadership of Florida A&M University, a Historically
Black College and University (HBCU). The program supports a graduate student
cohort of 12 underrepresented minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP
campuses across the nation. This BD Activity provides extensive training in
specific STEM disciplines, particularly physics, as a new American Physical
Society (APS) Bridge Program site. Over a two-year period, the program provides
professional development and guidance that promote peer mentoring and leadership
in the scientific community. Students receive rigorous academic and research
training experiences that support completion of the Ph.D. and the transition to
a competitive career in academia and industry. Fellows also engage in mentoring
and K-12 outreach to expand the potential pipeline of underrepresented minority
students pursuing STEM careers and STEM graduate education.

Over the duration of the project and beyond, the BD program at USF serves to
increase the number and quality of students from underrepresented groups
completing STEM Ph.D. degrees and entering post-graduate employment in STEM
careers. It enhances partnerships, research collaborations, and articulation
strategies between an HBCU (FAMU) and several major majority-serving research
institutions, including national laboratories.

The long-term impact of the BD activity is reflected in America's STEM
workforce, both in academia and in industrial research and development. By
nurturing future STEM alumni from historically minority populations, the value
added is seen in the diversity of STEM disciplines in the nation, increasing
representation at the doctoral level and providing role models and motivation
for the next generation.