* 1400530
* Faculty Development for Technician Education in Welding, Materials Joining, and Non-Destructive Testing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Lyn Potter, Chattanooga State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2017
* USD 197,944.00

There is a well-documented and growing need in industry for certified welding,
materials joining, and nondestructive testing technicians. Chattanooga State
Community College in collaboration with regional industry and the ATE National
Center for Welding Education and Training (Weld-Ed) are addressing this
challenge by providing faculty development to equip regional community college
faculty and high school welding instructors with recruitment strategies and the
necessary knowledge and skills to prepare students for nationally recognized
skills certifications in critical need areas. A key goal of this project is to
advance the knowledge of these welding instructors through a professional
development workshop and follow-up activities that address the principles of
advanced materials joining and the standards for welding and welding inspection
certification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the professional development workshop
is being offered to instructors, the benefits of the training are far-reaching.
Approximately 15 institutions (high schools, 2- and 4-year colleges, and
vocational centers) provide welding instruction within the region served by the
college. Students in these institutions, whose instructors participate in the
workshop, are benefitting from the instructional materials developed and
provided to all participants. Students who are introduced to welding inspection
may choose to pursue an Associate of Applied Science (AAS) Degree in Engineering
Technology with a concentration in Nondestructive Testing Technology. Through an
articulation agreement with the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC),
individuals who earn an AAS degree in Engineering Technology may continue their
education at UTC in pursuit of a baccalaureate degree in Engineering Technology
Management. Career prospects are being enhanced for individuals regardless of
whether they choose to earn welding or welding inspection certifications or seek
to obtain college degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College offers 21
engineering technology programs that prepare technicians in advanced technology
fields, including Welding Engineering Technology and Nondestructive Testing. The
Nondestructive Testing program at the college has been accredited by the
Engineering Technology Accreditation Commission of ABET that is recognized as
the worldwide leader in assuring quality and stimulating innovation in applied
science, computing, engineering, and engineering technology education. The
college is the first and only institution within the United States to earn this
distinction. This project is leveraging expertise at the college by adapting
Weld-Ed curriculum resources to provide faculty development that is updating and
expanding welding, materials joining, and nondestructive education in the region
and increasing the number of nationally certified technicians available to
industry. Participants are also being equipped with strategies and resources for
student recruitment for the targeted courses and programs.