* 1400870
* The University of Puerto Rico Bridge to the Doctorate Initiative:  Providing Multidisciplinary Training in STEM Disciplines at the PhD Level (Cohort X)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Celeste Freytes, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2016
* USD 987,000.00

The University of Puerto Rico (Rio Piedras), lead institution for the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PR-LSAMP), will administer its tenth
(10th) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program. The current UPR BD Program occurs
in the context of the important and significant contributions of the UPR system
STEM undergraduate programs. Sixteen percent of the Hispanic doctorate
recipients in Science and Mathematics, and twenty percent of the Hispanic
doctorate recipients in Engineering during the period 2005-2010 in the United
States received their bachelor's degrees from a PR-LSAMP member institution. The
economic strength of the United States, its ability to remain competitive in a
global economy, and the sense of social health in American society is reliant on
the successful incorporation of every ethnicity in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. The capability of the nation for
innovation and competitiveness depends on its ability to recruit and retain the
best talent across racial and socioeconomic groups. The implementation of the
UPR BD Activity develops a highly competitive STEM education and research
enterprise required to advance Puerto Rico's economic development and meets the
national need for diverse STEM professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPR's BD
program will provide multidisciplinary training in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at the Ph.D. level to enable a
seamless transition from the STEM baccalaureate degree to STEM graduate studies.
Twelve students who received STEM baccalaureate degrees from PR-LSAMP
institutions or from mainland LSAMP institutions will be selected and supported
as BD Fellows at the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras campus. The program
will continue to coordinate its activities with other NSF-funded projects that
are managed by the Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and by
pertinent UPR graduate programs. The activities implemented will increase the
number of Puerto Rican STEM undergraduate students who apply and are admitted to
STEM PhD programs, and increase the number of these students who obtain STEM
doctoral degrees. The total number of BD Fellows supported by PR-LSAMP since its
inception would increase to 118. BD Fellows will participate in a series of
development activities that will be provided or facilitated by the BD Program
including: scientific seminars on interdisciplinary or frontier research topics;
seminars in ethics of science; and workshops to develop scientific research
skills as well as written and oral communication skills. Fellows will be
encouraged to travel to and present at national and international scientific
meetings and to complete a summer research internship at national and
international partner research centers of PR EPSCoR and the Institute of
Tropical Ecology (ITES). In addition, UPR's BD program will implement activities
that develop mentoring and teambuilding skills. The Role Model Seminar series
will bring the BD Fellows into contact with successful nationally and
internationally recognized researchers thereby creating a mentoring environment
that further equips the Fellows to fruitfully incorporate themselves into the
greater research/industrial community.