* 1400017
* Application of Photosynthetic Proteins in a Field-Effect Transistor for Low Light Intensity Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Jing Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 04/30/2018
* USD 310,671.00

The objective of this award is to develop a new optical sensor using
photosynthetic proteins as ultra-photosensitive elements. Ultra-sensitive photo-
detectors are required for making night vision digital cameras and sensitive
lab-on-a-chip devices. Due to the low sensitivity of the silicon-based pixel
sensors, an external illumination source (i.e. flash) is usually required for
photography in low light conditions with a digital camera. The light source
affects the image quality (by reflection, loss of shadows, etc.) and consumes
more power. A matrix of highly sensitive photo-transistors can be used in the
next-generation cameras to enhance image qualities for medical, industrial, and
security applications. In contrast to silicon, photosynthetic reaction center
(RC) proteins are able to detect and respond to a few photons, emitted or
reflected by individual molecules. In this research a well aligned layer of RCs
will be employed in a field-effect transistor (FET) to make ultra-sensitive
photo-detectors. In addition to the low light intensity imaging applications,
this particular type of sensor can be used for detection of contaminants in
water or labeled viruses in a lab-on-a-chip device. The proposed research will
impact several areas such as nanotechnology, biotechnology, and electronics,
ranging from material characterization to device development. This research will
help to understand the interaction of biomaterials in synthetic structures.
Also, the knowledge will be useful to design and optimize other bio-electronics
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing the novel mechanism of charge photo-
generation in photosynthetic proteins, field-effect transistors will be
fabricated using the proteins as the secondary gate of the devices. Two
different devices made of thin film silicon and single wall carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) will be studied for the protein attachment and building the photo-
transistors. In this work it is planned to study the immobilization approaches
for binding the proteins to CNTs and silicon with specific orientations and to
investigate the field effect in the protein-insulator-semiconductor structures.
Ultimately, the fabricated device will be employed as an optical sensor in a
lab-on-a-chip device. Both experimental and theoretical studies will be carried
out to understand the limitations in using the field effect from a protein as a
signal for modulating carriers in a semiconductor device. Also, the study of the
protein-insulator-semiconductor structure will provide more insight to the
challenges for using biological materials in electronic devices and will be
transferable to other applications such as bio-solar cells and bionic eyes.