* 1400596
* Charge Transfer as a Probe of the Permeability of Organic Adlayers on Colloidal Semiconductor Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Emily Weiss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 361,567.00

In research funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, Emily Weiss of Northwestern University is carrying out research to find
ways to coat small objects known as nanoparticles with organic substances so
that they can be converted into more useful materials. Nanoparticles composed of
metal or semiconductor substances find application in a variety of technologies,
including energy, the medical field, and in chemical and biological sensors. The
surfaces of these very small particles are inherently unstable, though, so to
make them more useful they must typically be coated with a layer of organic
molecules that make the surface chemically and electronically homogeneous. This
organic layer also presents a physical barrier that impedes the approach of
other molecules and limits their adsorption. The organic layer, therefore, acts
like a semi-permeable membrane, protecting the nanoparticle and making it more
useful. This research is having a broader impact by helping investigators
improve the use of nanoparticles in analytical, therapeutic and energy
applications. Potential applications include better means of corrosion
resistance, specific detection of chemical and biological substances and new
ways to better target drugs to the desired location in the body. The work is
having a further broad impact through the involvement in the research of
undergraduates and members of groups historically under-represented in science.
As part of the project, an undergraduate is also helping to redesign the
curriculum for General Chemistry at Northwestern to make it more accessible to
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is developing ways to convert
organic-coated nanoparticles (NPs) into functional materials by facilitating the
design of surface chemistries that precisely control the types of chemical
reactions, redox reactions, and adsorption events that nanoparticles undergo in
a variety of environments. To do this, the investigators are finding ways to
control 1) the interaction of the NP with proximate molecules of interest while
minimizing non-specific or unproductive interactions, and 2) the stability of
the organic monolayer in various chemical environments. A specific aim of this
research project is to determine the relationship between the chemical
composition of organic adlayers on colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs)
and the permeability of these adlayers to small molecules, under various
environmental conditions, using measurements of interfacial charge transfer (CT)
between the QD and molecular redox probes. Chemical functionalization of NPs is
the most versatile, precisely tunable method for controlling the reactivity of a
NP, because self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) have been shown to act as molecular
recognition layers. The intellectual merit of this work is that it
quantitatively characterizes the relationship between the chemical structure of
the adlayer and its permeability to small molecules, and determines the
precision with which we can control QD-molecule interactions through the surface
chemistry of the particle. This study explores four properties of the adlayer in
tuning its stability and permeability: (i) the binding constant of the native
ligands, (ii) the intermolecular order of the native ligand shell, (iii) the
charge distribution at the interface between the ligand shell and the solvent,
and (iv) the hydrophobicity/oleophobicity of the ligand shell.