* 1400885
* MALDI-based Research-like Experiences in a 2YC/4YC Collaboration with a Renewable Fuels Industry Partner
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Grant, Anoka-Ramsey Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2018
* USD 128,253.00

Developing an advanced technological workforce hinges on successful academic and
industry partnerships that provide students with hands on experience with
cutting edge technology. The Research-Infused MALDI Modules (RIMM) initiative is
a collaboration between Anoka-Ramsey Community College (ARCC); the University of
Wisconsin-Stout; and Ever Cat Fuels, a renewable fuels company. By integrating
research and education, the RIMM modules are transforming the curriculum to
include vibrant inquiry-based experiences that incorporate the use of Matrix-
Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometry, a sensitive technology that excels at the molecular analysis of
biomolecules. Students are gaining hands-on experience in MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry and exploring scientific questions that include: biomolecule
extraction methods, microchromotography, renewable fuels, and biodiesel
synthesis.

MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry is particularly well-suited to undergraduate
research. Acknowledged as important in biomedical research and chemistry, MALDI-
TOF applications are still emerging in many applied areas, including
environmental studies, polymers, and food science. Yet, despite the wide-ranging
utility of MALDI-TOF methods, it is rare that an undergraduate would have hands-
on experience operating a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer. This project is
integrating MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry first into the chemistry curriculum
followed by the biology curriculum to enhance the undergraduate learning
environment and empower undergraduates to enthusiastically pursue science. The
partnership with Ever Cat Fuels also provides students with career opportunities
in the renewable fuels field.

The broader impacts of this project include the partnership serving as a model
for how institutions can collaborate to enhance research and instrument access
to students, and the infusion of undergraduate research at the community college
supporting the retention of under-represented groups (first-generation college
students and women). It is also expected that exposing this population to the
opportunities at UW-Stout offers an exceptional potential to improve diversity
at UW-Stout while promoting retention of students into a four-year program.