* 1400565
* Integrating Sustainability Through Technical Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Laura Cotner, Joliet Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,523.00

Preparing a technical workforce with a range of skills related to sustainable
energy practices is an important aspect of meeting our Nation's energy needs.
The primary objective for this project is to integrate sustainable energy
technology practices within technical programs at the college and implement a
new Certificate in Sustainable Energy Technology. The second objective of the
project is to develop pathways for entry into the emerging sustainable energy
field by providing intensive project based learning and dual credit enrollment
opportunities for students in grades 7-12, as well as professional development
for middle school and high school teachers.

In assessing the needs of region around Joliet, Illinois through direct
consultation with industry partners and regional workforce development boards,
it was determined that the technical programs of the college produce an adequate
and well trained workforce. However, to become more competitive and meet the
strategic objectives of the region, employers continuously cited that employee
retention and development should focus on the green and sustainable areas of
their respective disciplines. In addition, industry partners cited the need for
multi-disciplined technicians who can be flexible in their skill set. Job
security, placement and promotion were also areas continuously cited as
potential benefits of a diverse workforce with some background and knowledge in
green and sustainable practices. These findings are consistent with the 2010
Report of the National Energy Technician Education Summit which noted that
colleges should seek to integrate sustainable energy competencies in existing
programs. For this reason, the college is adapting existing programs to meet the
emerging needs for green enabled students across technical disciplines. Working
with industry partners to map their specific and cross disciplinary needs, the
college is also developing a technical certificate that demonstrates a wide
range of cross cutting technical skills and competencies. In addition, the
National Energy Technician Education Summit noted the need to develop life long
career and educational pathways for technicians to support the changing
workplace, including improving articulation between programs at the secondary
schools and two-year colleges. To address this recommendation the college is
developing an education pipeline by providing hands on, experiential and
problem-based learning opportunities for middle school students and dual credit
enrollment opportunities for high school students interested in pursuing a
career in a technical field with a cross disciplinary focus in sustainable
energy. The project has the additional impact of reaching low-income and
minority students in partnering middle schools and piloting the certificate
program through dual credit enrollment in a high school district located in
rural Grundy County.

This project is integrating sustainable energy principles and practices across
technical disciplines while improving and increasing student learning in topical
areas related to science and engineering technology since many subject areas in
the broad topic of sustainable energy technology are scientific principles and
are strongly based on physical sciences such as physics, chemistry and earth
science. The project design incorporates successful models for curriculum
development and integration of sustainability theory and practices, professional
development based on the Madison Area Technical College Career Education in
Renewable Energy Technologies (CERET) Train the Trainer model, and highly
contextualized STEM learning through experiential and problem based learning
opportunities. The goals and objectives of the project have measurable outcomes,
and evaluation is assessing the impact of enrollment in courses, seminars,
workshops, experiential learning opportunities and dual credit enrollment
courses as well as increased knowledge and interest in sustainability,
attainment of core competencies, retention, and subsequent completion.