* 1400943
* Linear systems on fibrations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Vyacheslav Shokurov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports a research project in the field of algebra and geometry, old
and traditional areas of mathematics, with methods and applications in modern
birational geometry. These methods and applications interact with most of
branches of mathematics, including differential geometry, topology, number
theory, and algebra, and can be useful in mathematical physics, cosmology,
cryptography, and robotics. From its origin geometry is closely related to
volume. The main objects under investigation are differential forms of volume
type on families and their products. The project addresses problems on
polynomial finite generatedness of those forms and on estimation of degrees of
generators with respect to the dimension and possibly to some other discrete
invariants of members of families. New techniques are needed in dealing with
differential forms on families or relative differential forms. Another novelty
of the project is to develop theory of the finite generatedness based on
universal mappings from moduli theory instead of traditionally used vanishing of
cohomologies.

The project deals with fundamental problems on linear systems of divisors
associated to twisted differential forms on fibered spaces. Standard problems
about linear systems are problems about their base points, about singularities
of their general or special members, and about correspondences with or
isomorphisms to other systems. Respectively, the PI considers the semiampleness
problem for moduli part of weakly log canonical families, the construction of
log canonical complements for fibered varieties with applications to log
canonical local and global thresholds, to a new beta invariant and to Tian's
alpha invariant, and explores possibility of an isomorphism between log
canonical linear systems adjoint to the discriminant curve for different conic
bundles structures of a threefold with applications to birational classification
of those conic bundles. Strictly fibered cases for log canonical complements and
for Sarkisov's links do not cover all possible cases, they cover main cases and
remaining ones are exceptional. The latter form usually bounded families up to
birational isomorphisms. A new technique relevant to these problems will be
developed under the project. This makes use of relative toroidal log
singularities, theory of b-polarizations, theory of moduli of triples,
interlaced by flops, and correspondences of those moduli. Investigation of
moduli of varieties defined up to flops is natural and agrees with the spirit of
current birational geometry where the minimal models are defined up to flops.