* 1400998
* Collaborative Research: Coordinated Radar and Optical Analysis of Flow Channel Disturbances within the Nightside Auroral Oval/Plasma Sheet
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Shasha Zou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2020
* USD 94,683.00

The coupling of the solar wind with Earth's magnetic field gives rise to a range
of disturbance effects in Earth?s near-space environment. Communications,
navigation and energy production and distribution are significantly affected by
this space weather. The ability to forecast disturbances that may impact these
technologies hinges upon detailed knowledge and understanding of the connected
Sun-Earth system, including complicated coupling processes between the
magnetosphere and ionosphere. A particular aspect of the latter within the
nightside aurora are meso-scale flow channels that have been discovered recently
and are believed to play a significant role in the creation and dynamics of
space weather disturbances in the ionosphere. Determining the precise nature of
the flow-channels and their relation to the large-scale dynamics of the
magnetosphere-ionosphere system is the main objective of this project. It will
be attempted through a comprehensive and carefully coordinated analysis of
simultaneous observations of the phenomenon from a variety of sources. The
resulting understanding constitutes a critical step towards being able to
include this effect in ionospheric space weather specification and forecast
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine observations from a
large and diverse set of instruments and facilities across the auroral region in
the North American sector, including incoherent and coherent scatter radars,
spectral auroral imagers, and ground-based magnetometers, to investigate meso-
scale flow channel events in the nightside auroral oval. Specific project goals
for the research effort include: 1) establishing the relative location of flow
channels and auroral streamers; 2) establishing the relation between flow
channel and streamer trajectories and large-scale convection; and 3) determining
the connection between flow channel events and other plasma sheet disturbances,
including substorms and omega bands.