* 1400567
* "Gamified" Digital Forensics Course Modules for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pamela McCarthy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,875.00

Cybersecurity and digital forensics are critical areas of national importance,
with an increasing demand for knowledgeable professionals. The demand for well-
qualified workers in these areas has prompted the development of many
cybersecurity and digital forensics programs and certificates by two-year and
four-year colleges. Community colleges often offer an Associate of Applied
Science (A.A.S.) degree in computer forensics or an Associate of Science (A.S.)
degree for transferring to four-year colleges. However, as digital forensics is
a relatively new field, only limited curricular materials are covered in these
programs, and the courses have been primarily designed for upper-level
undergraduate students, who are better-prepared to deal with abstract concepts
and complex forensics technologies. In this pilot project, three institutions --
Rochester Institute of Technology, Corning Community College, and Onondaga
Community College -- will collaborate to enhance digital forensics curricula by
introducing a small set of "game-based" digital forensics modules for entry-
level students. The game-based, modular approach will enable colleges to offer
digital forensics training to entry-level students, therefore producing
additional skilled forensics technicians and professionals to meet workforce
demands. The investigators expect this project to directly impact more than 500
students from at least 20 two-year and four-year colleges, including community
colleges in rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the Game-Based
Learning (GBL) approach, which presents forensics concepts and practices
designed as games through technology to engage students' learning. A sequence of
entertaining yet educational digital forensics modules will be built into games
in a real computing environment that has direct access to the latest forensics
software. The level-100 module will cover principles of computer forensics
investigation, including incident response and processes and procedures for
collecting, preserving, analyzing, and reporting digital evidence to the courts.
The level-200 game-based modules, focusing on system and network forensics, will
especially help freshmen and sophomores to better understand forensics concepts
and engage them to obtain hands-on experience in a user-friendly way. These
modules will also lay a solid fundation for community college students to
undertake advanced forensics training if they transfer to a four-year college.
In contrast with the traditional teaching approach, the modular approach
utilizing GBL and visualization techniques will help students to understand
intangible and inaccessible abstract concepts such as
deleted/hidden/encrypted/overwritten digital evidence, and to effectively convey
critical aspects of computer forensics. This approach will also encourage
students to explore forensics investigation technologies and procedures via
hands-on techniques. Solving the puzzles and reaching milestones along the way
will provide rewards and positive reinforcement when students take actions
appropriate for the problem at hand. Unlike other video games, these educational
forensics games will be developed to interface in a real computing environment
that allows students to investigate real cases using state-of-the-art forensics
software. Through this research and development effort the investigators aim to
study the effectiveness of the GBL and visualization approach in engaging and
improving entry-level students' learning in advanced fields such as digital
forensics, which involve understanding abstract concepts and hands-on practice.
In addition, the study seeks to broaden the base of knowledge regarding the
conditions under which successful learning occurs.