* 1400208
* Approximation, deformation-rigidity and classification in II 1 factor framework
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sorin Popa, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

"Rigidity" in mathematics occurs when objects in a certain class (functions,
function algebras, etc.) can be recognized by knowing very little information
about them. Regidity results are usually interdisciplinary and can be relevant
to many areas of mathematics, with applications to computer science, complexity
theory, design of computer networks, and the theory of error-correcting codes.
The principal investigator's work in recent years has to do with the study of
rigidity in so-called von Neumann algebras. These are algebras of infinite
matrices in which the product of two elements (A times B, say) may be different
from the product in reverse order (B times A), a fact that reflects Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle in the quantum mechanics of particle physics. They are
related to group theory and ergodic theory, since actions of groups on spaces
give rise to a class of von Neumann algebras, now known as "factors." Rigidity
in this context occurs when the group of transformations can be recognized by
merely knowing its associated factor. During the period 2001-2010, the principal
investigator developed a series of techniques to study such phenomena (namely,
deformation-rigidity theory) to which he recently added a powerful approximation
technique. In this project, he intends to combine all these tools to study
rigidity in factors and to tackle the two most famous problems in the area: the
Connes approximate embedding conjecture and the free group factor problem. The
Connes conjecture predicts that factors can be "simulated on a computer" and has
an interesting reformulation in quantum information theory. The project should
contribute to the cross-pollination of several areas of mathematics (e.g., free
probability, random matrices, group theory, logic) and lead to progress in each
of them. The principal investigator's research in rigidity theory has already
had considerable impact on these areas, with a large number of research articles
and Ph.D. theses sprouting directly from his work. He expects his techniques to
have an even broader impact in the future, leading to new developments and
solutions to problems in a variety of subjects, with direct and indirect impact
in applied mathematics and the aforememtioned areas of computer science.

In this project, the principal investigator intends to further the development
of deformation-rigidity theory by incorporating into it a new approximation
technology known as incremental patching. Using this array of tools, he will
continue to work on the classification of algebras arising from groups and their
actions on spaces, as well as on the study of rigidity properties of these
objects and the calculation of their symmetries. In particular, the principal
investigator will attempt new approaches to two famous problems in two-one
factors: the Connes approximate embedding conjecture and the free group factor
problem. The problems studied in this project are important to both von Neumann
algebra theory and the adjacent areas of group theory, ergodic theory, logic
(descriptive set theory), free probability, and subfactor theory. Together with
his students and collaborators, the principal investigator will make efforts to
broaden the scope of deformation-rigidity theory, strengthening its interactions
with all these (and possibly other) areas, an activity that should lead to
further surprising results of an interdisciplinary character. Also, the
principal investigator intends to continue to disseminate his new techniques
through summer programs, mini-courses, textbooks, and expository articles, as
well as through conferences that he will conduct and organize.