* 1400616
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Natalie Nannas, Nannas                  Natalie        J
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2017
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Natalie J. Nannas is "Engineering a Synthetic Centromere
for Artificial Chromosome Segregation in Maize" The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Georgia and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. R.
Kelly Dawe.

Increasing world population demands new technologies for crop improvement and
production. Introducing a few transgenes into agricultural plants have helped
combat pests and increase yields, but traits necessary to meet future demands
will likely require large sets of genes not easily introduced by current
methods. Synthetic centromeres make artificial chromosomes a viable strategy for
introducing whole genetic pathways without disrupting the native plant genome
and efficiently segregating all traits together. Training objectives include
plant genetics and genomics, and plant molecular and cellular biology. Broader
impacts include increasing undergraduate minority participation in science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) through collaboration with the Peach
State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP). A workshop
series will be created on finding summer research and funding opportunities,
applying and interviewing for graduate school and medical school, and exploring
STEM career options. Recruitment programming will be developed for the
University of Georgia's Freshmen Orientation and Fall Activities Fair, including
an advising seminar on offered science majors and recommended introductory
courses. A tutoring, mentoring, and study group network will be established
through LSAMP and will be available to support students in STEM courses.
Undergraduate students interested in research will be encouraged to participate
directly in this work; students will be trained and mentored while conducting
their own independent projects related to the synthetic centromere.

Artificial chromosomes are an emerging strategy to stack transgenes, but due to
epigenetic complications, these constructs lack reliable centromeres, DNA
elements on which kinetochores assemble and direct accurate segregation of
chromosomes through cell division. This project aims to engineer a "synthetic
centromere" capable of autonomously segregating an artificial chromosome in the
agriculturally important plant, maize. A synthetic centromere will be created by
artificially localizing kinetochore proteins to a specific genetic location;
kinetochore proteins will be fused with various DNA-binding proteins and
expressed in lines that carry an array of binding sites. To assess the
functionality of the synthetic centromere, a live imaging system will be
developed to measure the currently unknown dynamics of chromosome segregation in
mitosis and meiosis. The synthetic centromere will be compared to natural
centromeres in its ability to assemble a kinetochore, attach microtubules,
correct improper attachments and segregate a chromosome. The synthetic
centromere will also be assessed for its ability to heritably mark the site of
kinetochore assembly through multiple generations.