* 1400967
* Algebraic theory of integrable systems. Representations of affine superalgebras and mock theta functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Victor Kac, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Partial differential equations are equations from calculus that are used to
model phenomena in the physical world, for example, when studying the motion of
interacting water waves. A fundamental question is to find the quantities which
are conserved by the waves, and this search lies at the heart of the study of
integrable systems. The classical integrable Hamiltonian systems, like the KdV
equation and the non-linear Schrodinger system, have been playing a fundamental
role in physical theories, like the theory of wave interactions, plasma physics,
and fiber optics, to name a few. The main goal of the first part of this project
is to build up a rigorous theory of integrable systems of Hamiltonian partial
differential equations, based on algebraic structures that were inspired by
physics. It is expected that the integrable systems discovered as a result of
this project will play an important role in the study of various physical
phenomena. The second part of this project has its origins in the last letter
that Ramanujan wrote to G. H. Hardy in the early 1920's, where he wrote down 17
functions that had never been studied before (and which he named mock theta
functions). The second direction of the project is to study the connections of
mock theta functions to representation theory. It is expected that this will
lead to new types of mock theta functions and to applications in number theory.

Some of the problems to be explored related to the first direction include the
following: (a) develop a theory of non-local Hamiltonian structures and
corresponding theory of integrable systems, based on the notion of a ''non-
local'' Poisson vertex algebra; (b) compute the variational Poisson cohomology
for not necessarily quasi-constant coefficient Poisson differential operators,
developing the methods of a 2013 paper with De Sole; (c) develop further the
theory of the generalized Drinfeld-Sokolov hierarchies and their Dirac
reductions and establish their connection to the Kac-Wakimoto hierarchies. Some
of the problems to be explored related to the second direction include the
following: (a) compute character formulas for admissible representations of
affine Lie superalgebras; (b) find explicit transformation formulas for the
corresponding modified non-holomorphic theta-functions, in the spirit of
Zwegers; (c) using quantum Hamiltonian reduction, compute modular transformation
formulas and fusion rules of new representations of superconformal algebras.