* 1400989
* Weighing and measuring the Milky Way and other galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Robyn Sanderson, Sanderson               Robyn          E
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 11/30/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Robyn Sanderson is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Columbia
University and New York University. Outside the Galactic disk, where most stars
including our Sun reside, most of our Galaxy's mass is in its roughly spherical
halo of dark matter, invisible material only known to exist through its
gravitational influence. Also out there are a handful of halo stars, including
the scattered remains of smaller galaxies that entered the Milky Way's dark halo
only to be ripped apart by its tidal forces. The structures left behind, called
tidal streams, can be used to study the distribution of the Milky Way's dark
matter. Each tidal stream is made up of stars that were once neighbors in the
same small galaxy, and thus now follow similar paths as they orbit the Milky
Way. This common origin gives us insight into the Galaxy's mass distribution,
which determines the orbits of the stream's stars: only if we guess close to the
true mass distribution do the computed orbits of stars in each stream cluster
together around a common progenitor. Changes to the neighboring orbits of tidal
stream stars could also provide evidence for smaller-scale dark matter
structure: tiny dark matter clumps too small to hold galaxies, predicted by some
theories of dark matter, would deflect the paths of stream stars in predictable
ways. Dr. Sanderson will develop new tools to explore the structure of dark
matter halos, particularly the Milky Way's, by studying their tidal streams.
These tools use state-of-the-art methods, yet are based on fundamental concepts
that kids learn in middle school: why stars shine, how we make and read maps,
and how gravity works. To teach these core ideas and inspire middle schoolers'
interest in science, Dr. Sanderson will develop portable science lessons for use
in underserved New York City middle schools. The modules will use songs and
movement the students produce themselves to introduce them to the "music of the
spheres."

The work Dr. Sanderson will carry out as a fellow has three goals. First, she
will expand a new method of inferring the Milky Way's mass distribution, which
uses concepts borrowed from information theory to statistically analyze the
clustering of halo stars in streams and thereby select the best fit for the
Milky Way halo. This method will be applied to forthcoming data from the Gaia
satellite, which will accurately measure complete positions and velocities for
millions of stream stars in the Milky Way. Second, she will study the influence
of small dark matter clumps on tidal streams, by predicting their effects on the
orbits of the stream stars and determining which effects would be most
diagnostic to observe. Finally, Dr. Sanderson will complete tests of a new tool
to estimate the masses of galaxies outside our Milky Way, based on observations
of a particular type of tidal stream known as a shell or umbrella. In these
special cases we can understand the stream stars' orbits, and hence the mass of
the host galaxy, even with only the limited information we can obtain for such
distant stars. The information from these new strategies will allow Dr.
Sanderson to compare the structures of galaxy halos, including our Milky Way's,
to predictions based on different theories of dark matter. The images, movies,
and computer simulations produced in her work will be incorporated into the
middle school science lessons she will develop, to help educate and inspire a
new generation of American scientists.