* 1400699
* Teaching Sustainability through Problem Based Learning Communities: Professional Development for the Teachers of Tomorrow's Green Economy Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Scott Rollins, Community Colleges of Spokane
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,924.00

The Community Colleges of Spokane are initiating a professional development
program for K-12 and community college faculty where participants develop
problem-based learning communities to provide the pipeline to technical careers
that have become part of the green economy. Teams of faculty and industry
partners will develop real-world, interdisciplinary, industry-based
sustainability problems that address recognized skills gaps in the current
science and technology workforce. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers will
complete online sustainability and systems thinking modules prior to integrating
these concepts into problem-based learning communities. A summer workshop
introducing problem-based learning and integrative interdisciplinary courses,
industry partnerships and site visits, and a web-based support community will
provide faculty with the resources to integrate sustainability into science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) technical curricula.
Instructional approaches will improve student performance and increase
completion rates, particularly for underrepresented minorities, while fostering
student interest in regional STEM technical careers. This project will provide a
model for training green collar workers in regions that lack a well-defined
green jobs subsector, yet are seeing growth in their green economy. Furthermore,
the systems thinking approaches used in sustainability can be applied to many
other problems in the workforce. Academic conferences and publications, combined
with an established online presence via the Pacific Northwest Center for
Excellence for Clean Energy (PNCECE), will help to disseminate these findings
and to provide resources for training technicians for today's green economy.