* 1400911
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sarah Supp, Supp                    Sarah          R
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's
scientific workforce in the future. This fellowship to Sarah R. Supp supports a
research and training plan at the intersection of biology, statistics, and
computer science and examines how body size responds to environmental change.
The host institutions for this fellowship are the University of Maine and the
University of Vermont, and the sponsoring scientists are Brian McGill and
Nicholas Gotelli.

It is difficult to describe, predict, and preserve biodiversity in the face of
rapid environmental change, yet these are critical goals for conservation
efforts. A macroecological approach to understanding diversity uses patterns,
e.g., body size, that exhibit regular behavior across taxonomic groups,
ecosystems, and continents. This research develops a dynamic framework for
macroecology through 1) data aggregation and access, 2) mechanistic complex
system modeling, and 3) cross-scale analysis. Body size patterns integrate
taxonomic, functional, and trait diversity, and changes to these patterns are
being shown to be vital to understanding changes in ecosystem function. Size
patterns are expected to be sensitive to perturbation since mechanisms that
influence body size include species interactions and energetic constraints,
which can be rapidly impacted in human-altered landscapes. These interactions
are being studied by developing and using an interactive model for predicting
pattern response to global change scenarios. Training goals include developing
expertise in data informatics and advanced statistical and computational
modeling techniques. Broader impacts include development of undergraduate
courses, participation by under-represented groups, computer science outreach
programs, online science communication, and open-access sharing of all research
products.