* 1400274
* Collaborative Research:  Nanomanufacturing of High-performance Graphene-based Electrocatalysts for Efficient Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Liming Dai, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 211,383.00

Green and renewable energy generation from water and sunlight holds great
promise to solve the present energy and environmental challenges. The fuel cell
technology, which utilizes light-induced water-splitting to produce oxygen and
hydrogen gases coupled with the electrochemical reaction of these gases, offers
a viable approach to electricity generation directly from water and sunlight.
However, catalysts are required to facilitate the electrochemistry. Platinum is
the state-of-the-art catalyst, but its limited resources and high cost have
restricted commercialization of these renewable energy technologies. If properly
functionalized, graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms placed in a hexagonal
pattern, can replace expensive platinum as a high-performance catalyst for clean
and renewable energy generation from water and sunlight. However, its
applications to the market are hindered by the lack of approaches for large
scale production of high-quality graphene at low-cost. This research is to fill
the knowledge gap on manufacturing of high-performance graphene-based catalysts
for energy applications. This project is to develop a novel scalable, low-cost,
and eco-friendly ball milling technology that directly transforms conventional
graphite - or pencil lead - into graphene-based catalysts. This technology will
pave the way for more efficient and lower-cost fuel cells and batteries (e.g.,
lithium-air batteries) for commercial applications.

Edge-functionalized graphene has been demonstrated as high-performance
electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage. This project aims at
developing a ball milling process that directly converts bulk graphite into
edge-functionalized graphene flakes. The molecular structural change during the
ball milling is characterized using advanced analytic tools. In addition,
molecular simulations of self-exfoliation and edge-functionalization processes
are carried out using first-principles methods. Characterization and simulation
tasks will be performed together to better understand the basic mechanochemical
reactions and graphite-to-graphene structural evolution in ball milling, and to
guide the materials and process development. The success of this project will
provide a generic approach for scalable nanomanufacturing of graphene-based
catalysts for energy devices, including fuel cells and metal-air batteries.
Along with these research and development activities, an associated education
program will be carried out to provide research training and education
opportunities to all levels of students.