* 1400490
* Advancing Training Pathways for the Sustainable Energy Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sam Cheung, Bellingham Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,996.00

The Pacific Northwest region has a high density of renewable energy businesses
that require a technologically skilled workforce. Bellingham Technical College,
in close collaboration with Western Washington University (WWU) and the Pacific
Northwest Center of Excellence for Clean Energy (Center), is developing an
Associate in Applied Science-Transfer Degree (AAS-T) in Sustainable Energy,
which offers both preparation for technician level employment and the option of
seamless transfer to a baccalaureate degree program at WWU. The jointly
developed curriculum included in the Sustainable Energy Degree has enhanced
general education requirements, including applied math and science courses that
adequately prepare students to enter a university. A significant and novel
feature of this program is the inclusion of specialized certificate options
enabling graduates to enter the industry as trained technicians in several
technical specializations. The AAS-T degree provides a significant opportunity
to export the model to other states. &lt;br/&gt;This pathway model demonstrates
a new way of offering training as well as a new way of teaching. Being offered
at a 2-year open-door institution, this model provides new training
opportunities for traditionally under-served community members. The college has
a strong focus on serving nontraditional students and is working to increase the
number of women entering advanced technology training. This degree offers new
opportunities to obtain meaningful and applicable education and secure
employment in a growing and well-paid career field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
maximize regional workforce alignment with the educational experience, the
Center is convening and facilitating industry focus groups from among their
existing stakeholders to obtain targeted input on emerging fields in Sustainable
Energy. Once compiled, the project will disseminate these industry-driven
training standards by leveraging an energy careers web portal developed by the
Center under a Department of Energy grant. This career lattice is already in use
throughout a six-state region and the inclusion of this new material adds to its
usefulness as well as serves a student and educator audience in Northwestern
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an immediate and growing need for
sustainable energy technological training at all levels. The college is a leader
in technical education with a long-standing reputation for responding to
industry needs by employing experienced technical experts as faculty and
maintaining cutting edge applied learning labs. The partners provide expertise
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education, research,
and best practice dissemination and have established relationships with not only
each other, but with industry leaders. The key team members for this project are
experienced educators, researchers, and industry experts. Washington State has
an interconnected two-year college system supported by the State Board of
Community &amp; Technical Colleges which encourages innovation and provides an
efficient platform to share best practices.&lt;br/&gt;