* 1400670
* Project: Sustainable Energy Technology Program Enhancement at Missoula College: Partnering for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bradley Layton, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 727,912.00

Missoula College will implement "Sustainable Energy Technology Program
Enhancement at Missoula College: Partnering for Success", a program focused on
recruiting, educating and graduating the next generation of energy
technologists. Blackfeet Community College (BCC) is a key partner in this
project. This partnership will result in engagement of Native American faculty
and students in energy technician training and research opportunities. Another
key partner is Missoula County Public Schools. The project will engage high
school teachers in a two week summer course, following which they will mentor
high school students who can earn dual credit towards their diplomas and one of
the targeted programs at Missoula College. All of the activities are designed to
ultimately equip high school and community college students to enter the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) technician workforce
with expertise in sustainable energy alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's goals are to: educate the next generation of energy technologists
through new course offerings and delivery systems including face-to-face
classroom instruction, online classroom instruction, laboratory instruction and
industry-based educational experiences; engage local high school students,
lifelong learners, distance learners, rural students, and Native American
college students in technical education via community events, web-based
communication, and a mobile learning lab; and strengthen and create connections
with local businesses, non-profits, and the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) Centers. The project will be evaluated using the Context, Input, Process
and Product (CIPP) model to determine the effectiveness and impact of project
inputs, processes, products and context. After refining program elements based
on the evaluation results, the investigators plan to greatly expand the campus
boundaries of the Energy Technology Program and transform the thought patterns
of students, educators, and citizens, regardless of their location, through the
use of web-based material and on-site education sessions. Learning materials
will also be made available to institutions nationwide through various means
(e.g. online, other Advanced Technological Education projects and centers,
etc.).