* 1400570
* Manufacturing Associate Degree Education in Northwestern Connecticut
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sharon Gusky, Northwestern Connecticut Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,960.00

As advanced manufacturing moves forward in the Nation, there is an increasing
need to prepare a skilled, flexible, and innovative workforce. This project is
developing an advanced manufacturing technician associate degree program that is
designed to increase the number of skilled workers in the northwest corner of
Connecticut (CT) and provide a pathway where students can pursue associate and
bachelor degrees in manufacturing so they can advance their careers. The college
is partnering with three school systems, the Northwest Connecticut Manufacturers
Coalition (NCMC), and Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing (RCNGM).
In addition, the college is a long-standing member of the Connecticut College of
Technology (COT). As such, the college and its partners benefit from the best
practices, curriculum, and articulations developed by the
COT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is increasing the partnerships between
higher education and industry by creating a manufacturing technology program and
a career pathway that can be adopted by other high schools and community
colleges especially those in rural areas, and by increasing the number of high
school and community college students interested in pursuing careers in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surveys of the manufacturers in the
northwest region helped to identify four industry-driven, workforce-based needs
that are being addressed in this project:&lt;br/&gt;1. Recruitment: Recruiting a
skilled manufacturing workforce requires raising awareness of career
possibilities within advanced technology and manufacturing fields. This project
is continuing with current outreach programs to junior high and high school
students to inform future skilled workers. It is also exposing unemployed,
underemployed, displaced, and incumbent workers to the necessary skill sets and
career possibilities of manufacturing within northwestern CT.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Education: A majority of manufacturers in advanced technological sectors
nationwide indicate that they have a difficult time filling positions because
applicants lack the necessary skills for the job. This project is developing a
degree pathway that provides workers with advanced technology skills to meet
workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;3. Retention: Manufacturing employers in northwestern
CT have difficulty retaining employees who live outside of the area. Many
employees who have the appropriate skills do not want to travel or move to rural
CT and therefore end up leaving after they are trained. This project is focusing
on providing people who already live in the northwest corner of the state with
the skills and education they need to obtain jobs in the advanced manufacturing
sector.&lt;br/&gt;4. Continued education and career advancement: Modern
manufacturing requires workers to keep up with technology. Incumbent workers
also need skills for advancement. Both of these require a strong partnership
between manufacturers and the college. This project strengthens that
collaboration and provides workers with a pathway to advance their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;