* 1400249
* Extremal problems for sparse hypergraphs and graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Tao Jiang, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 133,235.00

Extremal combinatorics is a fast developing subarea within modern mathematics
that investigates extremal values of useful parameters of discrete
networks/systems. Its study has far reaching applications in computer science,
information theory, engineering, or even social science. The project focuses on
the following central problem in extremal combinatorics: how large/dense can a
discrete system be before certain substructures are set to emerge? Such a study
is critical to our analysis of discrete networks. In the analysis of discrete
networks, graphs and hypergraphs are two of the main mathematical models. In the
past several decades, powerful tools have been developed in the study of graphs
and hypergraphs, especially for those that are dense. However, in general, there
is a lack of effective tools for sparse graphs and hypergraphs. The project aims
at developing some useful tools for the study of extremal problems for sparse
graphs and hypergraphs via a study of several specific problems.

The first objective of this project is to adapt tools from classical extremely
set theory for general sparse hypergraphs. The PI and collaborators have
recently applied tools from classical extremal set theory such as the delta
system method and shadow analysis to solve Turan type problems for some general
sparse hypergraphs. The PI will exploit this connection and look to adapt and
develop tools for a more widely applicable setting. A second objective is to
investigate how the shadow structure of a sparse hypergraph affects its Turan
and Ramsey properties. One particular problem in this direction is to study
Turan and Ramsey problems for hypergraphs that are obtained from graphs through
expanding edges into hyperedges via new vertices. Another problem of particular
emphasis is the Turan problem for hyperforests on which the PI and collaborators
and other groups have made substantial recent progress, generalizing several
classic results. A third objective is to combine existing tools and to develop
new tools for the Turan problem for sparse bipartite graphs. One particular plan
is to explore the combination of the expansion method with supersaturation of
subgraphs and dependent random choice on sparse bipartite graphs. The PI and
collaborators have had some recent success in this direction and will continue
such an investigation. There is also an important educational component to this
project. The PI has been actively involving masters students in research
projects and will continue such endeavors on this project.