* 1400422
* Preparing Vehicle Technicians for Advanced Transportation Fuels
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Michael Rodgers, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 745,602.00

Owensboro Community and Technical College (OCTC) and partners are implementing
the Preparing Vehicle Technicians for Advanced Transportation Fuels project. The
project advances knowledge of the evolving transportation industry by training
secondary and two-year college students, educators and incumbent workers in
advanced transportation technologies and alternative fuels. Further, it provides
hands-on experiences that directly correlate to real-life industry concepts
through redesigned curricula, summer academies, teacher professional
development, and technician training. Societal benefits include preparing the
21st century workforce in Kentucky and the nation to be knowledgeable of the
evolving technologies that are transforming the transportation industry. Public
science literacy is enhanced by offering opportunities for engagement with
science and technology through a variety of outreach efforts such as a National
Alternative Fuel Vehicles Day Odyssey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives
include: (1) providing training in advanced transportation technologies and
alternative fuels to a minimum of 150 community college students;(2) exposing
150 high school students, particularly those underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines (females,
underrepresented minorities, disabled, low-income, and first-generation college
students), to the high-tech field of automotive and diesel technology through
summer academy offerings; (3) providing training leading to an industry-endorsed
certification in alternative fuels technologies to 100 incumbent workers
employed in transportation industries; (4) providing professional development
training in advances in the automotive and diesel technician industry to 90 high
school and two-year college instructors who teach in STEM areas; and (5)
promoting increased public engagement and awareness of science and technology
used in the transportation industry to 1,000 citizens in Kentucky and
surrounding states. Outcomes of the evaluation plan will inform the broader
community on issues of innovative and evolving alternative fuels technologies,
ways in which competencies in current fuel technologies may be assessed, and how
the use of industry-validated certifications in an academic program supports
increased skill levels of current automotive and diesel technicians.