* 1400583
* CCBC Generating Excitement and Training for Engineering and Technology (GET ET)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Judy Loar, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 755,882.00

The need for engineering technicians in the United States is expected to
continue to grow for the next decade. Skilled engineering technicians are a
critical part of the nation's high-tech workforce. Engineering technician
positions frequently require Associates Degrees in areas such as mechanical,
electrical, electronics, or civil engineering. In this project, the Community
College of Baltimore County will conduct a pilot in cooperation with Baltimore
County Public Schools (BCPS) that will improve the ability of high school
students to enter careers as engineering technicians. Supplemental materials
will be added to a series of existing high school technology education courses
that, when taken in combination, will allow a high school student to receive
articulated credit for the college-level "Introduction to Engineering
Technology" course offered at the Community College of Baltimore County. In this
way, by pursuing a series of high school advanced technology education courses,
high school students will start earning credit towards an Associates Degree in
an engineering technology field. This program will also offer training for high
school teachers, training for elementary, middle and high school counselors, and
outreach to high school students. The project will help to broaden participation
in engineering technology careers by creating a more seamless and efficient
pathway from high school into technician jobs requiring an Associates Degree.

The project will utilize the existing Engineering by Design (EbD) curriculum
developed by the International Technology and Engineering Education Association
(ITEEA). This curriculum is used by many secondary schools throughout the United
States and meets relevant STEM standards in many states. In Maryland, the EbD
Foundations of Technology course is required for all ninth grade students. After
taking Foundations of Technology, high school students may elect to continue the
EdD curriculum and enroll in the advanced technology education courses called
Advanced Design Applications (ADA) and Engineering Design (ED). The ADA and ED
courses are already taught in many schools. This project will enable other
community colleges and school districts to develop a set of supplemental
materials for the existing ADA and ED courses that will enable high school
student taking the required Foundations of Technology course and the two
elective advanced technology education courses to receive credit for the first
college course in the Associates Degree in Engineering Technology at the
community college. Since the ITEEA Engineering by Design curriculum is widely
used throughout the state of Maryland and across the country, the potential
exists to expand this approach statewide and across the nation. The project team
will begin to develop collaborations outside of Maryland to propagate this model
to other states.

The project also includes other activities integral to achieving the goal of
broadening participation in engineering technology careers. A training program
for school counselors is being developed to better able them to encourage
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, to enroll in this
series of technology courses with the goal of continuing education beyond high
school. A professional development program will be developed for high school
teachers concerning effective use of the supplementary materials. An outreach
program, involving engineering technology students from the community colleges
called Student Ambassadors, will be implemented.

The evaluation of this project will yield data concerning the potential of using
a high school technology curriculum aligned with a college-level engineering
technology program to increase the number and diversity of high school students
pursuing two or four-year degrees in engineering technology. Evaluation will
provide a baseline assessment of skills and content needs for high school
teachers who will teach the new articulated technology classes. Measurements
will be made of teacher learning, satisfaction, and confidence related to
teacher professional development activities. The annual number of teachers
participating in professional development activities will be monitored along
with demographic data. Annual benchmarks will track implementation of the new
curriculum in participating schools: number of courses offered, number of
students enrolled, as well as teacher self-reported developments. Evaluation
will consider assessments of high school student knowledge, interest, and
attitudes toward engineering technology studies and careers in participating
schools. Measurements will be taken at baseline, during, and after the project.
Measurement of impacts will include the number of two-year/four-year
articulations and transfer pathways at baseline, during, and after the project.
The goal of increasing the number of students in engineering technology programs
will be assessed through measurements of the number of college students enrolled
in the engineering technology programs at the participating 2-year institutions
who utilized the articulated credit at baseline, during, and after the project.