* 1400399
* Greater Philadelphia LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort XII) Program
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mazen Shahin, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree.

Delaware State University, a Historically Black College and University (HBCU)
and NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
institution, is the host site for the 2014-2016 (Cohort XII) BD program for the
Greater Philadelphia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation under the
leadership of Drexel University. The program supports a graduate student cohort
of 12 underrepresented minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP campuses
across the nation. The BD Activity provides extensive training in specific STEM
disciplines as well as professional development and guidance that promote peer
mentoring and leadership in the scientific community. Students receive rigorous
academic and research training experiences that support completion of the Ph.D.
and the transition to a competitive career in academia and industry.

Over the duration of the project and beyond, the BD program at DSU serves to
increase the number and quality of students from underrepresented groups
completing STEM Ph.D. degrees and entering the professoriate. It enhances
partnerships, research collaborations, and articulation strategies between an
HBCU and several major majority-serving research institutions within the Greater
Philadelphia alliance as well as national laboratories. The project activities
have the potential to develop a model approach which may be viable for use by
Masters-level, minority-serving institutions to promote the movement of students
from underrepresented groups through to STEM doctoral completion.

The long-term impact of the BD activity is reflected in America's STEM
workforce, both in academia and in industrial research and development. By
nurturing the future professoriate, as well as the scientific workforce, the
value added is seen in the visibility of minorities in science and engineering,
increasing representation and providing role models and motivation for the next
generation.