* 1400964
* Manipulating Nanostructure During High-Speed Casting of Glassy Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Paul Steen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 428,000.00

During processing, most metals such as iron or aluminum will solidify into an
ordered atomic-scale crystalline structure. In contrast, if sufficiently
hindered during the final stages of processing, solidified metals will lack
atomic-scale order. In this study, a planar-flow casting process is used to
produce a disordered structure known as glassy metal. Glassy metals often have
favorable properties such as ultra-high strength for a glassy stainless steel.
The favorable electromagnetic properties of the alloys under study are that they
enable energy-savings in applications such as electric vehicle power systems,
power harvesting from wind or photovoltaic sun farms and power distribution.
Such properties can be further enhanced by incorporating fine features, or
nanostructure. This study proposes a new approach to incorporating these fine
features during planar flow casting. To be able to manufacture green-enabling
products using a technique that itself has low carbon footprint represents a
double benefit to society. As part of this project, community outreach will
foster the interest of school children in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics with a special focus aimed at encouraging high-school girls toward
technical careers.

The goal is to advance the ability to rapidly solidify thin metallic glass
alloys continuously at speeds of meters per second, all while controlling in
real-time the formation of nanocrystals. Control is sought of the extent to
which crystallization occurs and where in the solidified product it occurs. At
production speeds of meters per second, this represents unprecedented
nanostructure control. The intellectual significance of this work relates to the
non-equilibrium materials science of rapid transformations on the atomic scale
in the presence of high thermal gradients. The approach will include experiments
using a modified planar-flow casting machine, characterization of the product
structure using X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy,
simulation of the temperature field within the material and substrate, and
mathematical modeling of the metal-on-metal contacting event. The results of
this effort will have impact on high speed non-equilibrium processing for
materials other than metals as well.