* 1400680
* Understanding the Boundary Between Stars and Substellar Objects in the Solar Neighborhood
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sergio Dieterich, Dieterich               Sergio         B
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Sergio Dieterich is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. Brown dwarfs
are objects that never acquired enough mass during their formation to attain the
internal temperature and pressure necessary to ignite the sustained nuclear
fusion of hydrogen, which is the hallmark of a stellar object. Understanding the
boundary between very low mass stars and brown dwarfs has deep implications for
the search for life in the Universe. It is likely that life may evolve on
planets orbiting stars but it is more difficult for life to evolve on brown
dwarf systems due to their constantly changing temperature. Dr. Dieterich
studies trends in temperature, radius, and luminosity of objects near the
stellar/substellar boundary. His thesis work identified a stellar and a
substellar population based on these trends. This work will now be extended to a
larger sample of stars, and will explore how chemical compositions for different
stars change this boundary. Dr. Dieterich will use his experience as a former
middle and high school physical science teacher to facilitate the integration of
astronomy in the high school physics curriculum. He will compile an activity
book that will serve as a resource for physics teachers who wish to enrich their
classes by illustrating physical concepts with examples from astronomy.

Dr. Dieterich will address the following three scientific questions during his
fellowship: (1) What is the luminosity function at the stellar/substellar
boundary? (2) How does metallicity affect the properties of objects with masses
close to the hydrogen burning minimum mass? and (3) How can we use objects with
known dynamical masses to create a more robust and detailed Mass-Luminosity
Relation at the stellar/substellar boundary? The unique resources of Carnegie's
Las Campanas Observatory in Chile are key to answering these questions. Because
an accurate distance measurement is essential for establishing luminosity and
radius, Dr. Dieterich and collaborators will use the Carnegie Astrometric Planet
Search Camera (CAPSCam) on the du Pont 2.5 meter telescope to determine precise
trigonometric parallaxes so as to make the study sample volume-complete. Several
Las Campanas telescopes will also be used to obtain optical photometry for these
very faint objects, which is necessary for calculating bolometric fluxes.
Metallicities for the sample will be established through spectroscopic
observations done with the Magellan 6.5 meter telescopes. The MagAO adaptive
optics system on the Magellan II telescope is one of the only ground based
systems capable of obtaining diffraction-limited images in optical wavelengths.
This unique capability will be used for the photometric characterization of
stars in close binary systems for which dynamical masses are known. The resolved
optical photometry will then be used to determine luminosity and effective
temperature for these stars, therefore populating the mass-luminosity relation.