* 1400503
* Systemic Change Through Process Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pradeep Kumar, Community College of Beaver County
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,828.00

The tri-state region of Pennsylvania (PA), West Virginia, and Ohio has a high
density of industries that require a technologically skilled workforce; in
particular, highly-skilled and well-educated process technicians. To address
this need, the Community College of Beaver County in collaboration with local
high schools, the Beaver County Career and Technical Center, five community
colleges in Texas, and four regional industry partners are developing an
associate degree in process technology. Regional assets to support this effort
include the necessary infrastructure for expansion of the types of industries
that employ process technicians, abundant natural resources, human capital, and
existing industries. The college is geographically located in the center of two
prime shale natural gas resource areas and close to a chemical, energy, and
manufacturing corridor. Existing petrochemical facilities include NOVA Chemicals
and BASF and a site targeted by Shell Oil for the construction of an ethane
cracker plant. The goal of the project is to identify and prepare a diverse
human capital stream to meet the current and future process technology industry
needs in the tri-state region. Specific objectives are to (1) enhance and
develop industrial and community partnerships; (2) adopt, customize, and
implement a Texas-based process technology curriculum; (3) develop a Career
Pathways Program for high school students, and articulation agreements with
four-year colleges and universities; and (4) increase enrollment and retention
of women in process technology programs.

The curriculum is being made available to 14 community colleges in PA and other
institutions in the tri-state region. The Career Pathways Program and
articulations may be adapted and adopted by other process technology programs
across the nation at high schools, community colleges and universities. In
addition to regional and state-wide partnerships, the college has strong
networks across the United States through the Strategic Horizons Network,
Achieving the Dream, the American Association of Community Colleges and the
League for Innovation in the Community College. Project knowledge is being
shared through presentations at regional and national conferences and by hosting
delegations with similar program interests. In collaboration with the National
Institute for Women in Trades & Technology, the college is developing outreach
and recruitment efforts to increase enrollment of female students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields to benefit society as a
whole.

The Texas-based North American Process Technology Alliance curriculum, developed
under an ATE grant, is being adapted to include an associate degree, stackable
credentials, and non-credit articulations to allow graduates to start or stop
out at different points. It is being customized for competency-based, hybrid
delivery for inclusion of incumbent workers. The project is also developing a
Career Pathways Program for middle-school and high-school students through the
creation of Career Awareness Workshops and dual enrollment opportunities for
recruitment. Networks of support from higher education, industry and government
are critically important to the recruitment and retention of all students in
technology and engineering programs. The curriculum is designed to provide a
broad base of mathematics, science, computer literacy, process technology, soft
skills (reliability, leadership, communication, and conflict resolution) and
hands-on mechanical aptitude development.