* 1400193
* Dynamical Characterization of Complex Heterogeneous Networks: Synchronization and Beyond
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Francesco Sorrentino, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 289,898.00

Several real social, biological, and technological systems can be described as
sets of individual components or nodes coupled by connections to form a
"network." These networks are denoted as heterogeneous if they are characterized
by nodes and connections with different individual properties. Heterogeneity is
typical of many natural networks; for example, neuronal networks are
characterized by different types of neurons and connections between them.
Understanding how heterogeneity affects the network functions may enhance our
ability to design and interact with complex dynamical systems that can be
described as networks as found in various technological applications. These
include swarms of vehicles, robots, smart grids among others. A large body of
literature has studied how the structure of these networks affects their dynamic
behavior. However, the role of heterogeneous nodes and connections has not been
fully investigated. In this project, the PI will investigate synchronization as
a dynamic process where the nodes of heterogeneous networks converge on a common
time evolution. The dynamic behavior of heterogeneous networks will also be
considered in other contexts, including the study of robotic networks composed
of ground and aerial vehicles, as well as smart grids and evolutionary game
theory for agents interacting over a network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will impact the current knowledge and understanding of complex systems by
explicitly taking into account their heterogeneous features, which in turn will
provide a more detailed characterization of these systems and a better insight
into their potential applications. A low dimensional approach to the
characterization of the dynamics of these systems will consist of a reduced
number of equations that describe the overall dynamics of the network and its
stability. Tools from the theory of nonlinear dynamics will be employed to
analyze the conditions for the emergence of fixed points, limit cycles and
chaotic dynamics in the networks under consideration. In addition, a simple and
intuitive online applet will be developed that will allow users to upload a
given heterogeneous network and will output an analysis of its dynamical
features in real time. This will provide a valuable tool to other researchers
who work with social, technological, physical, and biological networks of the
kind investigated herein. The applet will also be used to expose a broader
audience to the fascinating dynamical properties of the complex heterogeneous
networks examined in this study, to their unique characteristics, and to the
exciting implications of the findings discussed herein for a number of
scientific and engineering fields.