* 1400618
* In-Situ Observation and Modelling of Friction and Wear Processes at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Laurence Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Friction is a pervasive phenomenon; by some estimates it represents between 2
and 6 percent of the GDP of developed countries, and in passenger cars, one-
third of the fuel energy is used to overcome friction in the engine,
transmission, tires, and brakes. Beyond energy, friction and wear are important
for orthopedic devices. A variety of conditions, most notably osteoarthritis,
may result in need of a patient for prosthetic joint implants of the hips and
knees. Every year, as the baby boom generation ages and patients live longer and
more active lives the demand for hip replacements rises and in the US is
expected to grow 174 percent from 2005 to 572,000 by 2030. This project targets
understanding some of the basic processes in friction and wear of materials used
in both technological and biomedical applications. An improved understanding of
these processes may be pivotal to design of better performing systems in
commercial applications as well as longer lasting implant devices. This project
will also assist in the exposure of underrepresented groups to research,
outreach activities to high-schools and enhance the Infrastructure for Research
and Education through workshops and science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a joint experimental and theoretical approach to establish some of
the basic materials science of weak interfaces and selvedge layer deformation
important in tribology. The experimental component exploits an in-situ holder
which allows the observation of samples during tribologically relevant
experiments in a transmission electron microscope, monitoring nanoscale
structural and chemical changes in real time. In-situ observations of
tribological processes provide unique information about the fundamental
processes taking place which can at best only be inferred from other
experiments. There already have been cases where what takes place has led to
revision of accepted views of tribological processes at the nanoscale, and there
almost certainly will be more from the work. The theoretical component will be
to apply some of the existing materials science models which are known to work
well for strong interfaces to the case of weak interfaces, and from this attempt
to extract general models, synergistic with the experiments. The global strategy
of this project is to look at the nanoscale processes taking place during
sliding as a materials science problem in a bottom-up approach. Some of the
specific targets of the work involve in-situ observations of the formation of
tribolayers, understanding the deformation in the selvedge layer for ductile and
non-ductile materials, in-situ observations of tribochemical changes coupled
primarily with dislocation-based continuum modelling.