* 1400499
* Physics of Cancer Imaging Workshop Held at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital. Dates for the meeting are  Nov 5-6, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 03/31/2017
* USD 49,595.00

Imaging plays a critical role in the diagnosis, staging, and in the assessment
of therapeutic response in cancer. Imaging is of course a broad discipline
encompassing a variety of rather different modalities (X-ray, MRI, PET) and
analysis techniques. Principles from the fields of physics and mathematics can
be applied to the analysis and interpretation of current imaging techniques as
well to development of novel imaging techniques. A key issue for the field is
the extent to which different methods can be used synergistically to gain
additional information. Another key issue is improving the usefulness of
specialized contrast agents to get around existing limitations in signal to
noise and/or spatial resolution. To address the aforementioned challenges, the
organizers will convene a two-day focused workshop to be held in the Boston
area. The two-day highly focused meeting will have a full agenda of topics at
the intersection of physics and mathematics and cancer imaging. The meeting will
be oriented around a high level of interactions between participants, focusing
on problems where fundamental physical and mathematical principles and advanced
imaging can be leveraged to make progress towards cancer diagnosis and
treatment. Most of each session will be devoted to active discussion within a
small group of invitees, who span both the physics and engineering of advanced
imaging and biologists and clinicians at the forefront of cancer biology and
treatment. This will be the first informal workshop that tries to create an
integrated picture of what can be accomplished via noninvasive methods in human
patients. It is expected that the white paper generated as part of the meeting
follow-up will have a very large impact on the direction of scientific research
in this essential area. Bringing together experts from different parts of this
field can be expected to lead to new directions and ultimately better imaging
"products" for the practicing oncologist. At a more basic science level, it is
expected that the ideas generated may be useful for other applications of
imaging in biology and biomedicine. To facilitate the spread of ideas generated
by this meeting to the rest of the community, synopses of various talks as well
as an overall summary will be posted at http://www.martinos.org/martinos/poahi/
and linked to the community Physics of Cancer website:
http://physicsandcancer.org/