* 1400787
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Ross Cunning, Cunning                 Ross
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics. The
Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific workforce of the future.
This fellowship to Ross Cunning supports research and training to integrate
quantitative genetic and modeling approaches to understand climate change
impacts on coral symbiosis. The host institutions for the Fellowship are the
University of Hawaii and the University of California, Santa Barbara; the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Ruth Gates and Roger Nisbet. Training goals
include genomics, bioinformatics, and dynamic energy budget theory and modeling
techniques to examine the coral-zooxanthellae symbiosis. Educational outreach to
students in Hawaii includes students from groups under-represented in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to understand the dynamic
interactions between reef-building corals and their symbiotic algae in an era of
global environmental change. The future persistence of coral reef ecosystems
depends on the integrity of this symbiosis; stress disrupts the symbiosis, but
the processes underlying its regulation and stability, even in the absence of
environmental stress, are poorly understood. The approach is to extract
molecular information from corals and sea anemones with zooxanthellae raised
under various conditions, then model the results and test the outcomes of the
models, resulting in a mechanistic understanding of the maintenance and
breakdown of symbiosis and integrate "omics"-based molecular data within a
Dynamic Energy Budget (DEB) model for coral symbiosis. The specific aims are to
1) develop a comprehensive DEB framework to model coral-algal symbiotic
interactions, 2) assess environmental influences on symbiosis structure and
function with quantitative metagenomic and transcriptomic datasets, and 3)
integrate these data within the DEB modeling framework to test diverse
hypotheses regarding the regulation and control of symbiosis and predict
responses to complex changes in the environment.