* 1400740
* Free Resolutions and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jerzy Weyman, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 06/30/2018
* USD 288,666.00

This research project is related to two branches of algebra: commutative algebra
and representations of quivers. Commutative algebra studies sets defined by
polynomial equations. This part of the proposal involves studying polynomial
equations defining certain sets characterized geometrically. A representation of
a quiver is a way to associate vector data to the vertices of some oriented
graph. The edges of a graph can be viewed as relations between these data.
Abstract algebra allows the study of such objects systematically. The results of
this research might lead to better algorithms dealing with linear algebra
problems, which have many applications in other areas of mathematics as well as
in other sciences. Some of the published research of the investigator led to
such algorithms. The PI will involve graduate students in his
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of several interrelated
parts. The first part is to study the structure of generic rings for finite free
resolutions. The investigator proposes to develop his discovery of a link
between the generic ring for resolutions of length 3 and Kac-Moody Lie algebras
related to graphs T(p,q,r). In particular the generic ring is Noetherian if and
only if T(p,q,r) is a Dynkin diagram. The PI proposes to work towards an
explicit description of the generators of the generic ring in the case when they
are Noetherian. He also proposes to continue to generalize this approach to
perfect complexes of length 3, for resolutions of Gorenstein ideals of
codimension 4 and for resolutions of higher length. In a related project the PI
proposes to study the role of Buchsbaum-Rim linkage which reflects the symmetry
of the graphs T(p,q,r). The second part is related to calculating local
cohomology. The PI plans to develop his calculation of local cohomology of the
polynomial ring on generic matrix supported in the determinantal ideal. He plans
to find similar results for Pfaffians of skew symmetric matrices and minors of
symmetric matrices. He then plans to develop the techniques used to be able to
find the free resolutions of irreducible equivariant ideals in all three cases.
The third part involves noncommutative algebra. The investigator proposes to
further study quivers with potential. He plans to pursue the conjecture of David
Berenstein concerning global dimension of the Jacobian algebra of a quiver with
potential. He also plans to study the relation between properties of a Jacobian
algebra and the corresponding completed Jacobian algebra. The PI proposes to
study the noncommutative resolutions of orbit closures in Vinberg
representations of type I, in particular for Pfaffians of skew symmetric
matrices and minors of symmetric matrices. Finally, he proposes to study the
geometry of the components of representation spaces for quivers with relations.
The most interesting problem is trying to decide the representation type of a
given algebra to the geometry of its representation spaces. In this context the
PI is interested in normality of these components as well as in their MF and DO
properties.