* 1400195
* Mode Division Multiplexing for Distributed Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Yong Xu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 04/30/2017
* USD 410,000.00

In optical fibers, sensing is traditionally carried out using a single mode
operation, technically denoted as Single Mode Fibers (SMF). This operation
greatly reduces the complexity of sensor signal processing, but at the same
time, significantly limits the capabilities of fiber sensors and sensing
systems. In this project, adaptive optics methodologies are employed in
conjunction with mode division multiplexing techniques to greatly expand the
overall sensing capacity of fiber optics sensor networks and to reduce their
per-sensor-cost by a factor of 10 to 100. The novel mode division multiplexing,
or MDM, sensing technology investigated in this project can impact a wide array
of critical sensing applications and data communication, and will enable large-
scale low-cost infrastructure monitoring as well as flexible and ultra-high-
data-rate internet communications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this
project aims to develop a first-of-its-kind MDM sensor network for distributed
sensing. The most critical element of this sensor network is an adaptive optical
component that can: 1) achieve highly selective mode excitation in a multi mode
fiber, and 2) dynamically route the interrogation signals towards different
sensor sub-networks. Specifically, two multi modal sensor networks will be
demonstrated: a quasi-distributed one for temperature/strain sensing, and a
fully distributed one for optical time-domain reflectometry sensing. The goal is
to demonstrate that it is possible to integrate multiple effective sensors in a
single fiber by exploiting the multi mode operation. A secondary goal is to
confirm the full compatibility of mode division multiplexing with state-of-the-
art multiplexing methods. Accomplishing these two goals will suggest that by
employing fiber modes utilizing M modes, one can increase the overall sensing
capacity of any existing fiber sensor network by a factor of M. While the
project will be limited to two-mode operation (M=2), which will lead to the
doubling of the sensors density available on a given fiber, it is fully expected
that the developed principles will be applicable to cases with M as large as 10
to 100, corresponding to ten-fold or hundred-fold increase in sensor densities.