* 1400452
* Building an Academic Pathway for Industrial Engineering Operations Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeffery Woodson, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 721,836.00

Columbus State Community College in Columbus, Ohio, in collaboration with
Eastland-Fairfield Career Center and its 16 associated school districts,
Franklin University, and key regional industry partners, is developing a new
multi-disciplinary academic pathway in Industrial Engineering Technology with a
focus in the logistics sector. This project is designing and developing an
associate degree curriculum that incorporates engineering, information
technology and logistics operations principles delivered through a blended
delivery model that integrates a learning objects methodology. Instructional and
student support systems are being developed to help establish the optimal
environment for student success. The overall project goal is to create a career
pathway for industrial engineering technicians with the STEM and subject matter
knowledge to support the increasingly complex technology needs of the supply
chain sector while providing program graduates opportunities in a variety of
industries. The project incorporates a component to inform high school students
of the opportunities available in industrial engineering technology including a
certificate option. The logistics sector offers career ladders to family-
supporting occupations that employ 9% of the regions workforce in central Ohio.
Labor data projects that this industry in the central Ohio region is
experiencing growth that is expected to increase at 11.8% over the next seven
years with over 200 annual openings. This proposal provides students with an
associate-degree level career pathway in this critical sector, one for which
national research data and local employer input evidence significant need. The
high school outreach program enables this curriculum to be available at
institutions that have historically been unable to afford the faculty and
equipment expenses associated with such a program. Finally, the project focuses
on advancing recruitment to underserved populations including minorities, women,
and veterans in the region thereby increasing the talent pool for industry and
providing these populations opportunities in a high demand, high growth sector.
The plans to disseminate the results of this effort will help other institutions
in other areas of the country to adopt the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
initiatives in this proposal result in a seamless educational pathway for supply
chain Industrial Engineering Operations Technicians. The program creates a
certificate program accessible to high school students and an Associate of
Applied Science degree that incorporate a multi-disciplinary academic foundation
in computer science, industrial engineering, and supply chain principles and
methodologies. This degree prepares program graduates for meaningful positions
in a variety of industries and with several employment-ready exit points. The
project deliverables provide a blueprint for other high school and 2 year
programs throughout the country. This initiative is designing 2+2+2 articulation
pathways, creating a pipeline of technical education from the high school to
community college to four-year institutions.