* 1400545
* Teaching Teamwork: Electronics Instruction in a Collaborative Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 896,130.00

This Advanced Technological Education project conducted by the Concord
Consortium and Tide Water Community College will help to teach students of
electronics how to work effectively in teams, both face-to-face and remotely
online. The ability to work together online is uniquely relevant to a 21st
century workplace that spans continents and crosses oceans. Employers repeatedly
cite collaboration and communication as critically important skills for new
entrants to the STEM workforce, yet schools and colleges continue to have
difficulty evaluating student work other than by individual test-taking ability.
The project is addressing the critical mismatch between the value of teamwork,
especially online teamwork, in a modern STEM workplace, and the difficulty of
teaching students to collaborate while also evaluating them individually. In a
time of chronic unemployment and under-employment, strong demand exists for
trained electronics technicians who are able to work effectively in teams. This
project addresses the problem of collaboration skills highly-valued in the
workforce being difficult to measure in educational environments in which
performance and grades are assigned individually.

Supported by simulation technology created by an earlier NSF award, this project
will advance the field by gathering and analyzing time-series data from teams of
students working in a shared online workspace on realistic tasks representative
of those found in the STEM work environment. The project is based on existing
software that creates realistic simulations of electronic components and circuit
boards that are linked together over the Internet and used to build and
troubleshoot a resulting distributed circuit. The project will monitor students'
actions as they work together, analyze the data produced, and report on the
performance of each individual student, as well as that of the team as a whole.
Analysis is based on using hidden Markov models to describe sequential
interactions of the data from teams captured in both computer-generated logs and
classroom observations. The data comprise actions, such as the modification of a
circuit, measurements made with simulated test equipment, and written or oral
communications. Patterns of actions are found that serve as markers for
effective collaboration. This approach reduces the need for continuous
supervision by an instructor and enables instructors to recognize and reward
talent, work ethic, and collaborative and cognitive skills. Team members need
not be co-located and work may be done by team members in an asynchronous
fashion, mimicking conditions frequently encountered in the modern work
environment.

This project will yield information regarding effective methods to assess both
individual and team effectiveness for students participating in online
collaborative laboratories. The information learned can apply to the teaching
and assessment of collaborative problem-solving skills generally and are not
restricted to the field of electronics. It is anticipated that evaluation of the
project results will find application in the teaching and assessing of teamwork
in a variety of other domains.