* 1400653
* RUI: Crossing numbers for topological drawings of the complete graph, rotation schemes, and interior triple systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Silvia Fernandez, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 130,000.00

This award supports the Principal Investigator's research in Mathematics with a
focus on the study of crossing numbers. Crossing numbers date back to World War
II, when the mathematician Paul Turán worked on a labor camp moving carts filled
with bricks from kilns to storage places using a railway system. In his own
words ''...the work itself was not difficult; the trouble was only at the
crossings. The trucks generally jumped the rails there, and the bricks fell out
of them; in short this caused a lot of trouble and loss of time which was rather
precious to all of us..." He realized that the situation could be improved by a
railway system with the smallest number of crossings. The general problem with
an arbitrary number of kilns and storage places turned out to be extremely
difficult and has not been solved to date. A generalized abstraction of this
problem is to consider drawings where some points are to be connected by curves
and the goal is to minimize the number of crossings. Crossing numbers are
important to everyday life and technology. Drawings of graphs are a helpful tool
to visually represent connections and interrelations among objects or subjects,
such as maps, genealogy tress, or organizational charts. To ease the
understanding of such information, drawings with few crossings are highly
desirable. Crossing numbers are also important to the development of electronic
circuits, such as computer processors, whose components must be connected by non
crossing electrical links in order to avoid short circuits. The accessible
nature of related problem statements and their important applications make this
project suitable to the direct involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimizing the number of crossings in a drawing
of a graph in the plane is a major problem in topological and geometric graph
theory. Crossing numbers of the complete graph are particularly important
because, using random embeddings, bounds on the crossing number of the complete
graph imply bounds on the crossing number of arbitrary graphs. Separation of
points by a straight line (halving lines, k-edges, k-sets) has extensively been
used to understand the complexity of finite sets of points in the plane. The PI
and coauthors recently developed a separation concept for topological drawings
of the complete graph in the plane. They used this concept to settle a long
standing crossing number conjecture for several families of drawings. The goal
of this project is to use this separation concept as a new approach to the
Harary-Hill conjecture on the topological crossing number of the complete graph
and its variations to other topological settings. Being able to separate points
in topological graph drawings opens up a world of possibilities; problems
involving k-edges, halving lines, and convexity will be studied for the first
time on this topological framework. The project will significantly advance the
understanding of the fundamental structure of topological drawings of graphs in
the plane.