* 1400261
* SusChEM: Design and Manufacture of Electrodes for High Energy Density Rechargeable Sodium Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Yan Yao, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2017
* USD 353,297.00

Rechargeable batteries that can store a large amount of energy are a critical
technology for society today in applications such as mobile electronics and
electric vehicles. In the future, such batteries will also be a critical
technology for use of renewable energy sources in commercial and home electric
power. The most widely used form of such rechargeable batteries today is the
lithium ion battery. There would be benefits to replacing lithium which is a
somewhat expensive and scarce element in these batteries with the much lower
cost and more abundant element sodium (i.e., the common element found in table
salt). The change to sodium could lower the cost of the battery and could allow
for the same size battery to store more power. However, this switch from lithium
to sodium is challenging since the other components of the battery are not
currently compatible with use of sodium. In particular, the current materials
that collect the electric current produced by such batteries are damaged quickly
when sodium is used in the battery. The goal of this project is to solve this
major challenge by developing new electrode materials that can successfully be
used in sodium ion batteries. In addition to the direct scientific impact and
the broader impacts in transportation and renewable energy that could be enabled
by this technology, this project will support interdisciplinary research on
energy storage with education of students at the graduate, undergraduate, and
high-school levels. This research makes an excellent platform in which to engage
both the public and K-12 students on the value of science and engineering to
society and will be used through a Houston-area high school outreach program to
attract female and first generation college students to Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of this work is that steric effects can be alleviated or
eliminated by increasing the lattice spacing of the intercalation frameworks
used in battery electrodes. The goal of this research is develop methods to tune
the interlayer distances of layered materials through a chemical delamination-
restacking approach that can allow for improved ion transport and ion
accommodation in the intercalation framework. This work combines
electrochemical, computational, and microscopic characterization experiments to
understand the design and behavior of such an approach, with the focus of the
work on development and understanding of a molybdenum metal oxide MoO3-polymer
nanocomposite featuring an alternating layered structure of MoO3 sheets and
polymer layers for high performance rechargeable sodium batteries. Key features
of the plan include the precise control of the synthesis of MoO3-polymer
nanocomposites with desired interlayer distances, characterization of the
influence of ion size on intercalation behavior in such composites by
electrochemically comparing the intercalation kinetics of lithium, sodium, and
potassium in these composite materials, and the formulation of an atomistic
understanding of the intercalation process of sodium in the expanded MoO3
structures by density functional theory modeling and in-situ transmission
electron microscopic observation. The results of this work will lead to a
general strategy to manipulate two-dimensional inorganic layered compounds at
the atomic level as favorable host materials for intercalation of large cations
for use in battery electrode materials.