* 1400470
* Microsystems Certification Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Andrew Bell, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,977.00

Preparing a skilled technical workforce to meet regional workforce needs
supports the Nation's competitiveness. Microtechnologies and nanotechnologies
are needed in a broad range of products and industries. The primary purpose of
the project is to broaden engineering technician education to prepare
technicians to work in the microsystems industry. This project is designing and
implementing a Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (Microsystems) Certificate for
students enrolled in engineering technology or electrical engineering technology
associate degree programs, as well as preparing them for LabVIEW certification
(Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench, for data acquisition,
instrument control, and industrial automation). Microsystems and LabVIEW
certificates are supplementing and complementing associate degrees in
engineering technology, creating broader employment opportunities for
technicians and preparing a competent workforce for the microsystems industry.
The Microsystems certificate and LabVIEW preparation created for this project
are easily replicable in engineering technology programs in each of other
regions in the state through the Ivy Tech System and in community colleges in
other states. The college is continuing its partnership with SCME, adding a
community college focus to their resources. This continuing partnership is
assuring that the resources produced are being made available through the SCME
national education and information dissemination channels. Project outreach
activities include those specially designed to attract and retain to the program
under-represented minorities, females, and veterans who already make-up a
significant percentage of students at the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on an NSF ATE grant (1205138) to the Southwest Center for
Microsystems Education (SCME). As a result, eleven hands-on educational course
modules and kits produced by SCME are being integrated into engineering
technology courses at the college. In this project the college and SME are co-
developing three additional course modules and kits focused on building
microsystems, which complement the learning modules developed by SCME. The
college is also integrating preparation for the LabVIEW certification test into
the new microsystems courses, providing technicians with the opportunity to
graduate with two certifications in addition to an associate degree, which makes
them more marketable. The new courses are increasing the capacity of community
colleges to produce technicians for a wide variety of micro- and nano-technology
related industries. An introductory microsystems course is being offered for
dual credit in high schools to introduce high school students to microsystems
concepts and careers. Students receive actual clean room experience each
semester through field trips to either Norte Dame University or the University
of Michigan, both located within a two and a half hour drive from the
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro and nano-technologies are found in a wide
range of products made by major employers in the state including Advanced
Surface Microscopy, Bangs Laboratories, Delphi Corporation, Eli Lilly and Co,
Guidant Corp, Exelis, J&amp;S Resource Management, M4 Sciences, Makuta Technics,
MicroTechNano, MonoSo, Prosolla, QuadraSpec, Semafore Pharmaceuticals, and
Sensor Advanced Development. Although the integrated circuits (IC) industry saw
a two percent decline overall in 2012, the research by Yole Development showed
that the microsystems sector grew by 10 percent to become an $11B business.
Analysts expect a 12-13 percent compound annual growth rate through 2018 to
create a $22.5B microsystems market. The use of microsystems and integrated
circuits is crucial to the design and development of new products. Common
examples include accelerometers, pressure transducers, inertial sensors, micro
fluidic pumps and flow sensors. The introduction of microsystems technology via
the proposed course modules and kits, and those already developed by SCME,
provides a unique opportunity for students to learn engineering concepts in an
easy to see fashion while exposing them to design and fabrication techniques
which are currently being used in many microsystems
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;