* 1400654
* Beyond Marketing to Stealth Recruitment: Creating ICT Pathways from High School to College and Work for Underrepresented Groups
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 09/30/2016
* USD 313,978.00

The Central California Coast region includes four community colleges that serve
large numbers of rural, Latino/a and female students. However, few of these
students receive training in computer and information technology fields, despite
being in close proximity to the high-technology hubs of Silicon Valley and San
Francisco.

This project will build technical education pathways that motivate and prepare
rural, high school students from underrepresented groups to enter and stay on
two information and communications technology (ICT) pathways: Networking, and
Software and Systems Development.

The project will pilot test an approach that involves building strong,
sustainable partnerships and infusing ICT skills into digital media high school
classes using media computation and aligning them with college classes and
workforce needs. This "stealth recruitment" approach is in contrast to most
efforts that take a marketing approach that tries to convince students of the
value of ICT classes; instead it leverages students? interests in digital media
and contextualizes their learning. The approach will be developed and pilot
tested by two community colleges, in partnership with high school teachers,
employers, and intermediary organizations.

This intervention has the potential to contribute to our understanding of how to
effectively bring together high school, community college, and industry
representatives to build strong, sustainable partnerships and coherent pathways
into ICT, and how to infuse deep ICT learning into digital media classes. The
project will also determine whether a stealth marketing approach is effective
for recruiting a more diverse student population into ICT courses and preparing
and motivating them to meet workforce needs.

Te work is designed to address a shortage of US workers trained for a high-
technology workforce by targeting students in CTE courses that are using
computers but not already considering an ICT field. Other impacts include
providing training, support, and resources for high school teachers in ICT, and
for college faculty in recruiting and retaining underrepresented students. If
effective, the project will result in a scalable strategy to increase the number
and diversity of students, including those from rural settings, that consider
and pursue ICT training and jobs.