* 1400689
* Strengthening Solar Photovoltaic Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Steve Paik, Santa Monica College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,892.00

Southern California has a high density of solar energy businesses that require a
technologically skilled workforce. Santa Monica College and its industry
partners are further developing and improving an existing Solar Photovoltaic
Installation program created in response to industry need. Through a
multifaceted project that includes program improvement as well as curriculum and
educational materials development, this project is creating and implementing
strategies to bridge the gap between employer demand for qualified workers and
student ability to acquire the skills necessary to match employment
opportunities in the field, including on the job training and math and science
understanding. This project focuses on three inter-related strategies for
addressing workforce demand, including 1) expanded outreach to include K-12 and
community based training programs; 2) the development of contextualized math and
science modules to strengthen the solar photovoltaic curriculum and improve
student success; and 3) the development of an internship course to provide on
the job training for students while connecting them with potential employers.
Through these activities, the college is improving the regional capacity to
address the workforce demands of the solar industry. The project aims to
increase student enrollment in the program by targeting high school students and
first time freshmen, women, veterans, and underrepresented minorities so the
program enrollment more closely resembles the general student population. It
plans to improve student completion rates in courses by improving their math and
science skills and increase student aptitude to attain employment by engaging
students in internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a minority serving
institution located in a highly diverse region, this project is impacting a
diverse array of students, including many low-income, ethnically diverse, first
generation college students, and providing them the opportunity to pursue viable
careers in a new and emerging field. Employers are being provided a steady
stream of skilled applicants for job openings that have both the hands on
training and a strong background in math and science necessary to address
immediate employer needs and advance in their careers. The educational materials
developed to support the degree program are being thoroughly assessed for
effectiveness and disseminated throughout California and the nation to assist
other regions as they prepare a qualified workforce for the solar energy
industry. An extensive evaluation is also assessing the effectiveness of the new
strategies designed to increase the number of students who enter the Solar
Industry workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced technological education in
solar energy is part of a career path that begins in middle school and high
school, continues through community college, and provides opportunities beyond
the community college setting. This project, both its needs and its responses,
is based on extensive conversations with students, faculty, and industry
advisors both locally and throughout the state regarding the barriers to success
both in the classroom and in the workplace. Strategies, specifically the
development of contextualized math and science education and field-based
learning experiences, are research-based and have demonstrated success in other
industries. With these program improvements, students who pursue coursework
through the Solar Photovoltaic Installation Program are completing their studies
with the skills and knowledge that they need to enter the workforce or continue
their education.