* 1400913
* Dissertation Research: Dissecting the genetic basis of craniofacial variation in the threespine stickleback
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* William Cresko, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,850.00

Little is known about the genetic basis of evolution to novel environments in
natural populations. Addressing this problem is of broad importance because
populations of organisms increasingly need to either adapt to a changing
environment or go extinct. Few studies have identified genes important for
adaptation in natural populations. This research into the rapid evolution of the
vertebrate head offers a unique opportunity to conduct a statistically high-
powered study on individuals that have undergone adaptive evolution in less than
50 years. The results of this study could provide insight into the genetic and
developmental mechanisms of rapid evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vertebrate
head is an impressive structure that houses some of the most important organs.
Across vertebrates head shapes are diverse, and much of this variation appears
adaptive. In contrast the early programs of head shape development are highly
conserved across vertebrates. This begs the question; where in the conserved
genetic programs of head development does variation lie to direct such a
diversity of head shapes? This question will be answered by identifying genes
that underlie head shape variation in the threespine stickleback fish. New
methods of visualizing and measuring head morphology will be used in conjunction
with genomic data from a pedigreed threespine stickleback population to map
genomic regions regions associated with head shape variation.