* 1400969
* Research Initiation Award: Revealing the Structural Basis for Calprotectin-RAGE Signaling Axis
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Steven Damo, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2017
* USD 236,848.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisk University's RIA
project utilizes well established experimental structural biology and
biophysical techniques to establish a transformative new paradigm for the
mechanism of regulation of protein-protein interactions in signal transduction.
The results will have a significant impact on the fields of structural biology
and signal transduction. Characterization of the CP-RAGE VC1 complex at atomic-
resolution represents a significant advance forward for S100 and RAGE biology.
This would be the first high resolution structure of the RAGE ligand binding
extracellular domain in complex with a protein, and one of few S100 proteins in
complex with its cognate binding partner. Moreover, the approaches employed in
this investigation represent a general approach to addressing mechanism of
receptor activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses a critical gap
in this knowledge by employing high resolution structural studies to reveal the
atomic resolution details of the CP-RAGE complex. RAGE is a transmembrane
protein comprised of three extracellular immunoglobulin domains (V, C1, and C2),
a single transmembrane helix (TM), and a short intracellular peptide (IC). Like
many other single pass receptors, activation is hypothesized to proceed through
an oligomerization based conformational rearrangement that occurs during ligand
binding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the research initiation project
will further the diversification of the STEM workforce by providing unparalleled
training to students that have been historically underrepresented in STEM. This
interdisciplinary program provides integrated research training and didactic
coursework at the interface of chemistry, biology, and physics illustrating to
students the impact of transdisciplinary research and high impact discovery.
Undergraduate students will present their findings at regional and national
meetings and will co-author peer-reviewed publications. As an NSF Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdiction, the project
will build research capability and capacity in the state as well as within this
minority-serving institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Page A&lt;br/&gt;This research initiation award
proposes to understand the molecular basis of interactions&lt;br/&gt;between the
S100 calcium binding protein calprotectin (CP) and the receptor for advanced
glycation&lt;br/&gt;endproducts (RAGE). CP binding to RAGE results in activation
of the transcription factor NFkB,&lt;br/&gt;a molecule which plays a key role in
inflammation. Despite the importance of this signaling&lt;br/&gt;axis, little is
known about the structural details of the protein-protein interactions
which&lt;br/&gt;govern CP-RAGE binding. This proposal addresses a critical gap
in this knowledge by employing&lt;br/&gt;high resolution structural studies to
reveal the atomic resolution details of the CP-RAGE&lt;br/&gt;complex. RAGE is a
transmembrane protein comprised of three extracellular immunoglobulin
domains&lt;br/&gt;(V, C1, and C2), a single transmembrane helix (TM), and a
short intracellular peptide (IC).&lt;br/&gt;Like many other single pass
receptors, activation is hypothesized to proceed through an
oligomerization&lt;br/&gt;based conformational rearrangement that occurs during
ligand binding. The focus of this proposal&lt;br/&gt;is on the V and C1
extracellular domains of RAGE (RAGE VC1) and how they contribute to
CP&lt;br/&gt;binding and/or oligomerization during receptor activation. In order
to address these questions,&lt;br/&gt;two complementary but independent
objectives are proposed: Objective 1) Define the molecular&lt;br/&gt;basis for
CP interaction with RAGE. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) will
be&lt;br/&gt;used to identify amino acid residues in CP and RAGE VC1 that are
critical for binding. The&lt;br/&gt;NMR studies will be validated and used to
guide strategies to create mutants in CP that are&lt;br/&gt;defective in RAGE
binding as assayed by isothermal titration calorimetry. Objective 2)
Characterize&lt;br/&gt;the oligomerization state of the CP-RAGE VC1 complex.
X-ray crystallography will be used to&lt;br/&gt;determine the structure of the
CP-RAGE VC1 complex. This structure will reveal high
resolution&lt;br/&gt;details of the interaction between CP and RAGE, as well as
interactions that define the oligomerization&lt;br/&gt;behavior of the overall
complex.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The research initiation award
utilizes well established experimental structural biology
and&lt;br/&gt;biophysical techniques to establish a transformative new paradigm
for the mechanism of regulation&lt;br/&gt;of protein-protein interactions in
signal transduction. The results will have a significant&lt;br/&gt;impact on the
fields of structural biology and signal transduction. Characterization of
the&lt;br/&gt;CP-RAGE VC1 complex at atomic-resolution represents a significant
advance forward for S100&lt;br/&gt;and RAGE biology. This would be the first
high resolution structure of the RAGE ligand binding&lt;br/&gt;extracellular
domain in complex with a protein, and one of few S100 proteins in complex
with&lt;br/&gt;its cognate binding partner. Moreover, the approaches employed in
this proposal represent&lt;br/&gt;a general approach to addressing mechanism of
receptor activation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this
research initiation award will further the diversification of the
STEM&lt;br/&gt;workforce by providing unparalleled training to students that
have been traditionally underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;in STEM. This
interdisciplinary program provides integrated research training and
didactic&lt;br/&gt;coursework at the interface of chemistry, biology, and
physics -illustrating to students the&lt;br/&gt;impact of transdisciplinary
research and high impact discovery. Undergraduate students
will&lt;br/&gt;present their findings at regional and national meetings, and
will co-author peer-reviewed&lt;br/&gt;publications. Enhancements in research
and curriculum infrastructure at Fisk University provided&lt;br/&gt;by this RIA
will contribute to recruitment and retention of minorities in STEM
disciplines,&lt;br/&gt;resulting in the development of early career scientists
into discoverers and leaders in academic&lt;br/&gt;and research careers.