* 1400720
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Erin McCullough, McCullough              Erin           L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2016
* USD 187,200.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Dr. Erin McCullough supports research and training on traits that
lead to reproductive success that serves as the source of greater biodiversity
in future generations in insects. The study animal is the horned dung beetle, a
member of the genus Onthophagus which with over 2400 species is the most
species-rich genus in the animal kingdom. The host institution is the University
of Western Australia under the sponsorship of Dr. Leigh Simmons. Training goals
include genetic techniques to establish paternity in insects, multivariate
selection analyses, and the estimation and visualization of complex fitness
landscapes. The model insect used in this study lends itself to interesting and
exciting educational and public outreach activities on animal diversity. The
fellowship is supported by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Office of International and Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexual
selection is a key driver of the elaborate and diverse morphologies found in the
animal kingdom. Sexual selection can occur both before and after mating, but the
traits that help males gain access to females are often different from the
traits that help sperm compete for the successful fertilization of eggs.
Unfortunately, few studies simultaneously measure sexual selection pressures
before and after mating. It is therefore unclear how different sexual traits
interact to influence a male's overall reproductive success or how these
interactions change depending on ecological or environmental conditions. Using
the horned dung beetle Onthophagus taurus as a model system, this research
investigates how pre- and post-mating sexual selection operates and how these
selective pressures vary in response to different density conditions.
Understanding how ecological conditions may shift the overall strength and
direction of sexual selection is expected to provide key insights regarding the
observed diversity in morphology, behavior, and mating strategies.