* 1400278
* Future Research Goals and Directions for Foundational Science in Cybersecurity, Phase Two
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2017
* USD 305,950.00

An appointed National Research Council committee will conduct the second phase
of a study to consider future research goals and directions for foundational
science in cybersecurity and how investments in foundational work support
civilian and national security mission needs in the long term. It will consider
relevant topics in social and behavioral sciences as well as more "traditional"
cybersecurity topics. The committee will review current federal cybersecurity
research strategies, plans, and programs as well as requirements for both
civilian and national security applications. It will consider major challenge
problems, explore proposed new directions, identify gaps in the current
portfolio, consider the complementary roles of research in unclassified and
classified settings, and consider how foundational work in an unclassified
setting can be translated to meet national security objectives. In Phase 1,
already completed with separate funding, the study committee conducted initial
data gathering and analysis. In Phase 2, to be funded under this activity, the
committee will undertake additional data-gathering, analysis and deliberations
and produce a report providing a high-level roadmap for foundational
cybersecurity research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Foundational cybersecurity
research that yields yield new technologies and approaches is an important
element of the nation's response to the cybersecurity challenge. The results of
this study are expected to inform future activities by federal agencies that
conduct cybersecurity research and federal coordinating bodies for IT and
cybersecurity. It is also expected to inform cybersecurity researchers as well
as industry -- which is both a developer and consumer of cybersecurity
technologies and services -- about needs, opportunities, and future directions.