* 1400575
* Technicians in Energy, Advanced Manufacturing, and Supply Chain Technology (TEAMS) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Ronald Logreco, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 642,103.00

The Technicians in Energy, Advanced Manufacturing, and Supply Chain Technology
(TEAMS) Project at the Community College of Allegheny County in Oakdale,
Pennsylvania aims to bridge the gap between employers and workers in the energy,
advanced manufacturing, and supply chain technology fields in Western
Pennsylvania. Through this project faculty will collaborate with industry to
create industry-relevant mechatronics specializations, and develop applied
capstone projects focusing on the design, operation, installation,
troubleshooting and maintenance skills essential to energy and manufacturing,
and supply chain processes. Oil and gas operations in the Marcellus Shale of
Western Pennsylvania have resulted in increased workforce demand not only for
jobs directly in the energy industry, but also jobs in ancillary and logistics
industries such as advanced manufacturing and supply chain technology.
Mechatronics educated-technicians are needed for many of these jobs: from the
midstream Marcellus Shale gas being produced and processed through the pipeline,
to the energy-efficient operations and maintenance of equipment in the cracker
plant, to the supply chain technologies used to distribute the petrochemicals,
to the manufacturing plants that receive and utilize the chemicals. This ATE
TEAMS Project will help to close the gap between employers and workers in these
industries by building mechatronics career pathways through the community
college and into the workforce. This project ensures that workers have the right
combination of academic and industry-endorsed skill-sets to meet regional, state
and national demands.

The TEAMS Project utilizes a student-centered approach to develop the
occupational skills needed to prepare a growing influx of nontraditional adult
students to succeed in the workplace. Career strategies and foundational core
courses within the Associate of Science (A.S.) degree at the Community College
of Allegheny County in mechatronics integrate national certifications. This
creates a focus at the college on the skills needed to link higher education
with workforce needs. Faculty development with equal emphasis on technology and
pedagogy balances workforce and academic education and assessment. Through the
TEAMS Project, the Community College of Allegheny County is establishing a
transportable curriculum model which can increase access to higher education by
rural, veteran, and other non-traditional populations. The project provides
access to postsecondary STEM education and personalized supportive services to
these groups. In addition, the project is also increasing the number of teachers
and students that are nationally certified in mechatronics-related competencies.
The TEAMS project adds to the number of faculty who are able to integrate career
readiness with academic rigor in the curriculum. The TEAMS Mechatronics degree
aligns well with the current workplace needs but also includes the flexibility
needed to adapt to the evolving requirements of industry. The TEAMS project
includes efforts to disseminate the methods and results of this effort to a
national audience.

Evaluation of the TEAMS Project will examine whether project objectives are
being reached. Summative evaluations will include information regarding the
effectiveness of methods to build the capacity of faculty to respond to
technical education needs across the industries of energy, advanced
manufacturing, and supply chain technology. The project evaluation will also
inform efforts of educators who implement a mechatronics curriculum to support a
workforce pipeline that directly responds to regional economic development in
the energy, advanced manufacturing, and supply chain industries.