* 1400605
* Conference Proposal: Support attendance to the 2014 -  26th International Ornithological Congress in Tokyo, Japan
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,000.00

Ornithologists from around the world meet once every four years at the
International Ornithological Congresses to share their research findings and
forge research collaborations that are critical in moving the discipline
forward. Research on birds is conducted in practically every country, and much
of the research spans national boundaries. For U.S. ornithologists to remain
current, it is essential that they exchange ideas directly with their
international colleagues. Although the obvious focus of the International
Ornithological Congress is birds, the breadth of disciplines represented among
ornithologists in attendance encompasses all of the biological sciences. A
partial list of these disciplines includes: evolution, systematics, ecology,
population biology, physiology, endocrinology, immunology, functional
morphology, behavioral ecology, neurobiology, and conservation biology. The
exchange of information among scientists during oral and poster presentations is
of great value, but equally important are the personal exchanges and resulting
collaborations established in the hallways between sessions and during the
numerous topic-based workshops scheduled throughout the congress.

Funds provided by NSF will help support the attendance of future leaders of
ornithology. Specifically, recipients will be at an early stage in their careers
(e.g., graduate students and post-doctoral fellows) and will be from U.S.
institutions. The selection committee will also strive to support individuals
from groups that are historically underrepresented in ornithology. Assistance of
such scientists will help forge new, international collaborations, thereby
creating long-term benefits for all involved. For example, a Round Table
Discussion at the 2010 International Ornithological Congress resulted in the
formation of an international Research Coordination Committee on parrots that
now boasts 247 members from all continents. Information from the congress will
be made available through publication on CD-ROMs containing the full text of all
plenary and symposium talks, as well as the abstracts of all posters and oral
presentations. Similarly, a subset of papers will be published in an online open
access edition of the Journal of Ornithology.