* 1400394
* Collaborative Research:  Optimal Design of Flaw-tolerant Structures and Material Microarchitectures via Stochastic Topology Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* James Guest, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2017
* USD 147,979.00

Topology optimization is a computational process for designing structures and
materials that meet some optimality criteria, e.g. minimum weight or maximum
stiffness. The technique has gained significant traction among design engineers
and has been shown to identify designs where efficient use of materials resulted
in unprecedented performance. The objective of this research is to develop a new
topology optimization framework capable of designing structural topologies that
are robust in the presence of geometric uncertainties. Accounting for
dimensional uncertainties in the optimization process is of paramount importance
in many engineering applications, for example in processes involving extreme
miniaturization of the material architecture, where the physical realization of
the optimal design is generally subjected to significant tolerances. The
application of this research to state-of-the-art commercially available
manufacturing technologies, including additive manufacturing, will greatly
impact the development of architected cellular materials and promote technology
transfer. Results of this research will be incorporated into graduate courses
within the Engineering and Applied Science PhD program at the University of
Massachusetts, Dartmouth. This project will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students at UMass Dartmouth (where many students are first
generation college students), the University of California, Irvine and Johns
Hopkins University.

This research will result in a new design optimization framework capable of
designing structural topologies that are robust in the presence of geometric
uncertainties. A number of strategies will be explored based on novel
integration of stochastic analysis and uncertainty representation and
propagation methods with efficient topology optimization techniques and inverse
homogenization-based material design frameworks. Stochastic topology
optimization frameworks for both continuum and discrete structures will be
developed where flaw-tolerance is achieved through careful incorporation of
nodal and boundary uncertainties. Novel methodologies for the characterization
and representation of geometric uncertainties are planned, including an
experimental effort aimed at carefully measuring typical geometric flaws in
architected cellular materials fabricated with state-of-the-art additive
manufacturing techniques, and quantifying their impact on the statistical
variations of the macroscopic mechanical properties. This experimental
investigation will feed into the development of a topology optimization
framework centered on flaw-tolerance.