* 1400610
* Mechanical and Manufacturing Technologies for Energy and Sustainability
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Filburn, CBIA Education Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 899,062.00

The Connecticut Business and Industry Association (CBIA) and Gateway Community
College (GWCC) are implementing the Mechanical and Manufacturing Technologies
for Energy and Sustainability (MET2) Program. MET2 engages a diverse group of
community college and university students and faculty in industry-driven
projects focused on mechanical/manufacturing engineering technology, with
emphasis on energy and sustainability. The project cuts across technologies such
as mechatronics, nanotechnology and green manufacturing, and brings together
numerous industry and education partners to ensure broad stakeholder
representation and involvement. MET2 develops and strengthens the innovation
pipeline from high schools to community colleges and universities, leading
ultimately to the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
technician workforce. The project is designed to attract and engage students
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines and to foster their
interest in the pursuit of careers in technology and engineering. In addition,
MET2 includes veterans who are provided with a supportive Veterans Oasis at the
participating community colleges.

MET2 integrates professional skills, including entrepreneurial skills,
leadership development and innovation, in industry-driven problem-based
projects. It expands on the Life Support and Sustainable Living (LSSL) Program,
a successful NSF-funded program that received the ATE High Impact Technology
Exchange Conference's Innovative Program Award at the 2012 HI-TEC Conference in
Denver, Colorado.

The primary goals of MET2 are to: (1) develop an engineering, technology and
business skills-based curriculum including business model development and
professional skills, for engineering and technical disciplines; (2) engage
community college and university students in a team-based learning environment
with the opportunity to solve real-world challenges, from conceptualization to
final design; (3) engage technical high school students in an outreach program
to create and strengthen a career pipeline in technology and engineering
disciplines; and (4) provide professional development for technical high school,
community college and university faculty on technical and professional skills.
Assessment and evaluation include input from students, faculty and industry
stakeholders to determine the extent to which the program is successful in
creating networking opportunities that connect the program to the workforce;
implementing mentoring activities that positively impact participants' formal
engineering and technology academic performance; leading to sustained
entrepreneurial activities in engineering and technology programs in
Connecticut's technical high schools, community colleges and partner
universities; and increasing enrollment of underrepresented students in
engineering and technology programs at Connecticut's community colleges and
universities.