* 1400351
* Expanding the National Center for Welding Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2023
* Monica Pfarr, Lorain County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,221,075.00

This project is supporting Weld-Ed, a national partnership between the welding
and materials joining industry and the nation's community and technical colleges
and universities, transitioning to an ATE Resource Center for welding technician
education. As an ATE Resource Center, Weld-Ed is continuing to support the role
and pipeline of welding technicians in industry. Weld-Ed is achieving this goal
by: offering a comprehensive welding professional development program for high
school teachers, community college and university faculty members, continuing to
advance welding technology programs nationally, providing technical assistance
consulting to welding programs nationally, and developing a certification
program for high school and community college welding technology programs to
support improved programs of study with a focus on continuous process
improvement. The comprehensive formative and summative evaluation plan includes
two project evaluators. Together, they will craft the evaluation design and
specifics, develop/adapt the needed instrumentation, and manage data security
and analyses. The internal evaluator will be responsible for data collection,
analysis, and writing formative evaluation reports. The external evaluator will
be responsible for the overall evaluation. The External Evaluator will review
data collected, documents and work products, and will use a protocol to
interview staff, customers, students, and partners. The Formative Evaluation
will focus on implementation and progress. The implementation evaluation will
track whether the project is being conducted as planned. Progress evaluation
will determine to what extent the project's goals and objectives are being met.
Qualitative and quantitative data will be collected using a mixed-methods
approach (Stevens, et. al. 1992) (Frechtling and Sharp 1997). The external
evaluator will ensure objectivity and manage the overall summative evaluation.
The summative evaluation will address the following questions: 'Was the project
successful?' 'Did the project meet the overall goal?' 'What components were most
effective?' 'Were the results worth the project's cost?' and 'Is the project
replicable and transportable?' The project has four primary objectives.
Objective 1 is to offer a comprehensive welding professional development program
for high school teachers, community college and university faculty members.
Success will be measured by faculty use of instructional materials and number of
individuals participating, and the degree of implementation of curricular
improvements on the campuses. Objective 2 is to develop a certification program
for high school and community college welding technology programs. Success will
be measured by the number of schools participating and the institutionalization
of programs. Objective 3 is to advance welding technology programs nationally.
Success will be measured by the number of students involved in outreach
activities, andthe number of students enrolled in and graduating from welding
programs. Objective 4 is to provide technical assistance consulting to welding
programs nationally. Success would be measured by the number of consulting
engagements, numbers of programs reached, courses changed, and students
impacted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the welding industry,
which is experiencing single digit job growth and double digit retirement and
attrition of welders and welding technicians. Weld-Ed partners with industry
including: American Welding Society, Lockheed Martin, Lincoln Electric, plus 154
industry affiliates, and high school, 2-year and 4-year institutions. The
instructional materials and research reports being developed and distributed by
the project reach thousands of educational institutions and tens of thousands of
students annually. The State of Welding Industry Report is a publication of the
project which is distributed nationally. There are significant efforts to
attract underrepresented populations.