* 1400561
* Midwest Photonics Education Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Steven Dulmes, Indian Hills Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,969,986.00

Photonics, the technology that incorporates optics and electronics (lasers,
fiber-optics, electro-optics), is a rapidly expanding field that provides
rewarding jobs for technicians and excellent opportunities for Midwest economic
growth. Photonics is also an "enabling technology", with wide-scale applications
in manufacturing/materials processing, as well as in defense/homeland security,
renewable energy, telecommunications, diagnostic and therapeutic medical
equipment, environmental monitoring, opto-electronics/nanotechnology and solid
state lighting. The employer demand for qualified photonics technicians
nationwide is great and has continued to grow in recent years. In 2012, a
national survey titled "Industry Demand for Two-Year College Graduates in Optics
and Photonics Technology" reported that the Midwest region's 500 photonics-
driven companies project a need for an additional 939 technicians over the next
five years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indian Hills Community College will establish
and operate the Midwest Photonics Education Center (MPEC). The Center's goals
are 1) to increase the supply of well-educated photonics technicians in the
Midwest, and 2) to serve as the national leader in photonics applications for
advanced manufacturing and laser materials processing. MPEC will accomplish
these goals by building and strengthening the number, capacity and quality of
two-year photonics education programs in Midwest colleges. MPEC's geographical
region includes the U.S. states of Iowa, Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio,
Nebraska, Minnesota, Indiana, and Wisconsin. MPEC will support and coordinate
efforts by institutions to: provide technical assistance, develop curricula,
assess industry needs, perform outreach activities, develop and implement
strategies to recruit and retain students including women, minorities and
veterans and offer flexible training for incumbent technicians and dislocated
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPEC will disseminate new information on laser
applications in advanced manufacturing and raise the awareness of high school
students, parents and teachers about photonics, photonics technicians and
photonics career opportunities. The Center will cultivate pathways to high-wage,
high growth technical jobs for high school and community college students.
Through the Center's activities Midwest employers will gain essential
information about colleges that offer photonics technical education and have
access to photonics graduates for new hires. Moreover employers will have the
opportunity to provide input and have oversight on the content of photonics
curricula. The outcomes of center activities will provide employers more options
for highly skilled new hires, stimulate the economic development of laser
manufacturing companies in the Midwest, and build and strengthen the capacity
and quality of photonics education in two-year colleges in the Midwest region.