* 1400224
* Collaborative Research: Characterization, Modeling and Uncertainty Analysis of Tornado Wind and Its Effects on Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Xinzhong Chen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The devastation from recent tornadoes in Joplin, Missouri, and Tuscaloosa,
Alabama, in 2011 and in Moore, Oklahoma, in 2013 highlight the national
vulnerability to these windstorm events. Direct measurement of tornado wind
speed near the ground level is difficult to obtain due to its unpredictable
nature and destructive force. Current practice is to estimate wind speed based
on observed damage to structures and non-structures using the Enhanced Fujita
(EF) Scale, which is widely accepted in climatological study, risk analysis, and
design of critical facilities. However, such damage-based methods have a great
degree of uncertainty. Critical knowledge gaps exist about spatial and temporal
distributions of wind flow near the ground level and how wind flow interacts
with the terrain and structures. To address these knowledge gaps, this research
will characterize, model, and analyze uncertainties in tornado wind and its
effects on buildings. This research will lead to better understanding of the
effects of tornado and terrain parameters on near-ground wind field structures,
the transient aerodynamic force of tornado wind on building designs, and the
uncertainties in building performance subject to tornado wind. This knowledge
will contribute toward the foundation for developing performance-based building
code provisions to mitigate the impact of tornado wind loads on
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make the following three
knowledge advances. First, knowledge for understanding the tornado wind field
will be advanced through a systematic study of the effects of tornado and
terrain parameters. This study will fill an important gap between a tornado's
structure aloft and ground level damages and will provide the physics-based
evidence critically needed for updating the EF Scale. Fragility functions will
be developed to recalibrate the expected, upper bound, and lower bound wind
speeds for Degree of Damage in the EF Scale. Second, understanding of pressure
and load effects of non-synoptic winds, including tornadoes and thunderstorms,
will be advanced with the development of transient aerodynamic force models.
These models will not only enable better characterization of load effects under
a non-stationary vortex but also will build a bridge to results accumulated from
decades of research in stationary boundary layer wind. Third, a new framework
for characterizing and quantifying uncertainties of the tornado wind load chain
on buildings will be developed and validated with finite element models and
post-storm damage surveys. This framework will permit the integration of
uncertainties, including those of building properties and construction quality,
in assessing building vulnerability, laying the foundation for performance-based
building code provisions for tornadoes. This research is enabled by a confluence
of latest advances in tornado simulation, data acquisition and modeling
capabilities, full-scale studies of the tornado vortex, near-ground measurements
of tornado wind, and theories in non-stationarity, many of which were not
available a few years ago.