* 1400077
* Processing Mechanically Reliable Flexible Organic Electronic Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Samuel Graham, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,002.00

Processing Mechanically Reliable Flexible Organic Electronic Films

The development of printed electronics made with organic (carbon-based)
semiconductor materials has resulted in several promising technologies including
organic light emitting diodes for displays, solid state lighting, and organic
photovoltaics. The advantages of organic electronic materials are their
relatively low cost and availability compared with inorganic semiconductor
materials. However, in general, the active layers and electrodes used in organic
electronics can be susceptible to chemical reactions with water vapor and/or
oxygen during use, thereby reducing their lifetime, efficiency, and overall
performance. There is a critical need to develop advanced permeation barriers
for assembling these devices given the role the packaging has in the reliability
of the organic electronics and the ever-increasing demand for these products.
These barrier films must also be mechanically robust (resist cracking) when
large applied strains are imposed during use. This award supports fundamental
research to provide knowledge for the processing of mechanically reliable,
ultrathin polymer barrier films processed with the atomic layer deposition
technique. Additionally, summer enrichment programs are planned for high school
students to encourage their interest in pursuing education and careers in STEM
fields.

The overarching goal of the proposed research is to provide a fundamental
understanding of mechanical reliability of ultra-barrier films made by atomic
layer deposition for application to flexible printed electronics. The
experimental protocol will explore the relationship between processing
conditions, onset failure strain, and material composition/structure failures to
elucidate the factors that impact the reliability of atomic-layered-deposited
barriers used in flexible electronics. These films differ from most atomic-
layered-deposited film in that they are processed at temperatures below 100Â°C
for compatibility with low cost substrates and/or sensitive organic electronic
devices. Thus, the stoichiometry of these atomic-layered-deposited films can be
quite different than those processed at higher temperatures, resulting in
properties that are not fully characterized or understood. This research will
provide a systematic scientific study to understand, predict and minimize
cracking of low-temperature coatings, with a specific focus on the effects of
processing conditions (temperature, chemical functionalization of the polymer
substrates) on their barrier performance and mechanical properties. This will be
enabled by coupling state-of-the-art mechanical testing with surface science and
multi-scale modeling studies that will provide the link between the
stoichiometry of the atomic-layered-deposited coatings, their hydrogen content,
and the analyzed mechanical behavior.