* 1400370
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Andrew Tredennick, Tredennick              Andrew         T
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's
scientific workforce in the future. This fellowship to Andrew Tredennick
supports research and training at the intersection of biology, mathematics, and
statistics and addresses the relationship of ecological diversity versus
stability using new theorical and experimental approaches. The host institution
is Utah State University, and the sponsoring scientists are Peter Adler and Fred
Adler. Plant biomass is the base of energy captured on Earth and necessary for
all life. In an era of rapid environmental change, it is critical to discover
the processes that promote the stability of plant biomass production over time.
A deeper understanding of how biodiversity influences stability promises to
inform conservation efforts as well as management decisions in many economically
significant ways, including livestock production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost
all ecological systems are subject to fluctuations in environmental conditions
through time. In plant communities, it is now widely observed that increases in
the number of species present in a community can dampen the effect of
environmental fluctuations and stabilize biomass production. This research seeks
to develop a more mechanistic understanding of the processes that increase, or
decrease, ecosystem stability than now exists. The research employs natural
ecological communities to consider how population dynamics add-up to produce
observed stability and how coexistence among species mediates their population
dynamics. The research confronts new predictive theory with five long-term data
sets of perennial plant communities from across the western United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include gaining expertise in theoretical
and analytical approaches in ecology, including training in model-data
assimilation using advanced statistical methods. The research promises new tools
for ecological modeling, and public outreach includes producing a series of
"Whiteboard Ecology" videos to introduce ecological theories.