* 1400505
* Understanding the Deformation of Heterogeneous Nanocrystalline Metals - Integrating in situ Experiments with Stochastic Crystal Plasticity
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Pedro Peralta, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Nanocrystalline metals are materials composed of grains (crystallites) whose
sizes are of the order of 100 nanometers or less. The small grain size endows
these materials with several desirable properties including very high strength
and increased toughness compared to conventional metals. However, many commonly
used methods to produce nanocrystalline metals lead to highly nonuniform
microstructures with a wide distribution in the size and orientation of grains.
Such heterogeneous microstructures lead to a large variability in their
mechanical properties, which limits their practical use. This award supports
fundamental research to predict and quantify uncertainty in the mechanical
properties of heterogeneous nanocrystalline metals using a combined experimental
and modeling approach. The ability to reliably and accurately predict the
behavior of nanocrystalline metals would hasten their adoption in technological
and scientific structural applications, which will directly benefit the U.S.
economy and society. This research involves a multi-disciplinary approach
comprising of advanced microfabrication, materials science and mechanics and
will lead to broader engagement of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline
metals with a wide or bimodal grain size distribution often exhibit the best
combination of strength and ductility and hence are very attractive from an
engineering perspective. However, to accurately predict the mechanical response
of these materials it is necessary to consider both their intrinsic
microstructural heterogeneity and the stochastic nature of nanoscale plasticity.
Motivated by this, a new stochastic crystal plasticity framework informed by in
situ experiments will be used to model the deformation of heterogeneous
nanocrystalline metals. The model will explicitly take into account both the
variation in grain sizes and orientations as well as the statistics of
dislocation bursts in nanocrystalline metals. Novel in situ transmission
electron microscopy experiments on nanocrystalline metal films with controlled
microstructures will be used to directly obtain input parameters for the model
such as the distribution of critical resolved shear stresses. The predictive
capability of the model will be verified with data from independent in situ
x-ray diffraction experiments.