* 1400521
* ATETV presents SciTrends
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Anthony Manupelli, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,056,618.00

SciTrends advances the mission of the ATE program by illustrating the multiple
educational and career pathways that begin at the certificate, associate, and
baccalaureate levels and that may be pursued throughout the United States. The
web-based video series is designed to motivate high school students to learn
about and become interested in pursuing careers as science and engineering
technicians in six manufacturing areas - additive manufacturing; agricultural
and environmental technologies; biotechnology and chemical engineering
manufacturing technologies; mechatronics and electronics, including optical and
photonics technologies; semi?], micro?] and nanotechnologies; and supply chain,
logistics and transportation technologies. Each video has three segments: an
episode using a science news magazine format to engage students; a segment
highlighting the educational pathways for achieving careers as technicians and a
segment exploring career opportunities. Although this series is produced
specifically for the Web, each episode and individual segments are downloadable
in high resolution video format for organizations and users. The six complete
episodes will have a total running time suitable for video broadcast.

A large group of stakeholders from industry, educational institutions, and
students participate in all aspects of developing and testing the videos. A
diverse team of teen ambassador/advocates are convened to assist in promoting
and assessing the use of social media in promoting viewership and dissemination
of the videos among their peers.

A key outcome of the research is to determine what aspects or components of the
project were most effective in motivating student behavior or changing
perception of a technician career. The project follows the research guidelines
in "The Common Guidelines for Education Research and Development" to measure how
these videos change student perceptions of technical careers and technician
education and the actions students take as a result of the videos. Focus groups
of 8?]10 high school students at locations around the country complete a
pre?]treatment survey and engage in a group discussion to assess their interest
in, knowledge of, and intent to pursue a career related to a STEM/ATE field.
They then watch one or more videos produced as part of this project. Afterward,
they again complete a companion survey to assess changes in attitudes,
understanding, and intent. In addition, 2?]3 months later, these same students
are asked to complete a follow?]up survey to further assess the ongoing impact
of the videos.

Pellet Productions has previously developed videos about ATE projects and
centers. The videos are posted on YouTube, iTunes and Vimeo and on YouTube alone
there have been 375,000 views with 858 subscribers. More than 300 colleges and
other educational organizations have requested and downloaded the ATETV videos.
ATE projects, ATE Centers, The National Technical Institute for the Deaf, and
the American Association of Community College report that they embed ATETV
videos directly on their Web sites. PBS has incorporated all of the ATETV videos
into PBS Learning Media. More than 120 cable access stations in 42 states are
currently airing ATETV videos. The knowledge attained is used to develop videos
to help high school students and their parents understand careers in the middle
skill technical occupations that make up the majority of available jobs and the
preparation necessary to be employed in them.