* 1400721
* Bio-Link Next Generation National Advanced Technological Education Center for Biotechnology and Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sandra Porter, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,758,957.00

Rapid advances in biotechnology require development of a technologically
advanced, middle-skills workforce. The Bio-Link Next Generation Center for
Biotechnology and Life Science's mission is (1) increasing the number and
diversity of well-educated technicians in the workforce; (2) meeting the ever-
growing needs of a continually evolving and diversifying industry for
appropriately educated technicians; and (3) institutionalizing community college
educational practices that make high-quality education and training in the
concepts, tools, skills, processes, regulatory structure, and ethics of
biotechnology available to all students.Bio-Link has influenced science
education in general through materials and techniques developed within its
network. With its partners, it has encouraged and enabled industry to hire
community college graduates and has opened doors for underrepresented
populations. Bio-Link is continuing and expanding its broad dissemination of
cutting-edge resources to improve teaching practice, educational access, and
career exploration and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Bio-Link is
situated in the San Francisco Bay Area, its activities embrace biotechnology
education throughout the Nation. Members of Bio-Link's leadership team are
located in several states (California, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin), and
over 100 community colleges from 36 states and territories self-identify as Bio-
Link programs. As the network has broadened to cover the diversity of the
industry and growth of educational programs, it has also deepened. Bio-Link's
broad mission --to prepare technicians and meet industry needs-- remains the
same. Goals for this phase of Bio-Link include the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1: Utilize Bio-Link's network of information
sharing to foster communities of practice that enhance the preparation of
skilled technicians.&lt;br/&gt;2: Deepen and diversify industry outreach and
engagement to ensure that training programs nationwide respond to industry
needs.&lt;br/&gt;3: Increase access to and use of educational and training
resources to improve student skill attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link's
focus is on biotechnology, an increasingly important interdisciplinary industry
that warrants significant attention as areas such as biopharmaceuticals,
bioenergy, regenerative medicine, biomanufacturing, and other biological fields
evolve with great speed. Moreover, the industry provides technicians with
opportunities to advance rapidly into high-wage positions. Bio-Link possesses
the critical expertise and capacity to continue and expand its work. Bio-Link's
particular aim to develop more communities of practice advances the sharing of
information and resources by engaging members of its network in sustained
partnerships around focused areas of work that result in leveraging and scaling
best practices, developing new approaches to challenges faced in educating
technicians, and better meeting the needs of
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;