* 1400946
* Research Initiation Award: Establishment of Pale Yellow Golden Pothos Plant-based Transgenic System for Studying Nuclear Genes Involved in Chloroplast Biogenesis
* EHR,HRD
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Carla Oldham, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 11/30/2018
* USD 194,651.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.

North Carolina Central University's (NCCU) HBCU-UP RIA is aimed at establishing
an experimental system to study nuclear genes encoding chloroplast proteins and
to test its reliability for the purpose by co-expressing two well-characterized
nuclear-encoded plastid protein genes individually. Pale yellow 'Golden Pothos'
plants resulting from impaired function of EaZIP, encoding the Mg-protoporphyrin
IX monomethyl ester cyclase in the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway, is used for
overexpression by EaZIP driven by an inducible promoter alcA (alcA:: EaZIP). The
overall goal of the RIA is to develop a pale yellow 'Golden Pothos' plant-based
inducible transgenic system to study chloroplast biogenesis.

During the two year duration, the project supports five undergraduate students
in biotechnology. The project has the potential for local, regional and national
impact through a collaboration with researchers at the University of Florida and
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Institutional resources in
support of the PI and students are also provided through the BRITE Institute at
NCCU.

The project outcome also has the potential to result in training opportunities
for additional students, particularly undergraduates from underrepresented
minority populations, in molecular biology and biotechnology in gene cloning,
for example. In addition, the project increases research capability and capacity
at a historically black university in addition to making contributions to a
diverse, highly competitive, scientific workforce for the nation.