* 1400780
* Garden State LSAMP Phase II
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Robert Prezant, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2021
* USD 3,500,000.00

The Garden State LSAMP (GS-LSAMP) will build upon the findings and successes
realized in the Phase I implementation. GS-LSAMP achieved its 5-year goal in
Phase I of doubling the number of STEM Baccalaureate degrees earned by students
historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines in just four years by
developing a transformative system of recruitment and retention based primarily
upon innovative use of online education resources, research experiences, and
best practices. In Phase II, the transformative system of practices will be
enhanced by focusing on two critical transition points for students: (1)
community college to a four-year institution in STEM and (2) STEM baccalaureate
program to graduate school in STEM. The overall goal is to enhance pathways for
students in STEM disciplines to seamlessly transition through a baccalaureate
program and into STEM graduate programs or STEM careers. Focusing on these two
critical transition points will allow GS-LSAMP to continue to be successful in
producing students who are well-prepared and well-qualified for admission into
STEM graduate programs and the STEM workforce, thereby improving the diversity
of the workforce and enhancing the nation's global competitiveness.

For the first transition point, effective practices of GS-LSAMP will be expanded
into a consortium of five nearby community colleges all of which are Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSIs) and primary feeders to the alliance. A new
designation has been developed making them Associate Members of the Garden State
LSAMP. Associate membership will aid the community colleges in instituting the
practices that made the Garden State LSAMP successful. Through a series of
interactions and sharing of resources, a new and seamless transition model from
community colleges to four-year institutions will be developed for students
historically underrepresented in STEM. For the second transition point, GS-LSAMP
will encourage and facilitate the transition of LSAMP scholars into graduate
school and research careers by integrating research and international
experiences into the undergraduate academic program. The goal is to greatly
increase the percent of graduating LSAMP scholars who attend graduate school and
consider pursuing careers that involve research. International experiences will
be offered by pooling all of the opportunities from across the alliance to find
the best fit for individual student needs. GS-LSAMP's structured program, which
will "guide scholars along the entire path from first interest in a STEM
discipline all the way to a career", will build knowledge about how to develop a
strong regional alliance and can become a model for other alliances (consortia
of institutions) to replicate for the success of a diverse and talented group of
students.