* 1400551
* Linking Equations to Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Thomas Wagner, Housatonic Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

In industry, the design of a product is a multidisciplinary effort since
engineers and technologists need to integrate the various laws of physics,
optics, chemistry and thermodynamics and use algorithmic technical computing to
analyze the design. The most fundamental abilities needed by workers in
engineering and technology fields are problem-solving, critical thinking, and
the ability to digest, analyze and communicate information; however, much of the
student learning in technical fields has been along rigid disciplinary lines and
has been visually static. To address this issue, Housatonic Community College is
using integrated multidisciplinary software to develop software modules that
teach mathematics, science, and engineering and engineering technology courses
with the aid of 3D solid modeling software and embedding these modules into
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) courses. These modules
are increasing fundamental abilities in understanding and applying engineering
design principles for current students, new students, and incumbent workers.
Links are being created by connecting three-dimensional solid modeling software
to three-dimensional equations; using technical computing language software to
connect equations with solid modeling software; and connecting physics based
analysis to the design process. Students are thus experiencing direct
application of engineering principles through visualization and thereby
enhancing their understanding and appreciation of these
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All modular curricula being developed in this
project are being tested, assessed, and disseminated to the twelve Connecticut
Community Colleges and the four state universities. Partnering with the NSF
Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing (RCNGM) has the potential to
impact 4,500 community college students in the state of Connecticut, and this
method of instruction and learning is being spread to high school level students
and educators through local affiliates of Project Lead the Way. The NSF SC ATE
Center of Excellence has agreed to distribute the modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modular curricula being created use solid modeling and
technical computing and focus on a particular task or application and link
mathematics and engineering technology. Three dimensional objects and surfaces
come alive visually in three dimensions with proper lighting, dynamic rotation,
and interactive cross section visualization and with 3D printers. Students
actually hold 3D mathematical equations in their hands. The modules are being
used in classrooms that contain computers, the required software, and 3D
printers and are being tested at the college with approximately 400 students who
are taking Manufacturing Mathematics, Blueprint Reading, Computer Numerical
Control classes, College Algebra, Precalculus, Statistics, Computer Aided
Design, Statistical Process Control, Calculus, General Physics, General
Chemistry, and pre-engineering courses.