* 1401854
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Ailene Ettinger, Ettinger                Ailene         K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2018
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
statistics. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation?s scientific workforce
of the future. This fellowship to Ailene K. Ettinger supports research and
training to address plant performance by asking the ecological question, is it
better to flower early as temperatures warm? It uses statistical tools to link
timing with plant performance. The host institutions for this fellowship are
Tufts University and Harvard University; the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Elizabeth Crone,Elizabeth Wolkovich, and Luke Bornn. Training goals include
learning new modeling techniques, including the powerful statistical approach of
Bayesian hierarchical modeling, through investigating the timing of many spring
events, known as phenology, in some regions of the globe and the resulting
effects on plants. Research results promise to assist natural resource managers
in assessing whether phenology is a useful indicator for prioritizing species or
populations that may be threatened by environmental change. They can determine
if it is likely that a population of conservation or economic interest will
decline in abundance if it has not shifted its flowering or leafing time with
recent warming. Public outreach to conservation groups may interest them in
conducting phenological monitoring on land they control.

In regions where temperatures have increased over the past century, phenology
has shifted: numerous plant species are flowering or leafing earlier. This
research applies Bayesian hierarchical models to datasets of environmental
monitoring and experiments that document the extent to which leaf-burst,
flowering, and/or fruiting dates have shifted with warming to determine how
shifts in phenology affect plant performance and population growth rates.
Bayesian hierarchical methods are rarely applied to meta-analyses in ecology,
despite the advantages they offer for accommodating uncertainty, variance, data
from multiple sources, and small datasets. Although increasingly used in
ecological studies, they remain controversial but powerful when used
appropriately.