* 1401316
* USA-Uzbekistan Conference on Analysis and Mathematical Physics, May 20-23, 2014.
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Zair Ibragimov, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 49,955.00

This project is to support participants' travel to attend the first USA-
Uzbekistan Conference on Analysis and Mathematical Physics which will be held at
California State University, Fullerton on May 20-23, 2014. The conference will
center on the following five main themes: (1) Dynamical Systems, (2) Geometric
Function Theory, (3) Mathematical Physics, (4) Operator Algebras, and (5)
Several Complex Variables. These areas are currently the focus of research by a
wide range of mathematicians from around the world. The conference will feature
eight plenary talks given by senior mathematicians from the USA and Uzbekistan
as well as about 40 invited talks and 60 short talks in five parallel sessions.
The conference presenters are leaders in various areas of analysis and
mathematical physics, and are well known for their contributions in these areas.
Their talks will highlight the applications of techniques used in analysis in
solving problems in mathematical physics, and vice-versa, and will act as a
catalyst for further collaborative efforts by the participants. Special sessions
discussions will generate open problems that participants can continue
collaborating on even after the conference is over. The grant will provide
funding for 55-60 participants with special emphasis on graduate students and
early-career mathematicians to attend the conference. This proposal has received
cofunding from the Global Venture Fund of the Office of International Science
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will provide a venue that
will foster new international collaborations, advancing the fields of analysis
and mathematical physics. The primary goal of the conference is to stimulate
future interactions among the U.S. researchers in Analysis and Mathematical
Physics and their counterparts in Uzbekistan and other countries, and serve as a
catalyst for future collaborations that promote, encourage and engage women and
students and junior mathematicians from under-represented groups. The conference
program provides ample opportunity for graduate students, postdocs, and other
young mathematicians to present their work. One of the important broader impacts
of the project is to increase participation of women and students and junior
scientists from under-represented groups in the event and insure their inclusion
into a larger group of mathematicians working in the areas of the conference.
The project will also promote interactions between U.S. and Uzbek
mathematicians.