* 1401299
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mycorrhizal mediated competition between producers and decomposers drives ecosystem carbon storage
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Christine Hawkes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,085.00

Forests and forest soils have a major effect on the Earth's carbon cycle.
Understanding what controls forest carbon storage is thus important for
predicting both the effects of climate change on forests, and the effects of
forests on climate change. Trees grow by converting atmospheric carbon dioxide
into biomass such as wood and leaves through photosynthesis; when trees
eventually die, their biomass can either be stored in soil or consumed by
microbes via the process of decomposition. The fate of carbon in decomposition
depends on what microbial groups dominate: free-living soil decomposers or
specialized (ectomycorrhizal or EM) fungi that inhabit roots. Free-living
microbial decomposition recycles nutrients into plant-available forms that would
otherwise remain locked up in dead plant tissues, but also simultaneously
respires carbon dioxide back to the atmosphere. In contrast, symbiotic EM fungi
are supplied with carbon from the plant, so their role in decomposition is only
to release nutrients and not carbon. If EM fungi can effectively out-compete the
free-living decomposers for nutrients, more carbon should remain within the
ecosystem than is lost to the atmosphere. This hypothesis is supported by
previous research showing that ecosystems associated with EM fungi store more
carbon at a global scale. This research project support experiments to quantify
how important these specialized fungi are in forest ecosystem carbon storage.
The goals of this research are to better understand the role of specialized
fungi and generate the information needed to incorporate their activities into
ecosystem and Earth carbon cycling models. The project will support the research
of a graduate student, and will also provide opportunities for underrepresented
minorities to gain significant research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
primary producer and decomposer activities can be limited by nitrogen (N) in
terrestrial ecosystems, setting the stage for competition between trophic
levels. Many plants associate with ectomycorrhizal fungi. These EM fungi can
produce N-degrading enzymes, allowing plants to access soil organic N directly,
without requiring conversion to accessible forms by free-living decomposers. By
"short-circuiting" the traditional N cycling pathway, plants associated with EM
fungi may induce or exacerbate N limitation of decomposers, and thus increase
soil and ecosystem C storage. Competition between primary producers and
decomposers via mycorrhizal fungi would have important implications for
ecosystem ecology, as it could be a major driver of soil organic matter
stability and ecosystem C storage that is independent of other known drivers
such as climate, soil mineralogy and organic matter chemistry. The project will
assess the importance of EM-mediated plant-decomposer competition and at both
local and global scales. At local scales, soil processes will be studied along a
gradient of EM fungal abundance as well as in contrasting EM and arbuscular
mycorrhizal (AM) forest types. At a global scale, EM ecosystems were found to
store 70% more C in soil than AM ecosystems, suggesting the importance of
microbial structure in determining carbon storage. Next-generation sequencing
and qPCR will be used to better quantify the relative abundances of these
different functional groups at the local scale. If empirical tests prove to be
robust in estimating local abundances, this approach will be expanded to global
scales by using published sequence data to describe the relationship between the
relative abundance of EM fungi and soil biogeochemical properties.