* 1401326
* Reconciling divergent histories of Eastern Pacific climate with new coral data from Galapagos (Ecuador)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Julia Cole, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 04/30/2018
* USD 449,993.00

The El Niño (ENSO) system orchestrates climate variability and extremes
worldwide, and its behavior under greenhouse warming remains one of the largest
uncertainties in anticipating future climate change. ENSO has a dramatic impact
on the climate of the Galapagos Islands, and this impact is preserved in
paleoclimate records from the archipelago. But published paleoclimate records
from the Galapagos yield disagreeing versions of the islands' recent climate
history, including the magnitude of recent warming and the range and timing of
ENSO variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve these disagreements, this
project will develop reconstructions of regional sea surface temperature using
the isotope geochemistry of long-lived, annually banded corals. With these
records, which directly track ocean conditions, important questions about recent
climate variability and change in this iconic region can be addressed. For
example, is the Galapagos warming as fast as the rest of the world? What is the
history of El Niño variability in the region? Do changes in this region coincide
with periods of higher-latitude climate variability such as cooler ("Little Ice
Age") conditions between 1500-1850? Understanding the full range of ENSO
variability and ongoing trends is important locally, for improving conservation
planning and climate adaptation efforts in the Galapagos National Park and
Marine Protected Area. The results of the research will be useful across many
disciplines, from conservation management in Galápagos to evaluation of global
climate models. Funding also supports student education and training at the
graduate and undergraduate level.