* 1401392
* Local Cohomology and D-modules
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Hans Ulrich Walther, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 05/31/2018
* USD 268,224.00

Mathematically, this research project falls into the broad category of algebraic
geometry, one of the most varied areas of today's mathematics. Fundamentally,
algebraic geometry is the study and classification of geometric objects
described by algebraic equations through manipulation of the input data using a
wide array of mathematical tools. Because of its diversity, algebraic geometry
permeates such different branches of science as robotics, cosmology, and
computer encryption. The origins of algebraic geometry can be traced to the
works of Euclid and Pythagoras. In its modern form, the focus of algebraic
geometry is on singularities, which are points that are unusual when compared to
their neighbors. Examples of singularities include cusps such as the tip of a
funnel cloud, or self-intersections such as the center in a figure-of-eight;
they indicate states in which a given physical system becomes anomalous. This
project also contributes to the training of the next generation of researchers
by engaging graduate as well as undergraduate students in research.

The main focus of this project is the study of singularities through
cohomological methods. To a singularity defined by a set of polynomial equations
one may attach several invariants; these may be of discrete type (such as the
number of branches of a curve meeting in a point) or of continuous nature (such
as the space of all vector fields tangent to the singularity). If one considers
a family of singularities, such invariants behave in interesting ways: on one
side, at special members of the family they "jump" (that is, get larger in some
sense), and such jumps are often accompanied by an appropriate nonzero local
cohomology group. The singularities where jumps occur typically exhibit worse
behavior than their neighbors. On the other side, near typical members of the
family, the invariants often deform according to so-called "hypergeometric"
differential equations. One component of this project investigates, using local
cohomology and combinatorial methods, jumps and solutions of the appearing
hypergeometric differential equations. The other part of the project is
concerned with the study of specific invariants in families of singularities
derived through either calculus (the Gauss--Manin connection and Bernstein--Sato
polynomial), counting techniques (the Igusa zeta function), or deformations
(cohomology of the Milnor fiber), and their interplay.