* 1401835
* Two-dimensional protein arrays: de novo design and applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Francois Baneyx, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,001.00

1401835 &lt;br/&gt;Baneyx, Francois C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional
(2D) protein arrays are of considerable interest for the production of advanced
materials, devices and systems. For instance, the naturally occurring purple
membrane patches of archaeal cells have been exploited for optical information
storage; 2D protein layers isolated from archaea and bacteria have been used to
produce next generation vaccines and as templates for the fabrication of
nanostructured inorganic materials. Yet, these technologies have not evolved
beyond proof of concept because they are not robust or scalable, and because
neither the geometry, nor the chemistry or assembly of these systems can be
precisely controlled from the nano- to the mesoscale. In this work, it is
proposed to create an entirely new generation of self-assembled 2D scaffolds
that have been designed from the ground up to enable the next generation of
advanced materials, biosensors and biodevices. The project seamlessly blends
computation, molecular biology, biochemistry, biotechnology, and materials
science, and provides a unique opportunity to train students in truly
interdisciplinary research. One underrepresented undergraduate student will be
paired with a graduate student to broaden participation in science. Results and
lessons from the proposed work will be presented to the public and a week-long
module on self-assembly will be developed for inclusion in the department's
Molecular Engineering curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to
computationally design a family of proteins that will be capable of robust self-
assembly into 2D arrays by fusing protomers from symmetry-compatible oligomers
and redesigning interfacial contacts between unit cells. We will delineate and
optimize self-assembly conditions for scalable formation of 2D arrays retaining
short-range order at the nanoscale but growing over hundreds of micrometers. We
will develop approaches to stack these lattices into periodic 3D structures, and
apply strategies to control the adsorption and orientation of 2D arrays at
technological-relevant interfaces through electrostatic interactions, surface
modification and the engineering of solid binding peptides within permissive
sites of the structure. And finally, we will explore the potential of these
designer 2D lattices as tunable molds for templating inorganic mineralization
and as scaffolds for high-density display of enzymes and proteins and for
membrane protein crystallization.