* 1401930
* GRC/GRS Batteries: Advances in Characterization, Analysis, Theory and Modeling of Basic Processes March 9-14, 2014, Ventura, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Maureen Tang, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the 2014 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Batteries, to be held in Ventura, CA
on March 8-9 and March 9-14, 2014, respectively. The majority of the 50 GRS
participants are expected to attend the GRC, which will have attendance capped
at 200 participants. The GRC will feature two poster sessions and nine technical
sessions, including a session dedicated to novel approaches recently taken by
junior investigators. All presentations are from invited speakers who represent
the leaders in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical challenges of
understanding and improving current electrochemical energy storage (EES)
systems, which include batteries, require a collaborative effort from
researchers in many disciplines. There are still many fundamental gaps in
understanding the atomic- and molecular-level processes that determine and
govern the function, operation, performance limitations, and failure of EES
systems. Fundamental knowledge is critically needed to uncover the underlying
principles that control these complex and interrelated processes. With this
underpinning knowledge, wholly new concepts in materials design can be developed
for producing electrodes, electrolytes, and battery cells that are capable of
storing higher energy densities and have long cycle lifetimes, at lower cost.
The themes of the GRC and GRS on batteries have been chosen to facilitate the
exchange of ideas between researchers who work on many aspects of EES. The GRS
program will consist of short talks from graduate students and post doctoral
research associates, mixed with discussion time and poster sessions. Technical
content will be divided into three sessions, dedicated to materials for energy
storage, advances in battery characterization methods, and studies of
electrochemical interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed GRS and GRC will
provide significant professional development activities for graduate students
and post doctoral research associates in the area of electrochemical energy
storage. The GRS and GRC will also stimulate new advances in batteries for
renewable energy storage through interaction of scientists and engineers who are
both new and established in this field.