* 1401512
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: A Mode-Based Simulation Enabling Model and Methodologies for Geometric Variation and Tolerance Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/10/2013,08/31/2014
* Zhenyu Kong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 62,813.00

Last Modified Date: 06/15/09 Last Modified By: Christina L. Bloebaum &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this GOALI award is to
establish methods for modeling geometric dimensioning &amp; tolerancing
(GD&amp;T) to enable effective GD&amp;T design simulation, and to develop
methods for probabilistic GD&amp;T tolerance analysis and synthesis. The
research will result in a tolerance modeling methodology that is capable of
simulating random variations and incorporating them into product function models
for probabilistic design in the face of manufacturing uncertainties. The
research approach progresses from the development of tolerance modeling for a
single complex part, to the creation of models capable of analyzing tolerances
for multiple part assembly. Deliverables include a unified framework for
geometric tolerance modeling, geometric tolerance representation and models on
the various one-dimensional and two dimensional geometric features, statistical
model parameter estimation, and tolerance analysis and synthesis methodologies
for assembly, new curriculum model creation, and laboratory development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will fill the
vacancies in the state of the art of computer aided tolerancing (CAT)
techniques, provide practical solutions for GD&amp;T tolerance design and
quality assurance, and shift the traditional dimensional tolerancing and
heuristic GD&amp;T design into a new tolerance design paradigm with a rigorous
model and methodological basis. The results of this research are generally
applicable to many industries for high quality product design, e.g. aerospace,
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), alternative energy (e.g., fuel cells),
optical, automotive, and shipbuilding, among others. The results will strengthen
students' research skills, and build faculty and students' experience, and
publications. Results will be incorporated into new educational curricula and
lab practicum, thus providing hands-on training for students in mechanical and
industrial engineering. The results will be disseminated widely via professional
academic and industrial collaborative networks, an industrial case study,
seminars, publications, and professional conferences. &lt;br/&gt;