* 1401677
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Plant interactions across common mycorrhizal networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Leonel Sternberg, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 11/30/2016
* USD 19,181.00

This investigation concerns the role of common mycorrhizal networks (CMNs)
"fungus interconnections among plant root systems" in plant competition
belowground. CMNs are formed by generally beneficial, root-inhabiting fungi
called "arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi". Plants feed these fungi some of the sugar
they produce by photosynthesis, and in return, the fungi take up and provide the
plants with key mineral nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen. Once
connected to a host plant's roots, the fungi forage throughout the soil and may
encounter root systems of other plant species with which they additionally
associate without preference, creating a network. The major question this raises
is whether all plants connected to the network share mineral nutrients equitably
or if mycorrhizal fungi disproportionately donate mineral nutrients to host
plant species that provide them the most sugar. The researchers utilize
tallgrass prairie species for their research, Big Bluestem and Canada Wild Rye.
Tallgrass prairie is an endangered ecosystem in North America and prairie
restorations often involve sowing the study species together. Understanding how
CMNs affect interactions between these plant species might inform restoration
management practices such as tillage, which can disrupt CMNs. Besides its
relevance to prairie restoration, this research will engage Miami inner-city
middle school students and university undergraduates from underrepresented
groups. The researchers will investigate competition as mediated by CMNs between
a tallgrass prairie dominant grass, Big Bluestem (Andropogon gerardii) and a
less common species, Canada Wild Rye (Elymus canadensis). If Big Bluestem is
able to obtain mineral nutrients disproportionately and thereby suppress the
growth of Canada Wild Rye, then CMNs may contribute to Big Bluestem's dominance,
influencing prairie community composition. The researchers will utilize a
rotated conetainer method in the greenhouse to isolate and reveal the effects of
CMNs by severing them. The proposed work will determine the effects of CMNs on
the relative strengths of intra- and interspecific competition and consequent
size hierarchy development. The student will investigate if large carbon
donation to CMNs elicits high mineral nutrient transfer from mycorrhizal fungi
by using carbon stable isotope ratios to compare carbon supplied by these C4 and
C3 grasses to their leaf mineral nutrient contents in monoculture and mixture.
Finally, if severing CMNs alters the fungus community on root systems, this will
be investigated through DNA barcoding.