* 1401384
* Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Melvin Hochster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 453,796.00

The PI plans to work on several questions in commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry. Algebraic geometry studies solutions of many polynomial equations in
many variables. Understanding this problem is of fundamental importance in many
sciences, in engineering, and in other disciplines as well. It is often
difficult to determine whether to expect any solution, finitely many solutions,
or infinitely many: in the last case one wants to know how many degrees of
freedom one has in describing the solutions. One can study the solutions
geometrically, or algebraically, by investigating certain functions on the
solution space that form what is called a commutative ring. This dual
perspective creates a close connection between commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry that is very valuable. The problems proposed for study are long
standing and of fundamental, central importance. The results obtained will be
disseminated by journal and book publication, lectures at conferences and
workshops, and via the internet. There is a strong educational component. The
principal investigator has had thirty-nine Ph.D. students including fourteen
women (and has five other Ph.D. students currently, including four women, one of
whom is African-American), and has served as mentor to fourteen junior faculty
members, of whom six were women. This level of activity will continue. The PI
will integrate undergraduate students into his
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate several long standing
questions in the theory Noetherian rings. One is to prove Stillman's conjecture
bounding projective dimension, which Tigran Ananyan and Hochster have done in
characteristic not 2, 3 for degree at most four. Another is to continue the
development of tight closure theory: Neil Epstein and Hochster have developed a
new version with many of the properties of the original theory that gives a
smaller closure, is defined in both characteristic p and equal characteristic 0,
and commutes with localization. This theory raises new questions while offering
insight into existing ones. Jointly with Bhargav Bhatt, Hochster has given a new
proof of the positivity of Serre intersection multiplicities over regular rings
in positive characteristic using an idea that has promise for solving the more
than fifty year old problem of settling the general case in mixed
characteristic. Other directions include the relatively recent theory of
quasilength and content of local cohomology, finiteness of support of local
cohomology, Lech's conjecture and generalizations, a new approach to the long
standing direct summand conjecture, and the geometry of certain algebraic sets
associated with matrices. A number of these problems are intended for
collaboration with graduate students and postdoctoral faculty.