* 1401506
* Multiscale Studies of Collective Behavior in a Model Social Bacterium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joshua Shaevitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 720,000.00

From wildebeest herds to bacterial biofilms and every scale in between, how
individuals self-assemble into large, spatially complex groups is a key problem
in understanding collective behavior, multicellularity and development. The
coordinated motion of individuals at the cellular level can drive the formation
of higher-scale structure in tissues, organisms and populations. These phenomena
arise statistically as cells modulate their direction and speed in response to
both local and global cues. A full understanding of how collective behavior in
cell populations arises has been difficult to achieve because the community
currently lacks methods to physically probe sensory input, motor control, and
group formation. Experiments examining the effect of specific mutations on
single cell movement and group morphology have identified many important
molecular players but lack the ability to probe the behavior of individuals
within groups or physical aspects of motion production and coordination. While
most current models of motile bacterial populations rely heavily on mechanical
coupling between cells as a key driver of collective behavior, we have virtually
no measurements of the effect of forces on cell movement or directionality in
this context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will study
biophysical aspects of force production, motion control, and cell-cell
coordination on the molecular to the multi-cellular level using the model social
bacterium Myxococcus xanthus. The three aims of the work seek to determine the
role of physical forces in coordinating cell speed and directionality and to
elucidate the properties of single-cell motility that drive starvation-based
aggregation. The experiments that will be performed will generate a huge leap
forward in our understanding of how individual cells move and how they
coordinate their activities to form large scale, motile structures. This project
lies firmly within the goals of the Physics of Living Systems program at the NSF
by using physical measurements and analyses to understand the dynamics of living
cells across spatial scales. The PI has developed a cross-disciplinary
Integrated Science course and will use the next several years to improve the
course's curriculum by making it more accessible to a larger audience of US
college students and, once complete, spearhead efforts to publish a textbook for
broad dissemination. In addition, many of the techniques and analyses developed
as part of this proposal will serve the larger microbiological community and
will be made freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.