* 1401217
* Collaborative research: Mio-Pliocene evolution of the Indian summer monsoon recorded in the Bengal Fan
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sarah Feakins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2018
* USD 226,075.00

The Indian monsoon brings moisture to the Indian subcontinent and the Himalayas,
feeding some of Earth's largest river systems, including the Ganges-Brahmaputra.
This is one of the largest and the most populated river basins in the world,
providing water for ~1 billion people. The rivers sweep sediments from around
the basin into the Indian Ocean, where they accumulate in a "megafan", a giant
deposit beyond the river mouth that extends as far south as the southern tip of
India. These sediments preserve traces of millions of years of environmental
changes in the region, including valuable molecular fingerprints of forests and
grasslands and Indian monsoonal summer rainfall
amounts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research engages the collaborative efforts of
faculty, graduate students and undergraduate students at the University of
Southern California and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, along with
national and international collaborations, to address societally-relevant
climate, and more broadly earth science, research. Specifically, this research
uses sediment cores from the center and the southern end of the Bengal megafan
to study the nature and causes of the vegetation and monsoon precipitation
changes on land and carbon burial in the Bengal megafan over the last 18 million
years. The research team will also use organic carbon contents of the sediments
to calculate the amount of carbon buried by the megafan, locked away from the
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The central hypothesis that will be tested is
that the intensity of precipitation in the summer monsoon has varied since
initiation and has driven changes in the Himalayan carbon cycle. Precipitation
changes are expected to be associated with: 1) global warmth in the mid-Miocene
and early Pliocene (when pCO2 levels were similar to today); 2) wind speed
intensification in the Mio-Pliocene; and 3) cooling in the Pleistocene.
Analytical methods include compound-specific hydrogen isotopic analyses of plant
leaf waxes, which when paired with carbon isotopes can resolve whether
hydrological changes drove C4 plant expansion in the region. Pairing further
with inorganic proxies will establish how erosive changes impacted organic
carbon burial in the Bengal Fan.