* 1401832
* UCLA CUORE Neutrino Physics Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Huan Huang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 774,164.00

Neutrinos are amongst the most abundant particles in the Universe and yet we do
not know many of their properties. For example, we do not know their absolute
mass scale or their particle-antiparticle nature. Because of their abundance,
even a small mass could have far-reaching consequences for understanding their
role in the evolution of our Universe. Knowing if neutrinos are their own
antiparticles could have implications in understanding the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of our Universe.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Neutrino-less double beta decay
(NLDBD) experiments address these two fundamental questions. Double beta decay
is a rare nuclear decay that has been measured in several nuclei when it is
energetically favorable. Some nuclei are stable against ordinary beta decay but
are unstable for double beta decay in which two neutrons in the nucleus are
simultaneously converted to protons and two electrons are emitted. Double beta
decay can proceed through several modes. The experimentally measured process,
the two-neutrino mode in which two electron antineutrinos are also emitted, is
completely described by known physics. NLDBD is an as-yet-undetected decay that
involves no neutrinos in the final state and necessarily would indicate that
neutrinos are their own antiparticle. The rate of such decays determines the
scale for the effective neutrino mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUORE (Cryogenic
Underground Observatory for Rare Events) experiment at the Gran Sasso laboratory
(LNGS), Assergi, Italy, is one of the next generation experiments to search for
NLDBD. It uses the 130-Te isotope with a design sensitivity to the effective
neutrino mass ranging between 40-70 meV, depending on nuclear structure
calculations. The UCLA group's major hardware responsibilities include the
testing of all the front-end electronics and the installation and commissioning
of the electronics system at LNGS in collaboration with the Milan and South
Carolina groups. Their analysis focus will be on understanding of the residual
background sources through Monte Carlo simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technology being used in CUORE which is based on milliKelvin bolometry is one of
the most innovative and largest scale in the field. If their electronics proves
out as designed, it will likely influence other fields. The NLDBD experiments
address fundamental physics issues that have a scientific impact beyond particle
and nuclear physics. For example, if neutrinos are Majorana particles and
neutrino masses are from the See-Saw Mechanism, the lepton sector could violate
CP (Charge-Parity) symmetry and contribute to the matter and anti-matter
asymmetry of the Universe. The group will also help train undergraduate and NSF-
REU students in their research programs and provide them with research
experiences in neutrino physics and modern detector technology.