* 1401362
* Flow induced particle movement under smooth to rough boundary conditions: A force-time history formulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Panos Diplas, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 258,775.00

The research will explore sediment dislodgement under the influence of
fluctuating hydrodynamic forces for boundaries spanning hydraulically smooth to
fully-rough, and flow conditions from laminar to fully turbulent. At the present
time, the mean boundary shear stress is widely used as the criterion for
identifying the threshold of motion for particles in streams, as well as
biological and industrial flows. Unfortunately, the dynamic features of these
flows are not adequately captured by such criteria, nor even by models based
upon instantaneous hydrodynamic forces. That is, these approaches ignore the
time-dependent dynamic aspects of the flow (recently demonstrated by Diplas,
Dancey et al. (2008).) The basic premise in this study is that fluctuating
forces and associated impulse due to the highly unsteady and dynamic nature of
turbulent flow, and grain-induced vortex shedding for both the laminar and
turbulent cases, are responsible for sediment transport at near threshold
conditions. The research will investigate the scaling behavior of flow
structures which are most effective at imparting the necessary impulse. This
will be accomplished experimentally, using state-of-the- art time-resolved
(>1000 kHz) digital particle image velocimeter measurements simultaneous with
dynamic grain surface pressure measurements and non-intrusive grain motion
detection.

Intellectual merit: Flow over an erodible boundary is the central problem in
earth surface dynamics and is applicable to biological flows and many industrial
processes. The process is complex and still poorly understood. The intellectual
merit of this research relates to both the advancement of our knowledge and
understanding of the phenomena as well as practical predictive capabilities.
This research will: Advance our fundamental understanding of the dynamic
interplay between fluctuating fluid forces and particle dislodgement and may
contribute to the development of new analytical approaches and experimental
methods, as well, Identify the flow structures that are most effective in
imparting sufficient momentum/impulse to entrain particles, Contribute to the
development of a new universal criterion for identifying threshold of motion
conditions, Facilitate the development of improved bed load transport equations,
especially those using the notion of excess shear stress.

Broader Impact: The research relates to a broad range of societal problems
associated with the Earth's Critical Zone and various industrial processes,
among them: 1. Dynamics of water processes in the environment. Improvement of
existing engineering methods for the design of stable waterways. Discovery of
the mechanisms responsible for scour around bridge piers and other structures.
Establishment of risk-based methods for preventing the removal of contaminated
sediments. Identification of consequences on stream ecology and biology 2.
Climate change and Natural Hazards. Prediction of effects on reservoir
sedimentation and its life expectancy. Identification of beach erosion
mechanisms and implementation of effective protection schemes 3. Industrial
processes. Development of improved models for solid phase transport in
pipelines. Establishment of better models for removal (flushing) of solid phase
contaminates.