* 1401507
* GARDE: Design Projects to Enable Veteran Reintegration in an Educational System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Jacob Glower, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 124,296.00

Proposal: 1401507&lt;br/&gt;PI: Khan, Samee U.&lt;br/&gt;Title: GARDE: Design
Projects to Enable Veteran Reintegration in an Educational
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance &amp; Importance&lt;br/&gt;The
GARDE proposal will develop customized solutions for North Dakota State
University (NDSU) students (preferably veterans), faculty, and staff with
disabilities. Each year, an average of 4 groups of 2-4 students each will work
closely with an individual with a disability, through NDSU Disability Services
in collaboration with the NDSU Nursing Department, and when applicable, the
North Dakota Interagency Program for Assistive Technology and the City of Fargo,
to develop practical and applicable solutions to resolve issues that are
affecting a specific veteran's academic progress and societal reintegration. In
most cases, a group will be entirely composed of NDSU Electrical and Computer
Engineering students; however, when appropriate, students from other
departments, such as Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering, may also be
part of a group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Customized
solutions for specific individuals with disabilities will be developed by groups
of undergraduate students following a rigorous design process that includes (i)
Requirements Capture; (ii) Analysis; (iii) Design and Testing; and (iv)
Validation. Because the developed solutions may also hold value for other
persons with disabilities, each group will adhere to the following five design
principles: (i) modularity, (ii) adaptability, (iii) cost-effectiveness, (iv)
efficiency, and (v) ease of use. This will enable the end-products to be
utilized by a larger consumer base. Therefore, provisions have been made to
maintain the product at a level that can guarantee
longevity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The developed
technologies can be classified as:&lt;br/&gt;-- Projects that address a unique
need for a specific student or type of student, such as:&lt;br/&gt;a) Book
Reader Application with Voice for Students with Depression and Anxiety
Disorders&lt;br/&gt;b) Auditory Enhancement System for Partially Deaf
Students&lt;br/&gt;c) Voice Enabled Smart Vending Machine&lt;br/&gt;d) Voice
Activated Door Openers for Students with Quadriplegia&lt;br/&gt;e) Custom
Computer Keyboard for Veterans with Reduced Motor Skills&lt;br/&gt;-- Generic
technologies to support students who are (for personal reasons) not
registered&lt;br/&gt;(or do not want to register) with the NDSU Disability
Services Department, such as Speech to Overhead Text Display.&lt;br/&gt;--
Projects that employ novel paradigms, such as social networking, smart phone
applications, and cloud computing, to build awareness and help connect students
with disabilities to other such students, such as:&lt;br/&gt;a) Interactive
Academic Supportive System for ADD/ADHD&lt;br/&gt;b) Behavioral Control Training
Application for Asperger Cases&lt;br/&gt;c) Route Information System for
Visually Impaired Students&lt;br/&gt;d) Automated Cloud-based ADD/ADHD Assisting
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These solutions will reduce dependability and will
assist users with life in general, which will help with reintegration into
society. Provisions have been made to enable the proposed GARDE program at NDSU
to become self-sustaining by: (i) closely working with the City of Fargo to
deploy the developed GARDE products to North Dakota elderly care facilities,
when appropriate, and (ii) presenting the most promising technologies at the
Innovate ND competition, which is a talent and venture capital competition
rolled into one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The products and
solutions developed will directly benefit disabled veteran students to help them
succeed academically and better integrate back into society. Products that can
be commercialized will benefit local, regional, state, and national economies.
The engineered solutions may also help in developing course content covering
design principles.