* 1401350
* Collaborative Research: Cyber-enabled Learning: Digital Natives in Integrated Scientific Inquiry Classrooms.
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Campbell, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 901,103.00

There is an increasing gap between the use of cyber-enabled resources in schools
and the realities of their use by students in out of school settings. This
project explores the potential of information and communications technologies
(ICT) as cognitive tools for engaging students in scientific inquiry and for
enhancing teacher learning. A comprehensive professional development program of
over 240 hours, along with follow-up is used to determine how teachers can be
supported to use ICT tools effectively in classroom instruction to create
meaningful learning experiences for students, reduce the gap between formal and
informal learning, and improve student learning outcomes. In the first year, six
teachers from school districts in Utah and New York are prepared to become
teacher leaders and advisors. Then three cohorts of 30 teachers matched by
characteristics are provided professional development and field test units over
two years in a delayed-treatment design. Biologists from Utah State University
and New York College of Technology develop four modules that meet the science
standards for both states -- the first being changes in the environment.
Teachers are then guided to develop additional modules. The key technological
resource to be used in the project is the Opensimulator 3D application Server
(OpenSim), an open source, modular, expandable platform used to create simulated
3D spaces with customizable terrain, weather and physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of the professional development program are
measured by classroom observations using RTOP and Technology Use in Science
Instruction (TUSI), selected interviews of teachers and students, and validated
assessments of student learning. An external evaluator assesses the quality of
the professional development activity and the quality of the cyber-enabled
learning resources and reviews the research design and implementation. An
advisory board will monitor the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
outcome of this project will be insight into the professional development needed
to make teachers comfortable teaching with the kinds of multi-user simulations
and communication technologies that students use everyday. The enactment with
OpenSim also provides an opportunity to demonstrate the level of planning and
preparation that go into fashioning modules with selected cyber-enabled
cognitive tools such as GoogleEarth and Biologica.