* 1401593
* RUI: Xerogel-Based Amperometric Biosensors Incorporating Nanoparticle Networks - Adaptable Templates for Clinically Relevant Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Michael Leopold, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2019
* USD 270,000.00

Funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael C. Leopold at the University of
Richmond, is investigating materials and strategies for the development of
clinically relevant sensors that incorporate nanomaterials. As a component
within sensors, networks of metallic nanoparticles (NPs) elicit improved
performance, including enhanced sensitivity and response time. Nanomaterials
enable miniaturization of sensing devices, allowing advances to be directly
applied to needle electrodes - a sensor geometry amenable to implantable or
bedside devices. Greater understanding of NP networks within sensing schemes,
allow for the formulation of sensor design strategies targeting molecules that
serve as diagnostic markers in emergency room and maternity ward settings, where
real time, continuous monitoring would be most beneficial. Biosensing schemes
with NP networks that detect lactic and uric acid, compounds linked to
diagnosis/monitoring of serious medical conditions, sepsis and pregnancy-induced
hypertension, respectively, are a focus. This award is also supporting full
immersion undergraduate research mentoring and a continuing outreach partnership
with the Math Science Innovation Center to introduce nanotechnology to teachers
and students of grades 6-12. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
identify and understand critical structure-function relationships within
amperometric biosensor schemes that incorporate metallic nanoparticles (NPs),
establishing greater understanding of the NP's mechanistic role. First
generation, xerogel-based amperometric glucose biosensors serve as model systems
that feature composite xerogel/enzyme films embedded with a network of
alkanethiolate-protected gold NPs or monolayer-protected clusters (MPCs). Each
component of the film, from MPC surface chemistry to the xerogel's silane
precursor, is systematically examined to elucidate both the NPs and xerogel
structural role in the sensing mechanism. Those findings prompt rational design
of NP-assisted biosensing schemes at "needle" or wire electrode geometries with
potential in-vitro or in-vivo capability that are also selective for clinically
relevant and chemically diverse species.