* 1401113
* Group and ring-like structures in Category Theory and applications to Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,11/30/2014
* Marcelo Aguiar, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 11/30/2014
* USD 104,828.00

This project involves research in algebraic combinatorics, category theory, and
the theory of Hopf algebras, particularly the aspects of the latter related to
Lie theory. Algebraic combinatorics is a branch of mathematics which uses
algebraic techniques to study finite or countable discrete structures. Category
theory is used to formalize concepts of abstract mathematics. The proposed
research makes considerable use of category theory as a tool for organizing the
various algebraic structures associated to combinatorial objects. The PI will
introduce graduate students to this area of research and make international
contacts and collaborations in Europe, Latin America, and
India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantial effort is devoted to a new theory
enlarging the scope of classical Hopf-Lie theory and including hyperplane
arrangements and idempotent semigroups as part of the fundamental data. That
such an extension is possible and meaningful is a main finding of the current
work of the PI. Briefly, the chambers of the arrangement are regarded as the
different ways of multiplying a sequence of elements in a free associative
algebra. Extensions of the notion of Hopf algebra and Lie algebra are then
formulated in terms of the projection maps of Tits. The classical case is
recovered by restricting to the case of braid hyperplane arrangements. An
equally important component of the project involves combinatorial applications
of the theory of Hopf monoids in species and related algebraic structures. This
is a continuation of previous joint work by the PI with Swapneel Mahajan. An
exciting recent development involves a ring-theoretic approach to chromatic
polynomials and generalizations. The proposed research makes considerable use of
category theory as a tool for organizing the various algebraic structures
associated to combinatorial objects. Specifically, higher monoidal structures in
Joyal's category of species are prominent. While guided by concrete examples,
this approach leads to general questions of a more abstract nature, which will
also be addressed. They deal with mixed distributive laws, monads on higher
monoidal categories, and extensions of classical results of Schneider and
Sweedler, among other topics.