* 1401091
* Research Initiation Award: FKH-8 Control of Dopamine Signaling
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Brian Nelms, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2018
* USD 237,631.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RIA project at Fisk
University, in collaboration with Vanderbilt University, tests the hypothesis
that the transcription factor FKH-8 regulates dopaminergic (DA) neuron function
upstream of the dopamine transporter, DAT-1, based on an exciting discovery that
mutation of the previously uncharacterized C. elegans FKH-8 gene leads to a
dopamine-dependent paralysis phenotype. Dopaminergic (DA) neurons regulate
critical signaling pathways that drive many facets of motor and cognitive
behavior. In DA neurons, switching on the right DA-specific genes and switching
off certain progenitor or non-neuronal genes is a critical step, but much of the
regulatory machinery is still unknown. The nematode C. elegans is a highly
tractable and powerful model for studying regulation of DA neuron cell fate and
function-- it has a simple, readily observed and manipulated nervous system,
while still expressing homologs of the essential mammalian biosynthetic enzymes,
receptors, and transporters. Using this system, the discovery that FKH-8, a
molecule with no previously known role in C. elegans, is necessary for normal DA
function. This research leads to increased understanding of gene regulation
involved in specifying and/or maintaining DA neuron identity, and provide
insight and data for subsequent proposals testing genetic networks that could
help bioengineering efforts to more faithfully recapitulate DA neuron
specification from induced pluripotent stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project precisely defines the position of FKH-8 in the dopamine signaling
pathway through the following objectives, with the overall goal of gaining key
knowledge of DA neuron regulation applicable across many species. The project's
two objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;-Test the hypothesis that FKH-8 regulates DA
neuron function as part of the same&lt;br/&gt;pathway as dat-1 by performing
genetic, pharmacological, and biochemical assays. &lt;br/&gt;-Test the
hypothesis that FKH-8 controls DA function through transcriptional
regulation&lt;br/&gt;of dat-1 and other DA-specific genes by a multi-pronged
approach to identify targets of the FKH-8&lt;br/&gt;transcription factor to
include identification of novel genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic research
from this project in developmental biology has the potential to contribute to
future studies and technologies connected to addiction, paralysis, Parkinson's
disease and schizophrenia. In addition, through this project, Fisk University
involves 2-3 undergraduates from populations underrepresented in STEM fields,
integrates them into the lab which is staffed by Fisk Masters-to-PhD Bridge
Program students. Undergraduate mentoring involves in-depth hands-on experience
with genetics and molecular biology techniques fundamental to many biological
disciplines, academic and professional. The broader impact stretches statewide
in increasing research capability and capacity to stimulate academic research
within the state as an NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) jurisdiction.