* 1401783
* Supramolecular Activated Photothermolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2018
* USD 455,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the
Chemistry Division supports Professor Bradley Smith of the University of Notre
Dame to prepare and study a series of dyes and organized molecular assemblies
that can absorb relatively harmless laser light and generate localized heating.
The process is known as photothermolysis and can be incorporated into a wide
range of modern research methods and frontier technologies such as advanced
materials, healthcare, and biotechnology. The project develops new methods of
producing photothermolysis over a very small area, or under specific
environmental conditions. The research activities train students, including
those from historically underrepresented groups, in synthetic chemistry,
quantitative photophysical measurements, membrane science, and multimedia
presentation of scientific results to expert and non-expert audiences. Professor
Smith and his students are also producing an electronic book (ebook) describing
the most effective synthetic receptors for biological molecules. Professional
and global distribution of the ebook ensures that it effectively reaches
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) students. The ebook is
expected to educate a wide range of STEM students who are new to supramolecular
chemistry and thus have a global educational impact.

The research plan builds on preliminary results showing that a new class of
near-infrared absorbing dyes is extremely well-suited for many laser
photothermolysis applications. The work investigates nanoscale photothermolysis
as a new way of producing highly localized bilayer membrane disruption events
without causing bulk heating of the sample. Another major theme is the broadly
applicable supramolecular design concept of activated photothermolysis. Dye-
containing assemblies are fabricated in a chromophore state that does not absorb
near-infrared laser light at neutral pH. Changing to acidic pH triggers
pseudorotaxane formation, a supramolecular complexation event that greatly
enhances laser absorption and photothermal heating. The general concept of
activated photothermolysis can likely be expanded to include various chemical
and biochemical reactions to switch on laser absorption by organic dyes.