* 1401082
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of nitrogen enrichment on multiple soil organic matter pools
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Sarah Hobbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,760.00

Humans have significantly increased the amount of biologically available
nitrogen (so-called reactive nitrogen) over the past 100 years due to fossil
fuel combustion, cultivation of nitrogen-fixing crops, and creation of nitrogen
fertilizers. Much of the reactive nitrogen that has been released ends up in
rain and snow, thus inadvertently fertilizing forest and grassland soils. The
effects of this nitrogen fertilization on storage of carbon in soils, and
release of carbon from soils back to the atmosphere, are unclear. The objective
of this research is to examine the effects of elevated nitrogen inputs on the
decay of soil organic matter by microbes, a process that releases carbon dioxide
to the atmosphere. The research will use a global network of ongoing nitrogen
addition experiments (the Nutrient Network) to test the effects of increased
nitrogen deposition on grassland soils. This information is necessary to inform
global ecosystem models, as well as make predictions about the long-term storage
of carbon in soils. The project also includes a program of education, outreach,
and training activities pursued by the project's investigators. They will
disseminate their results to the general public through the Cedar Creek
Schoolyard Long-Term Ecological Research program, as well as Cedar Creek's
Annual Open House. Furthermore, the investigators will continue to mentor
undergraduates in independent research in the University of Minnesota
Undergraduate Research Opportunity program and Macalester College's Research
Intern Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly cycling pools of soil carbon (C)
that are readily decomposed by microbes, and more slowly cycling pools that are
stabilized against microbial decomposition, likely respond differently to
nitrogen (N) enrichment. Preliminary data shows that N addition increases the
rate of decomposition of the fast soil C pool (mean residence time &lt;1 year)
and decreases the rate of decomposition of the slow soil C pool (mean residence
time 1-10 years). These results parallel those from leaf litter decomposition
studies and a number of biological and chemical mechanisms have been proposed to
explain the pattern. Evaluating mechanism is necessary to make predictions about
the effects of N addition on soil C sequestration. The objective of this
research is to examine chemical and biological mechanisms controlling the
response of soil organic matter decomposition to N addition. This research
improves upon ongoing dissertation research that examines the effects of N
enrichment on multiple soil organic matter pools, including unoccluded,
aggregate-occluded, and mineral-occluded soil organic matter. Specifically, the
research will use a network of ongoing N addition experiments, replicated in six
grassland sites across the Central Great Plains, USA, to quantify the effects of
N enrichment on substrate chemistry, microbial enzyme activity, and microbial
growth efficiency towards elucidating the mechanisms underlying the response of
soil organic matter decomposition to added N. The research will test the
hypotheses that: 1) N addition increases microbial growth, the activity of
hydrolytic enzymes, and plant tissue (substrate) N content, contributing to
increased decomposition of the fast soil C pool; 2) N addition decreases
activity of oxidative enzymes and increases microbial growth efficiency,
contributing to decreased decomposition of the slow soil C pool; and 3) N
addition effects on microbial processes (enzyme activity and growth efficiency)
will be larger following long-term N addition compared to an immediate, one-time
N addition.