* 1401448
* Collaborative Research:  A 650,000 year record of hydroclimate in the Western Pacific Warm Pool: Scientific Drilling at Lake Towuti, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 453,096.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This research will reconstruct the past
climatic and environmental change in central Indonesia over the last 650,000
years. To accomplish this goal, project scientists will drill long sediment
cores from the bottom of Lake Towuti, a large lake on the island of Sulawesi,
Indonesia, which contains the longest known record of terrestrial climate from
anywhere in southeast Asia. These cores will be analyzed for their physical,
chemical, and biological properties to deduce past variations in rainfall in the
heart of the tropical Pacific region. These data will be used to assess the
response of regional rainfall to changes in orbital cycles, greenhouse-gas
variations, and global glacial-interglacial cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
tropical western Pacific is an extremely important part of the global climate
system, yet its response to global climate forcings and change remains poorly
understood. This work will provide the longest continuous record of climate
available to investigate the fundamental processes that control Indonesian
climate variations. The research team will collaborate with scientists from
Indonesia, Germany, Switzerland, Canada, and Australia on this project,
stimulating interdisciplinary and international research training opportunities
for students and teachers. The project will contribute to developing new museum
displays and will engage the public via live web outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Lake Towuti is the
largest tectonic lake in Southeast Asia and is a high priority paleoclimate
target within the International Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP).
Seismic reflection and shallow sediment cores indicate that Lake Towuti contains
a 100-200 m thick section of stratified lacustrine sediment that continuously
spans the last ~650,000 years BP, the longest known terrestrial section in
Southeast Asia. This research--a collaboration between scientists from Brown
University, the University of Rhode Island, and the University of Minnesota--
will investigate the response of tropical western Pacific climate to changes in
orbital forcing and global climate boundary conditions through the late
Pleistocene. The research is part of a multinational drilling program on Lake
Towuti. This award provides funding to drill, to develop age models for the
cores, and generate climate proxy reconstructions of the past ~650,000 years
based upon a suite sedimentological, geochemical, and organic geochemical
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Changes in tropical
western Pacific hydrology exert enormous influence on global atmospheric
circulation and on the concentration of atmospheric water vapor, the most
abundant greenhouse gas. Despite its importance, the response of western Pacific
hydrology to global climate remains highly uncertain. The team will collect and
develop the longest continuous record of climate available from this region and
compare this record with reconstructions from low and high-latitude marine and
terrestrial sites to understand the response of tropical Pacific hydroclimate to
changes in orbital forcing and global climate boundary conditions during the
last 650,000 years.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will provide important
insight into the mechanisms governing long-term change in tropical hydrology and
will provide a benchmark test-bed for paleoclimate models to simulate climate
under different boundary conditions than the present. This project will provide
interdisciplinary, international research training and learning opportunities to
US and Indonesian students and scientists. This work will contribute to the
development of new museum displays, and will engage the public with scientists
in the field via interactions through web outreach activities. The research to
date generated considerable publicity and local educational opportunities within
Indonesia, including documentary programs on national television. The team will
continue these activities throughout this project.