* 1401636
* Correlated Solid and Liquid States in High Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Jainendra Jain, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2018
* USD 309,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
new electronic states of matter that emerge from correlated motion of electrons
that arise from the interactions among them. The understanding of emergent
states is an important challenge in modern condensed matter physics. The system
of electrons confined to a plane at an interface between semiconductors has
proved to be fertile for the investigation of new states of matter, producing a
large variety under the application of a high magnetic field. This award
supports research that will provide insight into the nature of liquid and
crystal phases, the role of spin - a quantum mechanical property of the
electron, and effects of the confined environment on electrons. The PI will
perform detailed calculations of compressibility, an important thermodynamic
quantity, incorporating nontrivial many body effects, and also explore the
applicability of other theoretical methods, to non-uniform fractional quantum
Hall states. This research contributes to the knowledgebase that supports new
technology and to education. The study of the fractional quantum Hall effect in
various contexts has led to new discoveries and new ideas, such as topological
insulators, Chern insulators, Majorana fermions, abelian and non-abelian anyons,
and the idea of manipulating quantum-Hall-like, or topological, states to
perform computation. The study of fractional quantum Hall effect has also been a
driving force for improvements in the quality of semiconductor materials,
necessary for other technological innovations. The graduate students supported
by this grant will receive broad training in forefront areas of research, will
master condensed matter theory on the one hand and computational methods on the
other, and will be exposed to international collaborative research. The PI and
students involved in the project will devote a portion of their time to working
with middle school, high school and undergraduate students to expose them to
ideas that become relevant in low dimensions, and to motivate them into physics
research. This will be done through existing outreach activities at Penn State
as well as through organization of a summer school.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education
concerning new phenomena in solid and liquid phases that occur when two-
dimensional electrons are exposed to a strong magnetic field. It will focus on
several problems on which substantial progress can now be made as a result of
the very accurate theoretical understanding that has been developed in recent
years. Some of the specific projects are as follows. The crystal in the lowest
Landau level has been shown to be a nontrivial, inherently quantum mechanical
state, which has non-trivial defects called bubble interstitials. The spin
physics of the crystal will be studied using theoretical methods as well as
Monte Carlo simulation. The PI will investigate the role of strong correlations
in the bubble crystal believed to occur in the second Landau level. The recent
understanding of the role of anisotropic effective mass will be extended to a
larger variety of fractional states. The compressibility of the correlated
system will be calculated as a function of the filling factor, incorporating the
variety of liquid and crystal states. The applicability of methods such as the
density functional theory will be explored to describe non-homogeneous
situations. These questions are of relevance to experiments being performed on
semiconductor heterojunction and graphene two-dimensional systems. In all of
these cases, the aim will be to obtain detailed quantitative predictions as a
function of various parameters, such as Landau level mixing and the width and
shape of the transverse wave function, which can be varied in experiments in a
controllable manner. A combination of analytical methods, exact diagonalization
and Monte Carlo techniques will be used as needed. The graduate students
supported by this grant will receive broad training in forefront areas of
research, will master condensed matter theory on the one hand and computational
methods on the other, and will be exposed to international collaborative
research. The PI and students involved in the project will devote a portion of
their time to working with middle school, high school and undergraduate students
to expose them to ideas that become relevant in low dimensions, and to motivate
them into physics research. This will be done through existing outreach
activities at Penn State as well as through organization of a summer school.