* 1401908
* Nonequilibrium phenomena in strongly correlated systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Alex Levchenko, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2015
* USD 216,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
the properties of novel electronic states of matter that are driven out of the
steady state of equilibrium. Recent advances in fabrication of materials and
materials systems at the nanoscale, in materials science, and in experimental
techniques have made it possible to investigate novel electronic systems and
quantum mechanical phenomena with an unprecedented level of accuracy and
control. When electrons are tightly spatially confined, their wave-like nature
results in interference effects governed by quantum mechanics, and the
interaction between the particles leads to a formation of novel strongly
correlated states of electrons. These systems offer new conceptual scientific
challenges and may be useful for a wide spectrum of future electronic
technological applications. In close collaboration with experimental groups, the
PI aims to investigate transport properties, for example how these systems
conduct electricity, with an emphasis to discover new transport phenomena.
Systems relevant to this investigation include Luttinger liquids, which are
relevant to quantum wires which have a nanometer scale diameter and a micrometer
scale length leading to an almost perfect one-dimensional environment for
electrons. Electrons in semiconductor structures called quantum wells can be
manipulated to form two-dimensional liquids, and if interactions are
sufficiently strong the electrons may crystallize. The other relevant systems
include recently discovered topological insulators, which are insulators in the
bulk but almost perfect ideal conductors at the surface or edge of the sample.
Superconductors are an important focus of the project. They display vanishing
resistivity to conducting electricity below a certain critical temperature. The
PI aims to investigate iron-based compounds where superconducting properties may
coexist with magnetic properties with a delicate interplay between each other.
The main emphasis of this project is on revealing how these systems conduct
electricity and heat, how robust are their properties under external stimuli,
and studying their fundamental limits of their potential practical applications.
The research will have a broad impact on the scientific community, postsecondary
science students, and public audiences. These audiences will be reached,
respectively, through conferences and journal publications, formal university
courses, and an extensive public science engagement program. A strong emphasis
is placed on outreach activities involving the interscholastic science olympiad,
and attracting students from socioeconomically disadvantaged and
underrepresented groups to consider careers in science.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
nonequilibrium and transport properties of several confined low-dimensional
materials and materials systems where low dimensionality plays a role. The
primary aim of this project is to develop a stochastic kinetic and hydrodynamic
theory of meso and nanoscale strongly correlated systems. The technical
analytical methods are based on Keldysh field theory built into the framework of
the nonlinear sigma model and bosonization technique. These theoretical
approaches will be applied to various systems. The goals of this project
include: (1) Out of equilibrium nonlinear, spiral and helical Luttinger liquids.
The PI aims to study quantum quench relaxation and thermalization in generic
nonintegrable one-dimensional liquids, reveal emergent physics phenomena beyond
the Luttinger liquid paradigm, investigate transport at the edges of quantum
spin Hall insulators, and investigate proximity effect phenomena between
superconductors and wires with spin-orbit interaction. (2)Kinetics of strongly
correlated two-dimensional systems. This research direction covers new aspects
of hydrodynamic Coulomb drag, spin-mediated mechanisms of magnetodrag as well as
novel mechanisms of photoresistance of two-dimensional electron systems in a
quantizing magnetic field. (3)Unconventional and topological nonequilibrium
superconductivity. The PI plans to investigate fluctuations and quantum
criticality in the iron-pnictide superconductors, search for novel collective
modes in the coexistence phase and to describe dynamics initiated by optical
excitation. The PI will also develop thermomagnetic transport theory of Pauli
limited ultra-thin superconducting films and study transport phenomena occurring
at the surface states of topological insulators and superconductors. A
postdoctoral researcher and graduate students working on this project will
receive extensive training by studying modern aspects of condensed matter
physics, developing new conceptual approaches to nonequilibrium systems and
conducting original research. The technical and theoretical methods that will be
developed as a part of this project are relevant to a much wider class of
problems in the quantum physics of many-body systems. The results of the
proposed work will be widely disseminated in publications, seminars, colloquia
and conference presentations. Educational aspects will be integrated through the
development of courses directly related to the proposed research and through
research-related seminars, coaching and supervising interscholastic science
olympiads, and meetings that target high-school teachers.