* 1401682
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jennifer Wisecaver, Wisecaver               Jennifer       H
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2017
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Jennifer Wisecaver is "The Evolution of Secondary
Metabolic Gene Clusters in Plants." The host institutions for the fellowship are
Vanderbilt University and the John Innes Centre (Norfolk, UK) and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Antonis Rokas and Anne Osbourn. Training objectives include
comparative and evolutionary plant genomics and bioinformatics. Broader impacts
include teaching and training of students at all academic levels, with the
inclusion of underrepresented groups, including outreach to local high schools
through Vanderbilt's Center for Science Outreach as well as the mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students.

Gene clusters in plants produce metabolites associated with stress tolerance, an
ecologically and agriculturally important trait. Additionally, many clustered
plant pathways code for small molecules with antimicrobial and anticancer
properties. Despite the importance of plant gene clusters, the computational
tools that can lead to their discovery are underdeveloped and the mechanisms
that make and maintain gene clusters in genomes are poorly characterized. This
project will use comparative genomics to quantify the relative impact of gene
duplication and other sources of gene innovation on the formation, maintenance
and dispersal of metabolic clusters in plant genomes. All available plant
genomes will be screened for putative metabolic clusters and gene expression
levels of putative gene clusters across entire genomes will be functionally
characterized to test for co-regulation of gene clusters under different growth
conditions. The evolutionary processes that give rise to clustered genes will be
identified and their relative contribution in plant gene clusters will be
quantified. The knowledge gained will improve our understanding of how plant
secondary metabolic gene clusters evolve, which will allow researchers to not
only better annotate and interpret novel secondary metabolic clusters, but also
better manipulate them for the development of new crop varieties to address
agricultural challenges due to climate change and increased demand for food,
biofuels, and other plant products.