* 1401874
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* David Gonthier, Gonthier                David
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. The research plan for this fellowship to David Gonthier asks if
functional traits and genetic relatedness of crop diversity influence
pollination, pest control, and yield in order to understand the ecological
consequences of biodiversity. The research and training are being conducted at
the University of California, Berkeley and the University of GÃ¶ttingen, Germany
with sponsoring scientists Drs. Claire Kremen and Teja Tscharntke. Training
goals include learning new phylogenetic and functional analyses. Undergraduates
from under-represented groups are involved in field research and meta-analysis.
A short term visit to Germany adds an international dimension to the research
and training.

While increased species diversity has been shown to improve multiple ecosystem
functions, few studies have investigated how functional traits and genetic
relatedness of species contribute to these diversity effects and specifically in
agricultural ecosystems where functions may be of economic value. For example,
it may be that planting fields with distantly related plant species improves
natural resistance to crop-specialist pests. Or perhaps increasing the range of
seasonal flowering traits amongst plants might maximizes pollinator persistence
and crop pollination. Although strawberry (Rosaceae: Fragaria x ananassa) can
self-pollinate, marketable fruit yield may depend on pollinator diversity as
flowers pollinated by multiple species are more-fully developed. This fellowship
research is being conducted in and around the Salinas and Central Valleys of
California, among the most productive regions of the U.S. for strawberry
production as well as salad greens, Brassica crops, spinach, and tomatoes. In
large scale California agroecosystems, strawberries are grown in monocultures in
order to mechanize production and facilitate ease of harvest. However, in
smaller scale systems, and in other regions, strawberries are intercropped with
a wide variety of other crops. Recent research of such agroecosystems has
demonstrated that intercropping with strawberries does not limit strawberry
yields. Using field experiments and meta-analysis of the scientific literature,
this research seeks to determine if functional traits and genetic relatedness of
crop diversity impacts the focal crop pollination and limits crop-damage by
pests and diseases. Finally, this project combines this information to identify
potential trade-offs or synergies between pollination, pest control, and yield.