* 1401438
* Integrating Inkjet Printing with Nanoporous Structures for High-throughput Manufacturing of 3D Heterogeneous Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Wei Sun, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Research results from this award will extend the roll-to-roll compatible inkjet
printing process into the 3rd dimension with robust deposition controls, from
complete or partial filling of nanoporous substrates to deposition of highly
repeatable nanoscale arrays. Drop-on-demand printing inside nanoporous
substrates enables encapsulation of multi-functional therapeutic materials for
drug delivery with precisely controlled release and localized delivery of growth
factors for tissue regeneration. Nanotemplated printing allows for large-area
deposition of nanoarrays for rapid screening of biomolecules and efficient
chemical detections. By tuning ink-substrate interactions, high-throughput
production of highly ordered 3D nanostructures is achieved. This project will
enable new laboratory demonstrations for the Nanomanufacturing for Energy course
and directly benefit highly related industry projects on printable solar cells
and solid-state lighting. The community outreach programs will extend to
Philadelphia inner-city K-12 students through the Philly Science Festival and
Drexel's K-12 Education Program on National Academy of Engineering Grand
Challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research on
integrating inkjet printing of functional materials with nanoporous structures
for high-throughput manufacturing of 3D heterogeneous nanostructures for energy,
biomedical, and sensing applications. Specifically, the research will combine
in-situ imaging, multi-scale modeling, and advanced characterization to examine
the simultaneous wetting, infiltration, and evaporation of inkjet-printed
functional inks onto nanoporous substrates and the subsequent particle self-
assembly and deposition processes both inside and through nanopores. A
synchronized high-speed camera, confocal microscope, and laser interferometry
setup will directly observe the complex transport phenomena during the 3D
nanoprinting process. A multi-scale approach, integrating a mesoscale lattice
Boltzmann model at the entire drop level and a molecular dynamics model for
probing interactions of nanoparticles with the contact line inside a single
pore, will be developed to capture the radial-dependent infiltration process in
nanopores. The project goal is to build the structure-process-property
relationship for nanoporous-templated 3D nanoprinting.