* 1401533
* Collaborative Research: Using sunlight to reduce air pollution and ensure corrosion resistant of concrete infrastructure.
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Eric Hoek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 301,223.00

Reinforced concrete structures exposed to sea water or de-icing salts are
susceptible to the corrosion of embedded steel, due to the ingress of chloride
ions. Such corrosion results in deterioration, reduces the service-life of
structures, and poses a burden to the national economy. In spite of extensive
efforts, our current methods of corrosion protection remain either: too
expensive, or unable to prevent corrosion actions. This research develops a new
strategy that utilizes visible light to decompose air pollutants into chemical
agents that can suppress steel corrosion in concrete structures. Such
environmentally sustainable solutions are critical to maintain large, widespread
and durable infrastructure?a critical driver of economic growth. To support
these goals, the research trains a diverse technical workforce at the levels of:
post-doctoral scientists, Ph.D. and undergraduate students and high-schoolers at
both University of California-Los Angeles and Georgia Tech. Both university
groups cross-train with each other, hierarchically and functionally to foster
collaboration and exchange scientific advancements needed to preserve
infrastructure inventories. The multidisciplinary nature of the work will expose
young researchers to cross-cutting intellectual concepts relevant to sustainable
development and propelling new technologies to the marketplace.

This research exploits the photoactive behavior of titanium dioxide
nanoparticles, and uses visible light, and manipulations of the cement
chemistry, to prevent steel corrosion in reinforced concrete. Monosulfate (AFm)
phases produced during cement hydration have the ability to intercalate anions
in their structure in a preference described as:
chloride>nitrate>nitrite>carbonate>sulfate>hydroxide. Thus, cements can be tuned
to maximize AFm formation, and capture of chloride species intruding into
concrete. Further, up on exposure to light, titanium dioxide can convert
atmospheric pollutants in the form of nitrogen oxides to aqueous nitrate/nitrite
ions which serve as anodic corrosion inhibitors. When applied in conjunction
with each other, these processes work to trap intruding chloride ions within the
AFm phase while simultaneously releasing nitrate/nitrite ions (previously stored
in the AFm) into the pore solution to ensure steel corrosion inhibition. Towards
these objectives this research: (1) synthesizes visible light active titanium
dioxide, (2) optimizes cement chemistry to maximize the yield of AFm phases and
(3) simulates nitrite/nitrate/chloride transport in concrete to maximize steel
corrosion inhibition. The intellectual outcomes of this work include: novel
advancements in corrosion inhibition methods which exploit photocatalytic
behavior, thermodynamic selectivity and ion exchange preference as a means
towards designing regenerative and tunable corrosion protection systems for
concrete infrastructure.