* 1401727
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Investigation of microbial roles in Pacific Asteroidea wasting disease
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2014
* Ian Hewson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 10/31/2014
* USD 33,375.00

Sea stars are keystone predator species in many coastal environments, where they
consume dominant invertebrate taxa, e.g. bivalve mollusks and sea urchins. A
very significant echinoderm disease, Sea-Star Wasting Disease (SSWD) appears to
be having a dramatic, and negative, effect on sea-star populations on the
Pacific Coast of the United States. This RAPID response project seeks to
identify causative agents of SSWD in the outbreak that is currently occurring on
the Pacific Coast, in concert with observations on the extent of the event with
respect to species affected, prevalence, virulence, spatial distribution, and
geographic extent. Viruses, bacteria, and protozoa will be examined in healthy
and diseased tissues of sea-stars using molecular approaches and comparisons of
the microbial flora between healthy and diseased tissues will permit
identification of candidate pathogens. The project represents a coordinated
ecological and microbiological study into the role of pathogenic microorganisms
in sea star disease. This study will provide new information on the diversity of
viruses, bacteria, and eukaryotic microorganisms inhabiting echinoderms, and the
outcomes of this project will include: 1) identification of microorganisms
(viruses, bacteria, and protozoa) associated with the disease; 2) analysis of
geographical extent of the disease, its progression, and impact on sea star
population size; and 3) linking the identified microorganisms with their
prevalence in SSWD-affected populations. The net result will be an understanding
of the cause of disease, how it relates to environmental conditions, and
subsequent impacts of the disease on wider coastal ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to undergraduate student in disease ecology
research a citizen's science group will be engaged to assess the prevalence and
impact of this disease throughout the full range of occurrence along the Pacific
Coast. These data, along with survey data from other groups using similar
sampling methods, will be uploaded to a database and used to populate the Sea
Star Wasting Disease Map, which provides information on SSWD presence at sites
along the entire west coast of North America. Already, this map and the SSWD
information associated with it have been accessed by users throughout the world.
By directly combining ecological and microbiological studies of SSWD, these
studies will provide a more complete understanding of SSWD, which will benefit
researchers globally, and assist managers in mitigating risk of future
outbreaks.