* 1401649
* Collaborative Research:  Testing Mechanisms of Tropical Climate Change and Variability Using New Cores from the Line Islands
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2018
* USD 305,511.00

Coupled ocean-atmosphere interactions in the tropical Pacific are the leading
source of modern global interannual climate variability. This variability,
expressed as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), extends far beyond the
tropical Pacific, affecting climate and human populations globally.
Understanding how climate change alters these interactions is therefore critical
for human societies to mitigate and adapt to future change. Discovering whether
external forcing or internal variability determines ENSO behavior will greatly
deepen our theoretical understanding of ENSO and improve our ability to
accurately forecast ENSO behavior under altered climates. In addition to these
broad scientific and societal benefits, this project will provide research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The project also provides
a platform for the development of K-12 teaching modules, which will be designed
in collaboration with public school teachers as well as an undergraduate science
teacher in training at the University of California, Santa
Cruz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing records of equatorial
Pacific Ocean sea-surface temperature variability during the past 250,000 years
to test factors that alter tropical climate and the behavior of the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO). ENSO is the dominant cause of interannual climate
variability globally, yet it is not known how its behavior could change with
future climate change. Understanding past changes in the behavior of ENSO, when
global temperatures were different, will be a significant advance in this
regard. ENSO behavior is reconstructed from the variability of sea-surface
temperatures determined by the chemistry of fossil foraminifera shells in deep-
sea sediments near the Line Islands, in the central Pacific. The Mg/Ca ratio and
oxygen isotope composition of each individual planktonic foraminifera shell
records a one-month snapshot of sea-surface temperature. Measurement of many
individual shells from a single sediment layer documents the variability of sea
surface temperatures over the time of deposition. Because ENSO is the primary
cause of sea-surface temperature variability near the Line Islands, past changes
in temperature variability show how ENSO behavior changed in the past. These
data will test the dynamic response of the equatorial Pacific to changes in
solar insolation from Earth's orbit, and to glacial-interglacial changes in
global temperature and greenhouse gas (pCO2) forcing, improving our
understanding of the ENSO phenomenon and how it might change in the future.