* 1401075
* Research Initiation Award: Life after death - The role and composition of the thanatomicrobiome in the decomposition of mammalian organs
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Gulnaz Javan, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,001.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alabama State
University's (ASU) HBCU-UP RIA is aimed at systematically evaluating the role of
the thanatomicrobiome (i.e., death-microbiome) in the decomposition of human
organs. The goals of the proposed study are threefold: (i) to establish a
working baseline of the thanatomicrobiome (blood, liver, spleen, heart and
brain) of human cadavers that have known post-mortem intervals (PMIs) (i.e., the
elapse time since actual death), (ii) to narrow down the number of sampling
sites (blood, liver, spleen, heart and brain) to one/three in order to provide
an in-depth assessment of the thanatomicrobiome in selected organs in many
cadavers, (iii) identify the microbial community signatures that could be used
to accurately determine PMI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the two-year project,
the award supports four undergraduate and one master student in molecular
biology, microbiology and bioinformatics STEM training. The project has the
potential for local, regional and national impact as a collaboration with
researchers at ASU, the University of Washington and the Alabama Department of
Forensic Sciences, As a designated Experimental Program to Stimulate Research
(EPSCoR) jurisdiction, the project broadens research capacity and capability in
Alabama and contributes to preparation of a diverse workforce in the biological
and computation sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to
lead to a tool that will assist in predicting the death interval for which, to
date, no scientific method exists.