* 1401281
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fitness consequences of variation in parasite-mediated selection on outbreeding in a natural population
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2016
* Amanda Gibson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2016
* USD 20,276.00

The vast majority of animals, plants, and fungi reproduce through outcrossing,
or the exchange of gametes between two individuals. Why is this form of
reproduction so common? Cloning, which only requires a single individual, is far
more efficient. Evolutionary biologists have struggled with this paradox for 40
years. The Red Queen Hypothesis argues that outcrossing is maintained because it
promotes the production of genetically diverse offspring that can escape
parasitism. In contrast, cloned offspring are genetically identical to their
parents and thus may be attacked by parasites that have adapted to infect their
ancestors. The proposal will definitively test this hypothesis using a natural
population of freshwater snails and their sterilizing parasites. The research
will combine long-term field observations and experimental manipulations to
determine if outcrossing snails gain an advantage over clonal snails in the
presence of parasites. The results will provide one of the most extensive
evaluations of selection on reproductive mode and genetic diversity in nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly, the project aims to understand the power of
genetic diversity to maintain parasite resistance in host populations. These
findings will bear upon the work of researchers using applied disease systems to
address human and animal health, crop management, and conservation. They will
particularly benefit the management of populations in which diversity is
declining (conservation) or manipulated (agriculture). Moreover, the
investigators are committed to undergraduate education. They propose to
translate their work into an interactive laboratory exercise in which to
instruct undergraduates in the evolution of interactions between hosts and their
parasites.