* 1401720
* Nanostructured Surfaces with Selective Biotraps for Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Tsukruk, Vladimir V. Proposal: 1401720 Title: Nanostructured Surfaces with
Selective Biotraps for Sensing

The demand for robust, reliable, selective, and sensitive detection of important
stress or disease biomarkers has become high to meet the needs of the fast
growing fields of biosensing for health, performance, and bioenvironmental
monitoring as well as real-time monitoring of cognitive function, state of
fatigue, and environmental exposure. Highly sensitive and selective
nanomaterials for novel biosensing routines will be advanced in this project
through precise fabrication of nanomaterials composed of noble metal
nanostructures decorated with grafted selective biomolecules. A broader impact
of this project is anticipated through the enhanced training of students with an
emphasis on their early involvement in an interdisciplinary, fundamental &
applied research experience. In addition, the PI places continued emphasis on
recruiting under-represented students by enhancing collaboration with HBCU
Morehouse College in Atlanta.

Highly sensitive and selective hybrid nanomaterials for biosensing will be
advanced in this project through an understanding of the selective binding
characteristics of functionalized ?biotraps? composed of noble metal
nanostructures decorated with grafted biomolecules. These biosensing
nanomaterials will target stress-, performance-, and disease-related biomarkers
based upon utilization of SERS phenomena. The candidates for
biofunctionalization of metal nanostructures are aptamers and selectively-
binding peptides, each capable of controlled grafting to the nanostructures and
remarkable specificity to target molecules. Anisotropic individual plasmonic
structures (such as gold and silver nanocubes) will be the materials base
because their pattern of plasmonic resonances covers a wide range of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Specific technical tasks to be addressed include: 1)
fabrication of noble metal nanostructures with highly controlled shapes in
array-form using electron beam lithography and directed self-assembly; 2)
determine how specific structural peculiarities affect their individual
plasmonic responses; 3) robust biofunctionalization of nanostructured gaps; 4)
investigate SERS phenomena of these biofunctionalized traps designed to
selectively bind different biomolecules. The highly interdisciplinary nature of
the proposed research requires intense collaboration with biochemist experts
from the Air Force Research Lab and chemists from academic institutions.