* 1401950
* CNIC: US-Australia Planning Visits for UNC-NCSU-Queensland Partnership on Novel Materials and Devices for Transdermal Sensors
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,500.00

In this CNIC program, Dr. Tarl Prow (Deputy Director, Dermatology Research
Center, University of Queensland) and the PI propose an innovative mechanism for
minimally invasive and in situ detection of melanoma progression using novel
microscale devices that contain microneedles as well as microarrays, which
detect chemical processes specific to melanoma. Three graduate research
assistants (US citizens or US permanent residents) will travel to Dr. Prow's
laboratory for four month periods to perform the following tasks: (1) synthesis
of microneedle devices for transdermal detection of melanoma, (2) microneedle-
skin characterization and mechanical characterization, and (3) studies to assess
the functionality of microneedle-microarray devices for detection of melanoma.

The goal of the proposed effort is to catalyze new international collaborations
between the PI and Dr. Prow, who are uniquely qualified to achieve the program
goals. Dr. Prow's lab has pioneered efforts involving microneedle-based
detection of melanoma. The PI?s lab has pioneered research efforts involving
rapid prototyping of microneedles for transdermal drug delivery and sensing. The
project will contrbute to improved melanoma treatment by enabling small samples
to be repeatedly obtained from single lesions over time, thus allowing molecular
mechanisms involved in melanomagenesis to be better understood. The PI is
leading a series of lectures and scientific demonstrations in Raleigh for young
people in the broader community; these "Science Saturday" events take place at
the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences. The PI and students will
incorporate results and demonstration materials from the project in these
events.