* 1401888
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Winnie Ho, Ho                      Winnie
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship combines approaches from sensory
biology and applied mathematics to understand how the brain processes complex
olfactory signals and supports a research and training plan for Winnie W. Ho
under the mentorship of co-sponsors Dr. J. Riffell from the Department of
Biology and Dr. N. Kutz from the Department of Applied Mathematics at the
University of Washington.

Animal sensory systems process a tremendous amount of information about the
environment and serve critical roles in driving situation-appropriate behavior.
Although a historical focus on sensory systems important to human perception has
generated important insights into how visual and auditory stimuli are processed,
there is less understanding of how multidimensional stimuli are encoded by the
olfactory system as a single percept of a biologically important stimulus. The
intricacy of the neural populations used to encode olfactory information
necessitates a computational approach that applies data reduction methods to
simplify the data while extracting and retaining structural information to
create a representation of odor space. This cross-disciplinary project
integrates empirical and computational components to address fundamental
questions associated with this complex sensory problem: how does the olfactory
system enable coding of complicated, highly dimensional olfactory stimuli, and
what are the salient signal features required to generate a biologically
relevant percept?

The fellowship provides the Fellow with integrative training in sensory
neurobiology, chemical ecology, and computational methods that include data
modeling and dimension reduction techniques. She is developing teaching and
mentoring skills through close working relationships with undergraduate
researchers and participation in university-sponsored programs. As part of this
project, she is conducting public outreach to communicate the importance of
insects and animal behavior through an existing citizen science program (the
"urban pollination project") with the potential to reach and educate over 4000
participants.