* 1401061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Applying a Social Ecological Framework to Inmate Health
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Joanne Belknap, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 11,994.00

Racial and ethnic disparities in health status and health care are a major
concern for both scientists and public health officials. To date, very little
research has focused on the role of mass incarceration on future trends of
health disparities. Research reveals disparities in health for inmates across
multiple domains, including chronic health and infectious diseases, serious
mental illness, and substance use disorders. Yet, incarceration is an often
ignored and poorly understood factor in health disparities research, in general.
Incarcerated persons are excluded from national health surveys and correctional
facilities often have an inadequate surveillance system for providing valid and
reliable data on inmate health status. Understanding the health profile and
health care needs of the incarcerated population is imperative for achieving
health equity and understanding and maintaining the public health of the local
communities from which inmates are drawn.

The proposed dissertation uses an epidemiological criminology perspective in
conjunction with large and representative national data sets to examine the
factors that contribute to mortality, morbidity, and health service utilization
among an often neglected yet increasingly relevant group for population health:
incarcerated adults.

Understanding how mass incarceration influences population health and health
disparities is imperative for health care policy. Prisons are currently uniquely
situated to provide healthcare to individuals who are likely underserved in
their communities. Understanding the health care needs of this population is
especially timely and given the overrepresentation of racial and ethnic
minorities in U.S. prisons, providing diagnosis and effective treatment during
incarceration as well as providing for transitions in care upon release may help
reduce health disparities in the population.