* 1401432
* Structure and Functions of ER/Plasma Membrane Junctions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Diego Krapf, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

Endoplasmic reticulum/plasma membrane (ER/PM) junctions are known to be sites of
calcium ion (Ca2+) influx. Recently, the PI discovered that these junctions
function as trafficking hubs for insertion and removal of plasma membrane
proteins. Furthermore, the PI has found that the voltage gated potassium channel
Kv2.1 interacts with the endoplasmic reticulum, dramatically increasing ER/PM
junction surface area and structurally changing the junction morphology. The
PI's findings show that the Kv2.1 potassium channel remodels to cortical ER,
which is likely within 30 nm of the plasma membrane. Kv2.1 is playing a
structural role similar to that of Orai, for the PI proposes that Kv2.1 is
binding an ER membrane protein. Thus, Kv2.1-mediated ER enrichment on the cell
surface is a novel specialized organelle with specific functions in protein
transport vital to cell signaling.

The current project focuses on understanding the biology of ER/PM junctions with
particular emphasis on the regulation of the ER/PM junction structure and its
function in the modulation of membrane protein trafficking. The PI will answer
the following questions: What is the role of Kv2.1 in protein trafficking at
ER/PM junctions? How are ER/PM junctions dynamically regulated by Kv2.1? What
are the relationships between the cortical cytoskeleton, ER, and Kv2.1? Which
theoretical framework can be used to describe the assembly and maintenance of
these domains? How does large-scale membrane behavior emerge from the
interactions between Kv2.1 and ER? The fusion of multicolor single-molecule
tracking in living cells and advanced stochastic process analysis, which are
integral to the project, will provide answer to these questions. This research
will offer excellent opportunities for graduate and undergraduate student
participation in interdisciplinary research through the collaboration between
two laboratories with very different backgrounds. The research program will be
integrated with an outreach component by developing a microscopy laboratory for
students at a local elementary school. The goal of the outreach program is to
foster scientific enquiry and to motivate students to appreciate science from an
early age. This lab presents a unique opportunity to leverage integration of
education and research, giving students access to hands-on practical learning.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.