* 1401775
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of the Hypocone in Microbats (Microchiroptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* John Hunter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,191.00

The addition of a hypocone, a fourth cusp, to the upper molar in mammals has
been a common transition in dental evolution. Using suborder Microchiroptera
(microbats) as a case study, the proposed research will examine the adaptive
significance of the hypocone. This research will test whether the hypocone
functions to increase tooth strength, by dissipating stress within the enamel to
avoid tooth cracking. Finite Element Analysis, a computer simulation technique
commonly used in engineering to assess how structures respond to physical loads,
will be used to determine the strength attributes of teeth with and without
hypocones. Ultimately, this work will examine how the hypocone?s role in tooth
strength may have influenced the evolution of molar shape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses innovative computer modeling techniques
to examine adaptation, a fundamental evolutionary concept. Facets of this work
are applicable throughout the scientific community (from paleontologists
studying the form and function of fossils to ecologists studying mammalian
diversity patterns). Further, an understanding of adaptation is vital for anyone
wanting to know how life has evolved. This work will encourage undergraduate
participation in scientific research. All computer models will be submitted to
the Morphobrowser and Digimorph online databases to allow access to both the
scientific community and the public.