* 1401222
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Responses of Plants to Urban Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Mohamed Yakub, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,719.00

Cities are among the most heavily altered of human environments. They are
hotter, drier, and differ in in air quality than neighboring rural areas and
thereby city-dwelling organisms experience environments distinctly different
than those experienced in rural areas. Therefore, urban environments are likely
similar to predicted future climate conditions. Understanding how adaptations by
plants allow them to thrive in cities will not only provide insight into how
plant populations have survived in urban environments but also help us
understand the potential effects of future climates on plant growth. A
greenhouse study using seeds collected from Minneapolis and St. Paul, MN and
neighboring rural areas revealed that plants from urban areas grow faster and
larger than plants from rural areas. The proposed research, which will accompany
ongoing manipulative experiments, is to sample multiple plant species from three
other urban areas, (Chicago, Detroit and New York), in order to determine if
there are similar suites of growth characteristics that differentiate urban from
rural plant populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding adaptation and
acclimation to urban environments, the focus of the proposed research, is
important for urban biodiversity and conservation, for management of urban parks
and for developing plant varieties that thrive in urban environments. The study
of urban plant populations also provides an ideal system for scientific outreach
and education. Many people think of ecology as understanding organisms in
pristine environments, and evolution as a slow process, but this is not true and
this proposed research focuses on understanding the interplay between ecological
processes and evolutionary forces in urban environments. This work is being
carried out at multiple high schools and community colleges engaging students
and community members to get involved in understanding how plant populations may
respond to climate change scenarios, which are expected to be characterized by
shifts in abiotic factors similar to those experienced by urban plant
populations.