* 1401237
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Validation of positive selection on gene regulation at the genome-wide scale
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Dustin Griesemer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2017
* USD 21,822.00

Variation in the regulation of the genes in human DNA is thought to have played
a critical role in the evolution of organism complexity, and thus the
characterization of regulatory variants selected for in the human genome is
broadly informative to understanding the evolution of multicellular, complex
organisms as a whole. The direct product of this research is the identification
of variants that may lead to population-specific phenotypes, such as resistance
to endemic infectious threats, adaptation to high sun exposure or high altitude,
or heightened sensory function in situations of predation. Follow-up work of the
variants identified could include field studies in Asia and Africa that will
promote the development of scientific infrastructure in the developing world.
Because this research will require close partnerships with both computational
and experimental biologists it will initiate productive scientific
collaborations between these synergistic fields of evolutionary biology.

Positive, or Darwinian, selection is an evolutionary force driving the creation
of genetic diversity that enhances the survival and/or reproductive fitness of
an organism. The availability of human whole-genome sequences marks an exciting
time in which signatures of positive selection can be detected directly from
primary genomic sequence without bias for the biological functions affected or
the molecular mechanisms involved. Because tests for positive selection are
limited by linkage disequilibrium of the causal variant with many non-causal
variants which "hitchhike" along the selective sweep, the Composite of Multiple
Signals (CMS) test was recently developed. The CMS test identifies genomic
regions under positive selection with 100-fold improved resolution and when
applied to human whole-genome sequencing data, 90% of causal variants were
predicted to be regulatory. This is intriguing because most examples of positive
selection identified to date involve coding regions, and positive selection on
regulatory variants remains largely unchartered territory. One class of
regulatory variants is single-nucleotide polymorphisms in miRNA binding sites
(mirSNPs). Based on preliminary prediction in silico and low-throughput
validation of several mirSNPs identified by CMS, this project will use a high-
throughput method to test all mirSNPs residing within CMS regions by functional
analysis with a massively parallel reporter assay. By combining in silico
prediction with high-throughput validation, the research will drastically
improve the ability to detect mirSNPs which have driven recent positive
selection in the human lineage. High-throughput validation allows the comparison
of multiple linked variants in tandem, providing a more direct assessment of
which variant(s) likely contributed to the selective sweep. This study will
provide much-needed insight into the impact of positive selective forces on
regulatory variation, particularly variation in miRNA binding sites, and in
addition to uncovering the causal allele within CMS regions, the project will
also increase understanding of the role this distinct functional class of
regulatory elements plays in adaptive evolution.