* 1401574
* Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Samuel Tabor, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 4,655,000.00

This award funds a broad program of measurements in nuclear physics by faculty
and students at Florida State University (FSU). The experiments include studies
of nuclear reactions and decays that play key roles in all stages of stellar
processes. This aspect of the program supports the large investment made and
being made in astronomical observations worldwide. Other experiments focus on
the evolution of nuclear shell structure with increasing neutron number,
especially near the magic numbers of 20 and 28. The behavior of nuclei at ultra-
high spin will be explored through discrete gamma spectroscopy using arrays of
gamma detectors at FSU and at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL). The group will also exploit heavy ion collisions at the Relativistic
Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) to investigate the characteristics of the quark-gluon
plasma. The broader societal impacts of this project lie in the education and
training of undergraduate and graduate students in a hands-on environment.
Florida State University has served as one of the leading educators in the field
of nuclear physics (4th highest Ph.D. production in the U.S.) and this grant
will enable the group to continue to attract and train the best and brightest
graduate students in experimental nuclear physics. Because of the students'
training and hands-on work with high tech equipment in a forefront nuclear
physics laboratory, FSU graduates are in high demand and now serve in key roles
in homeland security, national defense, high-tech industry, leading edge
research, and STEM education. Finally, these measurements will be important for
understanding stellar processes and the abundance of elements in our universe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant part of the proposed research uses short-
lived rare nuclear isotopes from the FSU Fox Laboratory to study nuclear
reactions and structure in unstable nuclei. This is very important for reactions
of astrophysical importance, many of which proceed through unstable nuclei.
These beams have low intensity and so will benefit from the ANASEN active target
and detector array recently developed by FSU in collaboration with Louisiana
State University. A newly developed neutron detector array (RESONEUT) will be
used to study (d,n) reactions in inverse kinematics with radioactive beams. A
series of experiments is planned to measure the critical parameter of lifetime
following beta decay of heavy, neutron-rich nuclei on and close to the expected
r-process path at TRIUMF. The confrontation of state-of-the-art shell model
calculations for multiple cross-shell excitations with proposed nuclear
structure measurements will strengthen their reliability for extrapolation to
the astrophysically important region. The FSU 14C beam will be used to explore
nuclear structure in more neutron-rich nuclei with a recently digitized
Germanium detector array. Measurements using gamma detector arrays (GRETINA and
GAMMASPHERE) will explore newly proposed exotic shapes and ultra-high-spin
structures in the atomic mass ~ 150 region. Other work involves studying the
quark-gluon plasma with heavy flavor probes using the PHENIX detector system,
parts of which were constructed at FSU. In this instance the FSU focus is on the
effects of cold nuclear matter on heavy quarkonia production.