* 1401922
* Support of Student Participation in the 10th North American Paleontological Convention
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Peter Harries, Paleontological Society
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/29/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC) is held every four years to
bring together disparate parts of the paleontological sciences that otherwise
seldom meet. It is supported by paleontological groups headquartered in North
America and is open to all who are interested in paleontology. The meeting
planned for February 15-18, 2014 at the University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida will be the tenth NAPC. A unique aspect of the 10th NAPC will be the
encouragement of participation among amateurs and hobbyists, including a
dedicated symposium that celebrates their contributions. Pre-meeting and post-
meeting field trips, which take advantage of the numerous world-class fossil
localities in Florida, are available (for details see: www.flmnh.ufl.edu/napc/).
NSF has supported the participation of American students in previous NAPCs and
this proposal requests funds to support students at the 2014 meeting. Based on
past experience, the Organizing Committee anticipates that about 100-150
students will attend. The support will be used for two purposes. First of all
funds will be provided to the meeting organizers to reduce the cost of student
registration. Secondly, funds will be available to support the travel costs for
some students to the meeting. Grantees will be selected on the basis of merit,
and appropriate attention will be paid to the need to support minority groups
and women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To avoid misunderstanding, the term 'student'
applies to any US graduate or undergraduate students in good academic standing,
regardless of their institution or field of study. Those who have received a
final degree within the past three years (June 2010-June 2013) and currently
hold a temporary post-doctorate position or are unemployed in the field will
also be eligible for this grant program. A formal verification of current status
will be required from the primary academic advisor.