* 1401572
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Robert VanBuren, VanBuren                Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2017
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Robert Van Buren is "Characterization of the
Physiological and Genomic Signatures of Drought Induced CAM Photosynthesis
Evolution" The host institution for the fellowship is the Donald Danforth Plant
Science Center and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Doug Allen and Todd
Mockler.

If successful, this project will provide significant new insight into the
physiological and gene expression changes that occur when plants switch from C3
to CAM photosynthesis under drought stress. Training objectives include
functional genomics, comparative genomics, physiology measurements and analysis
of next generation sequencing datasets. Broader impacts include designing
teaching modules on genomics, gene expression and bioinformatics for high school
teachers through the tech trunk and green means grow programs. Hands-on
molecular biology and bioinformatics lesson plans will be developed for use in
high school biology classrooms. Broader impacts also include scientific training
and mentoring of students at the high school and undergraduate level.

Drought is a global problem and understanding how to combat it is central to
increasing food production under the changing climate. CAM photosynthesis
represents a novel way to reduce drought stress as CAM plants use 80% less water
than typical C3 species. All plants contain the genes necessary for CAM
photosynthesis; evolving CAM simply requires rerouting preexisting pathways.
This project focuses on understanding the physiological and gene expression
changes that occur when plants switch from C3 to CAM photosynthesis under
drought stress, and identifying changes in gene and regulatory sequences
recruited during the evolution of CAM from C3 lineages. C3 and CAM species from
two plant families representing individual origins of CAM will be studied.
Specific aims include (1) measuring the physiological and biochemical
transitions from C3 to CAM under drought stress to provide a framework for (2)
RNAseq gene expression experiments. (3) Whole genome sequences of related C3 and
CAM species will be generated and (4) comparative genomics will be used to
identify genes and regulatory sequences recruited during CAM evolution.