* 1401381
* P2C2:  Past Extension of the North American Monsoon System (NAMS) into the Great Basin Reconstructed from Cell-to-Ecosystem Dendrochronology
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Franco Biondi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 453,519.00

Long-term annual to decadal variability of water supply in the Great Basin
region of North America is not well understood. Predictions of water supply and
groundwater recharge under future warming scenarios can be improved by providing
more accurate representations of past climatic changes derived from multi-
century-long tree-ring records. Latewood-width and false-ring chronologies have
been linked to summertime precipitation, and therefore can provide a record of
warm-season moisture over several centuries. This project will exploit a unique
potential for reconstructing past variability of the North American Monsoon
System (NAMS), one of the key mechanisms for warm-season moisture delivery to
the southern Great Basin. New ring-width chronologies combined with anatomical
and stable isotopic analyses of conifer species in southern Nevada will be used
to reconstruct the northern extension of the NAMS. Cellular-level
dendroclimatology is an evolving area of research, and detailed studies of wood
formation will complement existing projects in the NAMS region. The project will
help clarify the connection between summertime circulation patterns and the El
Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), as well as the contribution of seasonal
moisture regimes during prolonged drought episodes. Expected research results
will refine predictions of future differences in water availability between the
American Southwest, the Great Basin/Mojave Deserts, and the Four-Corners Region.

This research is motivated by the pressing need to quantify the environmental
controls of wood formation and the mechanisms underlying dendroclimatic proxies.
The project, a collaboration between the University of Nevada, Reno, and the
Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, builds on state-of-the-art instrumental
transects recently established across two mountain ranges in the Great Basin.
Specific research goals are: (1) to mechanistically determine the climatic
drivers for earlywood/latewood and false-ring formation in populations of
ponderosa pine located at the northwestern limit of the NAMS; and (2) to
reconstruct summer monsoon influences on tree growth in this NAMS boundary
region as an index of NAMS extension, and its interannual variability, over the
past few centuries. Field sampling will take place in the Sheep Range, where the
"Nevada Climate-ecohydrological Assessment Network" (NevCAN) provides
measurements of atmospheric, pedologic, and vegetational variables along a
valley-to-mountain-top transect. Detailed calibration of ponderosa pine tree-
ring records will be achieved by combining wood anatomical measurements with
stable isotopic analyses of oxygen and carbon from tree rings. Stable oxygen
isotopes will also be measured from soil water, atmospheric water vapor, and
precipitation to better calibrate the tree ring isotope measurements. Funding
supports training of a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student. The
research results will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate level
courses at the University of Nevada, Reno, a campus whose student population is
constantly increasing in number and diversity.