* 1401788
* Inelastic Electron Collisions with Molecules and Clusters
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,465.00

Low-energy electrons play a critical role in a large number of fundamental and
applied fields. They can induce specific chemical reactions which are relevant
to dielectric aging, surface engineering, radiation damage, cancer therapy, and
atmospheric physics. A particularly important process is dissociative electron
attachment (DEA) involving electron capture by a molecule with the following
break-up of a molecular bond. In spite of decades of experimental and
theoretical studies of this process the understanding of it is far from
complete. This is especially relevant to DEA processes involving molecular
clusters, which are many molecules loosely bound by weak forces. The present
project plans to theoretically study electron-molecule collision processes in
gas phase and in cluster environments. The proposed activities will advance the
theory of electron interaction with molecules and clusters, and molecules in a
cluster environment. This research will create new knowledge in the areas
connecting collision physics with chemical control, radiobiology and atmospheric
science. The research will involve interdisciplinary efforts and collaborations
with scientists from other fields. It will train students in broader areas
including several subdisciplines. Examples demonstrating the role of low-energy
electrons in different areas of chemistry, biology and environmental science
will be incorporated in teaching.

The project's major focus is on the development of the nonlocal complex
potential theory of DEA for polyatomic molecules. This theory would allow a
proper incorporation of long-range interaction effects into the DEA description
for polyatomic molecules which has previously been absent. These effects might
cause special type of resonances, vibrational Feshbach resonances, in DEA. They
were previously described in the approximation of one reaction coordinate, and
the project includes plans to generalize the theory to the case of several
vibrational degrees of freedom. In addition, the effects of the cluster
environment on the DEA processes will be investigated by the use of multiple-
scattering theory. Almost no information on these effects, experimental or
theoretical, is presently available, although they are important for the
understanding of the mechanism of radiation damage to biologically-relevant
molecules.