* 1401686
* RUI - Supraoctahedral Rhenium and Molybdenum Clusters: N-Heterocyclic Carbenes and Exploration Into the Coordination of Fischer vs Schrock Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Lisa Szczepura, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 06/30/2019
* USD 307,000.00

This award in the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of Chemistry
supports a project by Professor Lisa F. Szczepura from Illinois State University
to examine the chemistry of carbene ligands bonded to multi-metal systems
(clusters), and enhancing involvement of underrepresented minorities in STEM
disciplines at Illinois State. The proposed studies are critical to the future
use of these clusters in applications such as catalysis. Professor Szczepura and
students will develop new methods for these clusters containing stabilizing
carbenes. In addition to developing new methods, there is an interest in
determining the impact of these clusters in yielding novel light-emitting
materials. In addition, Professor Szczepura will engage in training and
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, running a STEM fair for
underrepresented minorities on campus, and administering a program aimed at
improving the success rate of underrepresented students in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic methodologies will be developed for the
preparation of hexanuclear rhenium selenide and molybdenum chloride clusters
containing N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligands. The impact the NHCs have on the
physical properties and small molecule activation of these cluster cores will be
of primary interest. This award will also allow for an exploration into the
viability of isolating supraoctahedral clusters containingthe more reactive
Fischer and Schrock carbenes. Since the clusters with molybdenum and rhenium
cores typically display interesting photophysical properties, the proposed
research will enable these clusters to be adapted for applications such as
sensors and luminescent materials.