* 1401026
* Research Initiation Award:  Role of Astrocytes in the Development of Synchronized Bursting Behavior in Neuronal Networks
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Murali Temburni, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to redirect and
rebuild a research program or need to build a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the researcher's home
institution and involves undergraduate students in research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delaware State University's Research Initiation Award for
the period of 2014-2016 addresses a major gap in understanding the role of glial
cells in a very important aspect of brain development-generation of synchronous
neuronal activity. It combines multi-electrode electrophysiology and molecular
genetic approaches to investigate how glia and neurons interact to form complex
functional networks and explores the link between GPCR mediated intracellular
Ca++ release to gliotransmitter exocytosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
has the following specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;--to characterize differences in
synaptic development and network activity in embryonic neurons cultured alone
and with glia, multi-electrode electrophysiology and Ca++ imaging to measure the
activity of neurons and glial cells from chicken embryos separately and in co-
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;--to investigate the specific mechanisms of glial influence
on developing neurons use of a dominant negative expression strategy to disrupt
specific GPCR pathways, mGluR, P2y1 and GABAB in astrocytes co-cultured with
neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages seven (7) undergraduate and
high school students from Delaware State University and Delaware State
University's Early College High School in research experiences. The results of
the study contribute to a clearer understanding of the role of glia in the
development, maintenance and modulation of synaptic function and neuronal
network activity and has a direct bearing on developing effective therapies for
epilepsy, a pathological condition emerging from inappropriate synchronous
firing.