* 1401836
* Youth and Alcohol Use: Risk and  Protective Factors in Vulnerable Populations
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Jessica Fish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2016
* USD 96,962.00

Excessive alcohol use and alcohol use disorders are a leading public health
concern in the U.S. Several vulnerable groups of youth are at elevated risk for
mental health symptoms and alcohol use due to their unique experiences and
backgrounds. Despite identifying the elevated risk for excessive alcohol use
among vulnerable young adults, researchers have yet to understand how modifiable
interpersonal (relationship with peers and parents) and contextual (school
environment and safety) factors influence their alcohol use. Consequently, there
are large gaps in the available research regarding how indicators of risk and
protective factors differ between youth groups. Despite the current disparities
research documenting the elevated risk of youth alcohol use, studies do not
provide adequate information for the development of targeted prevention and
intervention strategies that address alcohol use among vulnerable young adults.
Thus, opportunities to tailor prevention and intervention strategies to best
meet the needs of this at-risk population are missed. Consequently, studies are
needed that capture the rich and unique between- and within-group experiences
that characterize the lives of t vulnerable populations to determine how these
modifiable factors contribute to their short- and long-term alcohol use. The
current project applies a multidisciplinary approach to address the current
alcohol use disparities present among vulnerable youth groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the above issue, this project: (1) identifies
modifiable interpersonal and contextual factors associated with alcohol use; (2)
evaluates modifiable interpersonal and contextual factors unique that contribute
to elevated levels of alcohol use; and (3) conducts focus groups with selected
subpopulations to analyze, critique, and discuss empirical findings from Aims 1
and 2 to help inform prevention and intervention strategies targeting young
adult alcohol use. Results identify amendable influences associated with youth
alcohol use disparities. Further, findings from within-group studies provide a
greater understanding of the factors unique to these groups that contribute to
elevated levels of alcohol use. Using advanced longitudinal statistical
techniques, the current project progresses the extant literature forward by: (1)
expanding the prevalence research to identify how factors influence alcohol use
among subpopulations of vulnerable youth groups; (2) assessing these factors in
a developmental context by evaluating their influence over time as they
transition to young adulthood; and (3) focusing on previously ignored within-
group differences that contribute to alcohol use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
from the current study are used to produce translational research for youth and
family program providers, education officials, the general public and other
outlets for applied use. Further, findings from these studies aid in the
development of community-based prevention and intervention strategies targeting
vulnerable young adult alcohol use. In addition, since this project is a
postdoctoral Fellowship award, it provides the PI (Fellow) significant
professional development opportunities under the mentorship of a reputable
senior scholar at the Univeraity of Arizona.