* 1401062
* Research Initiation Award: Development and Study of an Implicit Model for Rapid and Accurate Simulation of Hurricane Storm Surge
* EHR,HRD
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Muhammad Akbar, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2017
* USD 209,403.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to redirect and
rebuild a research program or need to build a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the researcher's home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tennessee State University(TSU)'s project is
multidisciplinary combining engineering and computational sciences to develop
rapid storm surge simulation models. The project's objectives are to develop and
study an implicit storm surge model for rapid and accurate simulation by: (1)
parallelizing the implicit storm surge model developed by the principal
investigator, and (2) benchmrking the model performance and accuracy against
that of explicit surge models. The expected outcomes of the project are
described as (1) a new understanding of the performance and accuracy of the
implicit solver in storm surge modeling and (2) a novel storm surge model
capable of simulating surges rapidly and accurately. Past hurricane data,
including data from Hurricane Katrina, will be used for benchmarking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An efficient implicit storm surge model will be a valuable
contribution to the coastal engineering community. This investigation is
expected to transform current storm surge modeling and add valuable insight into
multidisciplinary hands-on engineering education as follows: a) The study will
address a long-standing engineering question - 'how feasible are the implicit
solvers for storm surge modeling?' b) An implicit solution technique will
establish a computational benchmark for similar problems, such as flood models.
c) The research and education plans will prepare a unique workforce from
underrepresented communities ready for multidisciplinary global challenges. d)
The educational approach and assessment will be significant since the study is
based on a genuine challenge. The approach will strongly support the curriculum
overhaul effort at Tennessee State University (TSU) and is expected to serve as
a model for other HBCU institutes. Through this project the potential for a
storm surge research community and multidisciplinary, authentic educational
ecosystem is established at TSU. This project builds the foundational knowledge
for future investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and education
plans are synergistically integrated. The project activities promote retention
and engage capable underrepresented minority undergraduate students, encouraging
higher level study. Summer activities are designed to attract talented high
school students to engineering education. The educational objective is to
prepare a new generation of well-rounded minority engineers to take on
multidisciplinary global challenges. The objective is achieved by providing a
learn-by-doing experience to the students within an ecosystem of
multidisciplinary education to address a real global challenge - hurricane storm
surges. Students will have the opportunity to enroll in a project-based computer
course. The expected outcomes are a novel educational approach and a new
generation of well-rounded minority engineers with the knowledge and cognitive
skills to undertake multidisciplinary global challenges. The education plan will
be assessed using established frameworks.