* 1401708
* Charting the history of reionization with radio observations of the early universe
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniel Jacobs, Jacobs                  Daniel         C
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 259,250.00

Dr. Jacobs is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a program of research and education at Arizona State University.
The goal of the research is to detect evidence of the first stars, thought to be
born sometime about 500 Million years after the Big Bang. These stars emitted
intense radiation which burned away the universe's pervasive atmosphere of
Hydrogen. As hydrogen accounts for three quarters of the normal matter in the
universe, this last global cosmological process underpins much of what is known
about cosmology and galaxy formation. However, observing this time period in
ordinary star light challenges the world's premier telescopes due to the extreme
distance and faintness of the early stars. The goal of this research program is
to detect and characterize radio emission from intergalactic hydrogen before and
during its ionization using two recently completed radio telescopes. Detecting
and characterizing the predicted radio signature of this "Cosmic Dawn" was rated
as a top priority by the astronomical community. This project will also support
a student volunteer corps who will take a portable a planetarium to schools and
who will be directly involved in developing elements for museum and planetarium
facilities. These include a state of the art 3D planetarium theater, in the
recently constructed Arizona State University astronomy
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in digital technology allow the
construction of very large arrays of antennae which provide the necessary
sensitivity to detect radio emission from Hydrogen when the universe was only
300Mya old. Emitted at a wavelength of 21cm, the radiation is stretched by
cosmological expansion to an observed wavelength of 1.5 to 3m depending on the
time period under observation. Both the Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) and the
Precision Array for Probing the Epoch of Reionization (PAPER) have been designed
to observe these wavelengths at the necessary sensitivity and are constructed,
in large part with funding from the National Science Foundation, far from
interfering human radio emission; the MWA is in Western Australia and PAPER is
in the Karoo desert of South Africa. Using both telescopes, Dr. Jacobs will
compile a deep statistical measure of the amount of radiation coming from
Hydrogen in the early universe. Portions of the work include performing
observations, measuring and removing other bright interfering signals from other
bright astronomical objects, and applying this new knowledge to building larger
telescopes capable of directly imaging the early universe. These measurements of
bright interfering signals will form a substantial, interesting, and
compellingly beautiful image of the universe and provide a foundation data set
for exhibits produced by the student corps created as a part of the project. The
team of undergraduate students will have two goals: First to improve retention
of astronomy and science education undergraduates and second to bring
planetarium shows to traditionally underserved schools and tribal centers which
cannot take advantage of other, more costly, programs.