* 1401190
* Multidisciplinary STEM Solutions LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 04/30/2017
* USD 987,000.00

Arizona State University's key hypothesis is: "Providing incentives to qualified
underrepresented minority (URM) students in a highly multidisciplinary
environment and mentoring them to apply their knowledge and skills within
centers engaged in societally-relevant problem solving will motivate them to
move from a master's program to a doctoral program best suited for their
intellectual goals." One of the most important incentives for students to enroll
and succeed in the Master's Degree programs is the student support provided by
the NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) program. With this support from the BD Fellowships, Arizona State
University (ASU) will build and demonstrate a national model on how to increase
the number of students from underrepresented groups (URGs) in STEM pursuing PhDs
in quantitatively-driven Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines by emphasizing the use of high-level mathematics to analyze
questions of global importance. Having other universities adopt this model
nation-wide will greatly expand the number of underrepresented minority STEM
professors and help the United States reach a critical mass of mathematicians
and quantitatively-driven STEM scientists and engineers. A national focus of
promoting globally important questions and mathematics as a tool to address them
will lead to resolving the problem of underrepresentation in those STEM fields
critical to our nation's competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU's BD
addresses the obstacles to obtaining a Ph.D. for students historically
underrepresented in STEM through their program's three objectives: (1) Recruit
from the overlap between ASU, LSAMP, and the Math Alliance pipelines; (2)
Provide incentives to qualified URM students in the targeted disciplines to
enter and succeed in STEM Master's Degree programs; and (3) Cultivate a strong
self-identification as scientists and scholars en route to a Ph.D. Students in
the BD program are assigned a faculty mentor with a quantitatively strong STEM
research program as well as to their chosen advisor who serves as an explicit
role model, provides oversight of their academic progress and offers cultural-
emotional support that often make the difference in the success of URGs. ASU's
BD program creates an environment where success, publications and earning
advanced degrees are the norm.