* 1401312
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Robert Muscarella, Muscarella              Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 175,632.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Robert Muscarella supports research and training in evaluating
determinants of demographic variation across tree species ranges to be conducted
at two host institutions, Aarhus University in Denmark under the sponsorship of
Dr. Jens-Christian Svenning and the University of Wageningen in the Netherlands
under the sponsorship of Dr. Frans Bongers. The research project contributes to
knowledge on tropical forest dynamics across broad environmental gradients. This
fellowship is jointly funded by the Office of International and Integrative
Activities.

The research project focuses on understanding climatic and other factors that
influence the range limits of tropical tree species. It integrates existing data
from long-term forest plots across the Neotropics to evaluate how regional
climate and local conditions jointly affect demographic rates, such as growth
and mortality, of tropical tree species. By examining variation in demographic
rates across a broad spatial scale, this research is clarifying the relative
strength of local and regional processes in setting species range limits. The
project also explores several central assumptions of commonly used methods to
model species distributions, including the idea that demographic performance is
positively correlated with abundance. By integrating data on plant functional
traits, additional insights are gained on the mechanisms underlying demographic
variation across various environmental gradients. To further broaden the impact
of the research, the Fellow conducts training workshops in statistics and
species distribution modeling at the host institutions for other researchers and
students. Training goals include quantitative modeling techniques, which have
extensive utility for both basic and applied research.