* 1401110
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mercedes Burns, Burns                   Mercedes       M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships enhance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Mercedes Burns supports research on reproduction in
insects and how different reproduction strategies evolve in different
environments. The host institution for this fellowship is San Diego State
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Marshal Hedin. The Fellow is
broadening her scientific horizons also through a research collaboration with
scientists in Japan. The main training goal is to achieve mastery of genomic
sequencing techniques to be used in identifying population-level genetic
variation.

The research investigates the role of the ratio of males to females in
evolution of mating systems in two species of harvestmen, the insects commonly
known as daddy-longlegs. Effective male/female ratios may drive evolutionary
change in the reproductive structures and mating systems of species by altering
selection over the control of mating rate of each gender. In these species,
reproduction proceeds with or without male fertilization and female-biased
populations of these species are common in high-latitude and altitude marginal
habitats. The research goals are to 1) elucidate mechanisms producing the
geographic distribution of female-biased populations by reconstructing the
colonization of marginal habitats using molecular markers and 2) examine the
effects of a long-term female-biased ratio on female fecundity, male morphology,
and paternal diversity of egg clutches using a comparative approach.

The host institution is a Minority-serving institution that offers two courses
in arthropod biology, providing the Fellow who serves as an effective role model
an opportunity to identify highly motivated students for mentoring and assisting
in the research once they learn functional morphology and molecular sequencing
procedures.