* 1401584
* Promotion of tissue engineering angiogenesis via analysis of cellular decision-making processes in response to mechanical and biomolecular cues
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Pamela Kreeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 455,973.00

PI: Masters, Kristyn Proposal Number: 1401584 Institution: University of
Wisconsin-Madison Title: Promotion of tissue engineering angiogenesis via
analysis of cellular decision-making processes in response to mechanical and
biomolecular cues

Because diffusion alone is not sufficient to provide adequate nutrient delivery
and waste removal in tissues, a blood vessel supply is considered necessary to
maintain the viability and function of most tissues thicker than 0.2 mm.
Currently, the inability to promote the formation of such a blood vessel supply
in biomaterial scaffolds remains a major obstacle in the creation of healthy
engineered tissues. The work proposed in this project will provide both
computational and experimental information to help the design of scaffold
environments that permit enhanced blood vessel formation (known as
angiogenesis). Proposed studies are expected to identify specific scaffold
design parameters that best promote angiogenesis, as well as investigate
pharmaceutical strategies for switching poorly angiogenic scaffold environments
into ones that better support angiogenesis. Overall, this work is intended to
yield information that helps overcome the most significant obstacle currently
facing the construction of viable engineered tissues. Additionally, this work
sets the stage to perform similar investigations with other cell and tissue
types; such an expanded library of information with respect to controlling and
predicting cellular behaviors would be invaluable in numerous applications. This
proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division, and by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research.

The process of angiogenesis may be guided by numerous extracellular influences,
such as soluble growth factors, immobilized growth factors, extracellular matrix
(ECM) components, and mechanical forces. While the angiogenic response of
endothelial cells (ECs) to these individual stimuli has been characterized,
little is known on how cells interpret and respond to combinations of these
signals. Moreover, the identification of optimally angiogenic culture conditions
alone will not be sufficient for all tissue engineering applications, as the
other physical and biological requirements specific to a given target tissue
will constrain many elements of the scaffold design. Understanding the manner in
which these cues regulate angiogenesis is critical in making advances in
applications that require angiogenesis, such as tissue engineering. This
proposal is based on the hypothesis that angiogenesis can be promoted in tissue
engineering applications via manipulation of cellular decision-making processes
that occur in response to the delivery of combinations of microenvironmental
cues. This hypothesis will be addressed by an integrated experimental and
computational research approach and specifically by 1) analyzing how ECs respond
to combinations of growth factor, mechanical, and ECM cues, 2) determining the
signaling processes by which ECs sense, interpret, and respond to these cues, 3)
building a computational model relating signaling processes and angiogenic
outcomes, and 4) applying this model to experimentally manipulate angiogenic
responses. Ultimately, the proposed studies will help to better understand and
predict cellular decision-making processes that could be used to identify
scaffold conditions that support angiogenesis, more broadly inform tissue
engineering scaffold design principles, and develop pharmaceutical approaches to
promote angiogenesis in scaffolds that restrict angiogenesis.