* 1401194
* Synchrotron Studies of Long Range Internal Stresses in Plastically Deformed Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Kassner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 205,985.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials are often intentionally or
unintentionally subjected to loads, or stresses, during service. There is
evidence that these stresses may not be uniformly distributed in materials due
the presence of clustering of atomic defects in the material. These defects are
responsible for facilitating or "carrying" the normal permanent or plastic
deformation in materials that results from the external stresses. However, this
redistribution of the stress can lead to long range internal stresses (LRIS) in
materials. It is critical to characterize and understand the details and origin
of long range internal stresses that lead to backstresses. This will be
researched by the Principal Investigator and his students using, new cutting-
edge, x-ray microbeam characterization techniques at the Advanced Photon Source
(synchrotron) at Argonne National Laboratory. Learning the details of the origin
and the magnitude of the backstresses can lead to a new understanding of
important performance aspects of materials. This particularly includes fatigue
and metal forming. Fatigue is one of the most common catastrophic-failure
mechanisms in structural materials. Better understanding of fatigue would lead
to enhanced structural-materials performance. Understanding backstresses in
metal forming operations could lead to enormous savings in the metal-forming
manufacturing sector. The PI will also work with outreach programs to high
schools in south-central Los Angeles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Backstresses or long range internal stresses (LRIS)
have been, in the past, widely suggested to exist in plastically deformed
crystalline materials. Elevated stresses can be present in regions of elevated
dislocation density or dislocation heterogeneities in the deformed
microstructures. The existence of long range internal stress is especially
important for the understanding of cyclic deformation but also monotonic
deformation. X-ray microbeam diffraction experiments will be performed by the
principal investigator and students using a synchrotron that are able to
determine the strain within dislocation cell walls and interiors for the first
time. This work includes an attempt to measure the full elastic strain tensor in
the cell interiors and cell walls. This will also be the first experiment ever
performed of this type. The PI will also perform in-situ microbeam experiments
and measure the lattice parameter while the specimen is under external load. The
PI and his students will examine severely plastically deformed (SPD) materials,
where relatively high LRIS has been suggested to be present. These experiments
will be performed by the PI and graduate students at the Advanced Photon Source
at Argonne National Laboratory. Our understanding of plastic deformation, in
general, is expected to be enhanced. This project will understand backstresses
that are important to fatigue, the cause for most structural material failures,
and also spring back in metal forming. Understanding LRIS in metal forming
operations could lead to enormous savings in the manufacturing sector. The PI
will also work with outreach programs to high schools in south-central Los
Angeles.