* 1401698
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Multi-Site Paleo-Reconstruction of Missouri River Streamflows from Tree Ring Data
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Naresh Devineni, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2017
* USD 117,120.00

Modern records of gaged flow for major rivers are limited to the last 120 years,
at most. These records, which reflect average annual flows as well as periods of
drought, have been used to allocate water resources and plan for future uses.
Tree-ring based reconstructions of streamflow have been used to extend records
back in time. The most well-known of these, for the Colorado River, showed that
the period of flow used to allocate the basin's water supplies in the 1920s was
one of the wettest period of flow in the past five centuries. Reconstructions of
flow for other basins, such as the Sacramento River, have shown that drought
much longer than any in the gage records have occurred over past centuries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use centuries-long tree ring records to
reconstruct streamflow for the Missouri River Basin for gages from the
headwaters to the confluence with the Mississippi River. This will be done using
innovative statistical techniques based on Bayesian methodologies. To date, The
Missouri River Basin is the only major river headwaters in the western US for
which reconstructions from tree rings have not been generated. This knowledge
gap is critical given that the region is facing an array of water resources
issues that are challenged by hydrologic variability-- both floods and
droughts-- over just the past decades. Providing a longer context for
understanding past variability of flow and climatic controls on it, particularly
at decadal and longer time scales, is critical for anticipating and managing
water supplies in the future. The Missouri River system is the life-blood of the
American Midwest. The research team will collaborate with the US Army Corps of
Engineers Institute of Water Resources and their Upper Missouri Basin Offices to
develop and test scenarios of past tree-ring reconstructed river discharge that
can be used for different aspects of the Corps' operations on the river system,
leading to better multi-stakeholder discussions on how best to manage climate
induced risk in the region. This direct engagement will enhance the application
of the research products, as well as provide guidance for their design. To
engage Montana water users in the headwaters region of the Missouri River Basin,
the research team will convene a workshop for local, state, tribal, and national
management agency personnel with the goal to build capacity to incorporate
scientific information into planning and management. The research team will also
partner with a new NSF EPSCoR project with a focus on Montana's vulnerability to
climate change to produce a K-12 science module on water resources.