* 1401789
* PWA90: Emergent Frontiers of Condensed Matter will be held at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 14-15 December 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2014
* USD 22,500.00

The two day workshop "PWA90: Emergent Frontiers of Condensed Matter" will be
held at Princeton University, 14th-15th December 2013, to bring together world
leaders in the area of emergence in condensed and biological matter and to mark
the achievements of Professor Philip W. Anderson. The event will frame the grand
challenges of emergence that face the community today, combining forward looking
research talks and panel discussions with presentations of a historical
perspective, examining the areas of physics in which Professor Anderson has made
seminal contributions to modern science. Science makes often makes strides by
using the perspective and pedagogy of past achievement to provide direction and
inspiration for future challenge. This occasion provides an unparalleled
opportunity to frame today's frontier challenges in physics, condensed matter
and biological matter, providing what is possibly the last opportunity of our
science community to commune with Anderson, the co-inventor of the term
"Condensed Matter Physics" and one of the great contributors to our modern
understanding and the philosophical underpinning of collective, emergent
behavior in physics. This event will provide a unique opportunity to summarize
the current status of understanding of emergent behavior. The material presented
as part of this event will be published as a proceedings with World Scientific,
providing a lasting record of a unique research event. The perspective provided
by this meeting will help frame the big questions and research in this area for
future researchers to push back the frontiers of emergent materials research.