* 1401662
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Mechanics of Shear Delocalization in Metallic Glass Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jason Trelewicz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2017
* USD 214,755.00

Metallic glass matrix composites are a new class of materials that combine high-
strength, non-crystalline metals with ductile crystalline inclusions. By
combining these two components one aims to overcome the inherent brittleness of
metallic glasses. These materials have a tremendous potential to reach both high
strength and and high ductility at the same time. Still, the exact nature of the
mechanisms responsible for the properties of metallic glass matrix composites
remains unknown. A full knowledge of these mechanisms is needed to fully use
metallic glass matrix composites. This research combines experiments and
computational modeling to study the unique deformation behavior of these
materials. It has the goal to build new deformation mechanism maps, a tool
commonly used by engineers to depict material properties. Knowledge of these
mechanisms will define new methods to control the mechanical properties of
metallic glass matrix composites. This will result in the ability to transform
the classical application space of structural metals and open up exciting new
areas of research in modern metallurgy. The principle investigators will offer
research and learning opportunities for underrepresented college students. These
students will be motivated to achieve their individual potential while fostering
the development of critical thinking skills, academic creativity, and a passion
for engineering. Such activities will be in the context of the Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to develop a new fundamental understanding of competing
rates associated with shear band nucleation and propagation in metallic glass
matrix composites and the implications of these mechanics for strain
delocalization and ductility. The guiding hypothesis is that the ductility
induced by the crystalline phase results from the limitation of shear band
propagation rates, which in turn promotes the nucleation of many shear bands
that effectively delocalizes the process of plastic strain accumulation. To test
the hypothesis, this multifaceted research program combines unique mesoscale
shear transformation zone dynamics simulations with instrumented indentation
techniques for examining the competition of rates leading to delocalization as
well as any natural length scales that emerge. By correlating rates and
mechanical length scales to microstructural variables, new deformation mechanism
maps will be constructed to elucidate the mechanics of delocalization and
formulate new design methodologies for enabling tunable mechanical properties in
metallic glass matrix composites.