* 1401341
* RAPID: Sovereignty, Rights, Justice and the Manus Island Detention Center, Papua New Guinea
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2014,07/31/2015
* J.C. Salyer, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Paige West of Barnard College proposes to explore how human migration and its
social effects contribute to understanding human social relations as they are
emerging in the context of environmental change and social upheaval. The
research will be carried out in in a region of the world expected to be
profoundly impacted by climate-related migration over the next fifty years, thus
making it a test case for emergent international relations related to migration
and refugee resettlement. This RAPID proposal documents the context that gave
rise to and results from the Regional Resettlement Arrangement between Australia
and Papua New Guinea (colloquially known as "The Papua New Guinea Solution"). As
of July 2013, asylum seekers who attempt to reach Australia by boat are diverted
to Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, for detention and processing, and then
eventual resettlement in Papua New Guinea. The Manus detention facility provides
an important predictive baseline for understanding how governments respond to
volatility in refugee and migrant flows in climate insecure areas. The project
entails interviews with key stakeholders in Papua New Guinea, Australia, and the
United States; analysis and archiving of the policy-related documents and
literature regarding this agreement; and community-based data collection with
individuals living in Manus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research, a collaborative
effort between American anthropologists and legal scholars from Papua New
Guinea, will be of interest to researchers in anthropology, political science,
environmental science, and international relations. The intellectual merit of
the project is grounded in the anthropology of migration and immigration, the
anthropology of intercultural relations, especially with regard to xenophobia,
the anthropology of post-colonial relations between nations, and the
anthropology of sovereignty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an important test
case for how nations will accommodate the estimated 330 million climate-related
refugees that are expected over the next 50 years. The objectives of the
proposed project are to understand the social, economic, and legal aspects of
this situation and to examine it as a precursor to what is predicted to happen
with climate-related migration and asylum seekers in the Pacific over the next
fifty years. The outcomes and broader impacts will be predictive models that can
be used in the governance of these migrations. Economic and national security
perceptions and immigration policy in the United States and elsewhere will be
shaped by important test cases such as this.