* 1401192
* Topology, Geometry and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Clifford Taubes, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2020
* USD 388,666.00

The immediate goal for the project is to develop new tools and methods to study
three and four dimensional spaces. Questions about these spaces are central to
much of current research in both geometry and topology. There exist powerful
tools for studying these spaces, but more is needed, especially to study four
dimensional spaces where ignorance is broad and deep. This ignorance motivates
the focus here to develop new tools and sharpen the old ones keeping in mind the
long term hope of understanding more about the spaces involved. The research
described in this proposal could construct bridges between the fields of
topology, differential geometry, symplectic geometry and mathematical physics.
These fields are central not just to mathematics, but to theoretical physics as
well. For example, notions from these fields are used in condensed matter
physics, high energy physics, string theory and theories of gravity.

The foreseeable future research of C. H. Taubes will focus on differential
topology questions with the following three specific areas of concentration. The
first area of concentration will be directed towards understanding the behavior
of sequences of solutions to certain generalizations of the equations for flat
connections on 3 manifolds and for self dual connections on 4-manifolds with a
goal to determine if divergent sequences doom solution counting constructions of
differential topology invariants. The second area of concentration will
investigate the differential topology of certain natural generalizations to
dimensions 3 and 4 of the 2-dimensional notion of a holomorphic, quadratic
differential. The third area of concentration will use the Seiberg-Witten
equations to analyze the dynamics of vector fields on manifolds of dimension
three and higher. Of particular interest are conditions that guarantee the
existence of closed orbits and other sorts of small dimensional invariant sets.
In all of these areas, the research will use methods from differential geometry
and analysis to construct new tools for studying the differential topology of
low dimensional spaces. Specific topics and questions notwithstanding, the long
term goal is to understand the structure of smooth, low dimensional manifolds.