* 1401349
* Ocean Acidification Category 2: Collaborative Research - Development of geochemical proxies to evaluate larval pH-exposure history
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2015
* Achim Herrmann, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2015
* USD 61,026.00

Intellectual merit: This project will develop a new interdisciplinary
partnership between connectivity ecology (Levin at SIO), metal isotope
geochemistry (Anbar and Gordon at ASU), and paleoclimatology (Herrmann at ASU)
to identify new proxies for ocean acidification that can be used to assess pH
exposures in living organisms and, potentially to interpret the geologic record.
The investigators hypothesize that the isotopic composition of larval calcium
carbonates reflects changes in seawater chemistry driven by ocean acidification
and, in some instances, with associated decline in oxygen levels. The large
extent to which these two parameters vary in concert in the modern and past
ocean (and thus have joint influence), and the extent to which they may be
uncoupled by anthropogenic CO2 inputs, merits considerable attention. Thus, the
integration of pH and oxygen in proxy development would be an important
advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on proxy development
to determine pH exposure history for living organisms in their larval state, and
will center on calcium, boron, and uranium isotopes as well as multi-elemental
fingerprints. For this project, the investigators will target open coast, front
bay and backbay mytilid mussel species, each living naturally under a different
pH regime, and statoliths of encapsulated market squid larvae from the open
shelf. Larvae with known pH, oxygen and temperature exposure histories will be
obtained from (1) laboratory larval rearing experiments that manipulate pH and
oxygen and (2) in situ out planting of lab-spawned larvae in larval homes onto
existing moorings where pH, T and oxygen are being monitored. Analyses will
employ SIMS (for del 11B), multicollector (for del 44Ca, del 238 U), and laser
ablation ICP-MS (targeting B, Cu, U, Pb, Mo, and a suite of additional pH- and
redox-sensitive trace elements). Multivariate statistical tools will define
ability to detect pH-induced signatures and to determine species or taxon-
specific vital effects. The investigators are exploring proxies for invertebrate
larvae that are untested in the context of acidification geochemistry. Targeting
larvae is critical as many marine organisms produce larval carbonate structures
and these stages may be most affected by ocean acidification. The retention of
larval shell and statoliths after recruitment may ultimately allow us to test
the importance of larval pH and O2 exposure to survival and population
persistence. An ability to assess past exposures through geochemical proxies
will provide information about relative pH tolerances and ecosystem-level change
in response to changes in the ocean¡¦s carbonate
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will: (1) engaging
young scientists in new collaborations (2) involving underrepresented students
through UC summer diversity programs and (3) conveying the science to students
via UCSD IGERT courses in the program Global Change, Marine Science and Society,
as well as via courses taught by Levin, Anbar and Herrmann. Translation of
ecological results to the fields of marine geochemistry and paleoclimatology
(and back) will provide the seed for future collaboration and advances.