* 1401480
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The influence of wildfire on food-chain length and aquatic-terrestrial connectivity: a before-after approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Mažeika Sulliván, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,590.00

Although wildfires are important disturbances in ecosystems in the mountains of
the American West, their effects on streams remains unresolved. In particular,
wildfires may have a strong influence on the way stream and riparian food webs
interact, which may further influence diversity and stability of ecological
communities. This research will build on three years of pre-fire research to
investigate the influence of the Rim Fire, an unusually large and severe
wildfire, on the interconnections between stream and riparian food webs.
Invertebrate food webs will be analyzed in small tributary streams of the
Tuolumne and Merced Rivers, which flow within the burned areas of Yosemite
National Park, CA. The approach will consist of coordinated surveys of stream
and riparian habitat, aquatic insects, and riparian spiders as well as analyses
of energy pathways between stream primary producers and riparian consumers. This
research will provide an empirical understanding of how wildfires may act as a
disturbance agents to influence linked aquatic and terrestrial food webs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing our understanding of the short-term effects
of wildfire on ecosystem function, this study will inform fire-management policy
that supports maintenance and restoration of stream and riparian ecosystem
services. Educational and human resource benefits from the proposed study
include training of graduate and undergraduate students participating in
research activities. In addition, results from this work will be shared in
workshops geared toward Resource Advisors and Fire Management Officers from the
National Park Service, USDA Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management,
California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and California State and County
Parks. Additionally, presentations will be offered to undergraduates at the
University of California at Merced Yosemite Environmental Science Research
Training summer semester.