* 1401700
* Rational Reaction Promoter and Ligand Design in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Gerald Hammond, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2019
* USD 476,100.00

Nontechnical: In this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Gerald B. Hammond, of the University of
Louisville, is improving the efficiency of ionic reactions in chemical
synthesis. Ionic reactions, involving by definition charged species, are the
most common reactions used in chemical synthesis. Such synthesis plays a vital
role in pharmaceuticals, materials, agrochemicals and many other related fields.
The broader impacts of this project involve training postdoctoral fellows and
graduate and undergraduate students, and enhancing the recruitment opportunities
of Hispanic American students through symposia featuring high-profile Hispanic-
American chemists, and scientific collaborations with Latin American faculty.
The proposed work impacts the manufacturing industry broadly defined because it
gives ready access to catalysts and promoters capable of streamlining chemical
syntheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Whether ions are separated or
associated with each other depends on the polarity of the solvent. In low
dielectric constant solvents, ions usually exist as ion pairs. The reactivity of
a paired working ion is considered lower than the corresponding 'free' ion
although there has been no systematic approach to understand, in quantitative or
mathematical terms, the effect of ion pairing in ionic reactions. In most
theoretical and experimental studies of ionic reactions, counterions are simply
ignored. The hypothesis espoused in this project is that the transition state
structure in an ionic reaction is bigger in size than the starting ion pair and
is distorted by the counterion. The work to be carried out should lead to the
design of reaction promoters and ligands that will reduce the hindrance effect
of ion pairing, which, in turn, may lead to higher reactivity in ionic
reactions. This research makes available broadly applicable reaction promoters,
polymer-bound reaction promoters, and chiral reaction promoters, as well as
chiral super strong Bronsted acids. In addition, bulky ligands are to be
utilized in cationic gold catalysis and other cationic metal catalysis--with or
without a reaction promoter--with the ultimate goal of ushering in a new
generation of cationic metal catalyst with unprecedented reactivity at ppm level
loadings under mild reaction conditions. Experimental investigations of ion
pairing in typical reaction systems, and developing calculation methods to
measure the distance between ions in an ion pair, as well as the size of ions,
are performed using computational chemistry techniques by a collaborator,
Professor Robert Paton, from Oxford University, England.