* 1401097
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:  Deep Mantle Cycling of Oceanic Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Thorne, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 23,558.00

This 2-year research project focuses on investigating the fate of oceanic crust
and tectonic plates that dive into Earth's interior at subduction zones. Earth's
convecting mantle transports the former crust to the deep interior, and
eventually back up to the surface. This work specifically seeks to understand
the chemistry, structure, and dynamics of oceanic crust in Earth's lower mantle.
Plate tectonics and thus subduction-currents carrying crust into the deep mantle
are an ongoing process; thus better understanding the distribution of, the
dynamics of, and chemistry of deeply transported crust uniquely provides a
window into the chemical and dynamical evolution of Earth's mantle as a whole.
Past work clearly establishes how the mantle might convect, viable deep mantle
minerals, and that there are seismically detected heterogeneities. This work
builds upon these ideas by seeking to connect them via studying a known input
into the system of unique chemistry: the oceanic crust. This work has broad
impact, since the mantle's evolution ultimately plays a role in the chemical and
thermal evolution of the oceans and atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
multidisciplinary approach is adopted for this project, since (a) high pressure
mineral physics in the diamond anvil cell can investigate the properties of
former crust and sediments (e.g., melt) at conditions 1000's of km deep in
Earth's mantle; (b) how former crust interacts with convective flow and
structures, including deep compositional reservoirs, hot mantle plumes, and deep
mantle chemistries can be explored with state-of-the-art numerical convection
experiments; and (c) former oceanic crust may relate to structures observed with
modern array seismology methods that have unknown mineralogy, including thin
ultra low seismic wave speed zones at the bottom of the mantle, as well as
massive continent-sized zones of low shear wave velocities beneath the Pacific
and Atlantic Oceans. The multidisciplinary proposed work will include a strong
co-mentoring approach among the team of PIs for the graduate student and
postdoctoral researchers.