* 1401576
* Phenotypic Variability in Bacterial Populations and Population Fitness Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hanna Salman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 540,018.00

Non-genetic phenotypic variation plays an important role in many biological
phenomena. It is generated by a variety of physiological mechanisms and
maintained by non-genetic inheritance with variable degrees of fidelity.
Transitions between phenotypes are influenced by the internal history of the
cell and the environment. The environment, on the other hand, can be altered by
the population through metabolism and secretion of chemicals. Therefore,
phenotypic variability and population fitness must be understood as a triad
dynamical problem of cells-population-environment with dynamic interactions
between all levels playing equally important roles. This research project will
deepen our understanding of how non-genetic inheritance contributes to
phenotypic variability in microorganisms and how variability affects the
population fitness. This in turn will help better understand the evolution of
such traits in living organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study of the
dynamics of protein expression and population fitness. Initially, the influence
of growth rate and non-genetic inheritance on the dynamics of protein expression
controlled by the LacO promoter will be studied. Based on the acquired data
here, together with similar data collected by collaborators on the GAL system in
yeast, a universal model describing how the dynamics of protein expression
contributes to the variability in protein copy-number across a population will
be developed. Afterwards, the dynamics of population fitness and its symbiotic
interaction with protein expression will be examined. In addition, the influence
of different types of environmental stress on the fitness dynamics and protein
expression will be assessed using the LacO system as before and a second model
system with engineered plasmids expressing antibiotic resistance. The last stage
of the project will focus on the dynamic interaction between phenotypic
variability and population fitness in spatially inhomogeneous environments,
where the environment can alter the phenotype and thus its interaction with the
environment and the population fitness. For this purpose, the sensing network of
Escherichia coli will be used as a model system, with the ratio of the receptors
Tar/Tsr being the phenotype of interest. This study will examine the variation
in the ratio of the two proteins, and aim to: (i) measure the effect of growth
rate and protein inheritance on the Tar/Tsr distribution, and (ii) study the
dynamics of phenotypic variability and population fitness in spatially
inhomogeneous environments. The experiments described above will utilize
microfluidic and microscopy techniques, and will be coupled to a theoretical
component that aims to develop quantitative modeling of the data acquired and
provide predictions that can be experimentally verified. The project will
integrate research in the interdisciplinary field of biological physics with
education to: (i) Include high school teachers and students in research projects
in the PI's laboratory and develop instructional material based on their work to
be distributed to high schools in the area. Students from under-represented
minority groups will be particularly encouraged to participate in this
initiative. (ii) Develop biophysics experiments for students' undergraduate
laboratories, and (iii) Introduce new instructional material focusing on
applications of physics in biology into courses at all levels in the
undergraduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.