* 1401862
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Mary Duryea, Duryea                  Mary           C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 188,888.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to M. Catherine Duryea supports research and training on how
molecular variation in female reproductive proteins plays out in reproductive
success in nature. Color modifications in the blue-winged damselfly make it a
unique experimental organism in which existing knowledge from the genetics of
the fruit fly model system can be used to reveal how genetics and ecology
combine to define populations and evolution. The host institution is Lund
University in Sweden and the sponsoring scientist is Prof. Erik Svensson.
Educational outreach involves local schools in Lund.

In many organisms, reproductive proteins show signatures of rapid evolution and
high levels of intraspecific variation, suggesting that an intersexual arms
race, i.e., sexual conflict, is driving the evolution of these genes. However,
very little is known about the ecological pressures that result in this genetic
variation. This project investigates intraspecific variation in reproductive
proteins in female damselflies. This system is ideal for such studies because
females have three different body colors that are related to the rate of male
harassment and can be used to infer the degree of conflict between the sexes.
Through a combination of field and lab experiments this project identifies
female reproductive proteins that are involved in mating, characterizes
intraspecific variation in reproductive proteins, and investigates if there is
any genomic signature of correlational selection among reproductive proteins and
female color morph genes.