* 1401165
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Carly Kenkel, Kenkel                  Carly          D
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 169,056.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. The
fellowship to Carly D. Kenkel supports a research and training plan to
investigate the evolution of symbiont transmission mode using reef-building
corals as a model system. The research will advance basic scientific knowledge
concerning the evolution of mutualisms and elevate understanding of the coral-
algal symbiosis, the foundation of one of the most ecologically and economically
important ecosystems on earth. The host institution is The Australian Institute
of Marine Science (AIMS) and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Line Bay. Training
goals include acquiring expertise in novel biochemical techniques, next-
generation sequencing methods and bioinformatics analyses. Educational and
public outreach activities include establishing a high school internship program
at AIMS in collaboration a local school. This fellowship is being funded jointly
by the Office of International and Integratiave Activities and the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.

Symbioses are ubiquitous in the natural world, yet little is known about how
transmission mode evolves in any system. Reef-building corals are a good system
in which to study this question because symbiont transmission mode has diverged
repeatedly and recently across coral lineages. This research tests the
hypothesis that vertical symbiont transmission (direct transfer of symbionts
from parent to offspring) stabilizes mutualistic relationships. Laboratory
experiments use biochemical and physiological assays to quantify resource
sharing between coral hosts and algal symbionts in closely related corals with
different symbiont transmission strategies. Comparative genomic methods are
being used to identify genes involved in the evolution of different transmission
modes by looking for signatures of selection.