* 1401063
* Development of clean, fast, and mild photochemical reactions to break C-N, C-O, and C-S bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Pengfei Wang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Pengfei Wang of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham is studying new photochemical reactions to
develop photoremovable protecting groups (PPGs) for potential applications in
chemistry, biochemistry, biophysics, medicine, and materials science. PPGs are
indispensable tools that are used in a broad range of basic and applied research
areas, especially when removal of protecting groups under neutral and reagent-
free conditions with precise spatial and temporal control is desired. The
broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the
discovery of new PPGs as well as the development of a training ground for
students (including students from underrepresented groups) in an academic
setting.

The photochemical release of an amino group is of great importance in many
research areas. However, direct release of an amino group by photochemically
breaking the C-N bond in a fast, primary photochemical process is rare. This
project focuses on the development of new photochemical reactions and their
applications in the development of structurally simple and mechanistically novel
photolabile protecting groups for nitrogen (amines), sulfur (thiols) and other
atoms. New PPGs with different chemical/photochemical properties, largely based
upon photosolvolysis of trityl derivatives, are being examined and optimized.