* 1401725
* Thermal Stability and Mechanical Behavior of Ti-base Nanocrystalline Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Carl Koch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 428,638.00

Non-technical Summary

The thermal stability and mechanical behavior of selected titanium-base alloys
with very small (nanocrystalline) grain sizes will be studied. The alloys will
be prepared by the ball milling of powders that will then be consolidated by hot
pressing. The structure and microstructures of the titanium alloys with
appropriate additions of third elements that are predicted to stabilize the fine
grain structure will be determined. Mechanical properties will be measured with
techniques that evaluate the strength and ductility. Annealing studies will be
carried out to quantitatively determine the thermal stability by measuring the
growth of the fine grains. The results of these studies should have a
substantial impact on both the processing and elevated temperature requirements
of very fine grain size titanium alloys. Superior mechanical properties compared
to conventional grain size titanium alloys can lead to breakthroughs in
structural and bio-related (for example, implant materials) applications.

Technical Summary

Ti-base alloys processed to synthesize nanocrystalline microstructures with
superior mechanical properties are of great interest for automotive and
aerospace applications. These alloys are the focus of the proposed research.
Powder compaction followed by elevated temperature consolidation is necessary to
process the initial non-equilibrium alloys in most cases, and elevated
temperatures are prerequisite for end-use. The research will investigate the
kinetic and thermodynamic mechanisms that can provide high temperature thermal
stability for nanocrystalline Ti-base alloys. Ti alloys with hcp alpha
stabilizers and bcc beta stabilizers will be synthesized using mechanical
alloying. A model will enable selection of optimum (oversize) solutes for
thermodynamic stabilization. Kinetic stabilization by solute drag or Zener
pinning will be achieved by in-situ (intermetallic precipitates) or ex-situ
(oxide dopant) strategies. Thermal stabilization mechanism interactions and
strengthening mechanism transitions (Hall Petch vs. Orowan strengthening) are
highly relevant for achieving optimum microstructures. Microstructure
characterization will be done using methods appropriate to the microstructural
scale of interest. This will include structural and chemical investigation using
state-of-the art instrumentation capable of atomic scale resolution. Mechanical
properties will be measured with techniques that evaluate strength and ductility
for the sample sizes produced by hot compaction of the processed powders.
Isothermal annealing studies will be undertaken to establish grain-growth
kinetics and activation energies. This will provide additional insight and
modeling for stabilization mechanisms and interactions in selected temperature
regimes.