* 1401794
* Interaction of Low-Energy Positrons with Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* C. Surko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 629,398.00

Positrons, a form of antimatter, are the antiparticles of electrons. While our
world is almost solely composed of matter, it is not understood why. Positrons
(antiparticles) can be created using a variety of techniques, however, and they
are important in a number of applications. One example is in medicine and drug
design, where positron emission tomography (PET) is used to study metabolic
processes. Positrons are also used to study and develop new materials, to form
antihydrogen (stable neutral antimatter), and to understand a variety of
astrophysical processes. This research seeks to establish a fundamental
understanding of the interaction of positrons with ordinary matter, particularly
in the form of molecules, which can be used to further these applications and to
develop new ones. The project is also an excellent training ground for
scientific and technical personnel; it involves student and post-doctoral
researchers at all levels, from the planning of experiments to the dissemination
of research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on studies of
the interaction of low-energy positrons with atoms and molecules. Of interest is
the excitation of vibrational Feshbach resonances, a process in which a
positron, in collision with a molecule, excites a vibrational mode and becomes
trapped on the molecule. A particular focus of the research is the understanding
of the observed enhancements in annihilation rates as a function of incident
positron energy and using these spectra to determine positron-molecule binding
energies. Fundamental aspects of atomic physics involved in this research
include understanding electron-positron correlations, positron binding to atoms
and molecules, and the nature of the resonances in positron annihilation
resulting from positron attachment. A new cold beam will allow studies of the
role of vibrational-mode symmetry in determining the strengths of the
annihilation resonances. Other research goals include understanding
quantitatively the annihilation of positrons on molecules when intramolecular
vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) is operative. These positron-IVR studies
could potentially provide new insights into molecular dynamics, complementary to
studies now done by the chemistry and biology communities using optical
techniques.