* 1401268
* Universality and semi-classical behavior in 2+1 dimensional integrable systems and random matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2017
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 03/31/2017
* USD 119,998.00

The understanding and eventual control of complicated phenomena is a primary
goal of scientific research. "Universality" refers to robustness of certain
phenomena and to the counterintuitive prevalence of the same phenomena across a
wide array of different physical situations and models. For example, waves in
the ocean can organize themselves into "trains" transporting energy, and
analogous trains are also observed in laser beams propagating in optical fibers;
statistical fluctuations in nuclear experiments led to a new type of
universality that subsequently has been observed in a wide variety of situations
modeled with randomness, as far-flung as the statistics of spacings between
parked cars! This research project involves the detailed rigorous analysis of
canonical models for a wide variety of physical settings whose singular behavior
is a guide for the understanding of some complicated phenomena in nature. The
project aims to develop methods to understand, predict, and control system
behavior. The potential long-term impacts of this research program stem from the
emergence of universality as a new paradigm in science: probing its range of
applicability is fundamental in emerging areas as well as established
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project concerns the development of new
methods for the asymptotic analysis of Riemann-Hilbert problems and d-bar
problems and application of these techniques to problems in a range of fields
including random matrix theory, nonlinear partial differential equations,
orthogonal polynomials, and asymptotic combinatorics. In each of these areas,
the overarching goal is to provide a complete description of the system (be it
the eigenvalues of a random matrix, or the solution of a nonlinear partial
differential equation). Two examples under study are: (1) Eigenvalue statistics
in the normal matrix model. The quest for universal behavior when the
eigenvalues are accumulating in a two-dimensional region is in its infancy; this
project aims to create connections between rigorous mathematical analysis and
physical intuition developed over the last 20 years. (2) The asymptotic behavior
of the partition function in the two-cut regime, for which ideas and conjectural
formulae have existed for some time.