* 1401049
* SusChem: IUPAC: Sustainable Transition-Metal Catalysts for Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Jack Norton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 12/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jack Norton of Columbia University examines radicals as
versatile intermediates for the construction of complex chemical molecules.
While the bond-forming reactions of radicals are predictable, and their
tolerance of functional groups is high, their use in sustainable synthesis
remains largely untapped. This research is done in an interdisciplinary manner,
combining new synthetic methods with research in quantum chemistry, mechanistic
inorganic chemistry, and biological chemistry. The first-row transition metals
(vanadium, titanium, cobalt and chromium) investigated in this research are
ideally suited for sustainable catalysis. They are nontoxic (in the oxidation
states to be used) and replace complexes using rare and expensive metals. The
use of dihydrogen (H2) as the terminal reductant resolves longstanding
environmental and toxicity issues associated with reductive radical reactions.
New catalysts are being synthesized and quantum chemical methods are being used
for virtual catalyst screening and mechanistic determinations. Sustainable
methods for catalyzing the hydrogen-mediated reduction of epoxides to alcohols,
reductive radical cyclizations with H2, and radical cycloisomerizations by
various dienes, enynes and epoxyenes are under investigation. These methods are
applied to the efficient, general, and stereoselective syntheses of
functionalized eight- and nine-membered ring lactams and cyclic amines, and to
the syntheses of polycyclic Aspidosperma and Kopsia indole alkaloids such as
voafinidine and grandilodine A.

This project is performed in collaboration with Professors Stefan Grimme and
Andreas Gansaeuer of the Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universitaet in Bonn,
Germany and Professor Chaozhong Li of the Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in China. Together, these groups combine
their separate areas of expertise in the preparation and study of catalytic
radical reactivity and mechanisms. In additional to the technical applications
of this research by the chemical industry, the broader impacts of this work
include the training of graduate students and an international exchange of ideas
and expertise.