* 1401429
* Radiative Double Electron Capture (RDEC) of Ions with Quasi-Free Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* John Tanis, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 133,532.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This project involves an investigation of
how two of the smallest and most fundamental constituents of matter (electrons)
exchange information with each other (the analog of "talking") when they are
transferred from one atom to another as the two atoms move by each other
quickly. In the process to be studied, the two electrons come from a target atom
and are captured by a fast moving projectile ion (an atom missing some electrons
on it initially) accompanied by the emission of a single x ray. The process can
be thought of as the inverse of the double ionization (removal of two electrons)
by a single photon. This two-electron process is similar to the one-electron
process in which an electron is liberated by a single photon. The latter process
is known as the photoelectric effect, which was explained by Einstein in 1905,
for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize, and which underlies much of modern
technology. During the two-electron process the electrons "talk" with each other
and coordinate the double photo-ionization. The same must occur in the time-
reversed case when two electrons are transferred to a projectile, giving up a
photon. There is considerable interest in studying this "talking" process, from
the point of view of collisions between ions and target atoms and from the time-
reversed process of double photo-ionization of an atom by a single photon.
Theorists have calculated probabilities for the two-electron process, with
results differing by factors of 1,000 or even 10,000. This wide range leaves the
field open for experiments that will determine the actual probability
accurately. Up to now, five experiments of two-electron transfer with
simultaneous emission of a photon have been attempted at laboratories in the
U.S. and Germany. One of these experiments (in the U.S.) was partially
successful, but the others were not, mostly due to the long measuring times
required to see the events. Notably, photon collision researchers would be very
much interested in measuring double photo-ionization of two-electron ions,
something they cannot yet do, except for the two-electron atom helium. The
involvement of Ph.D. students in the planned research gives them valuable
training in state-of-the-art physics experiments, and along with the preparation
of collaborative manuscripts and abstracts, help make them productive young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The transfer
of two electrons to an ion accompanied by the emission of a single photon is
called radiative-double-electron capture, or RDEC for short. The intellectual
merit of RDEC lies in its intrinsic fundamental interest in the field of ion
collisions with quasi-free electrons, and its close relationship to photon
interactions with highly-charged ions. This relationship is essentially the time
inverse of RDEC, which is the process of double photo-ionization of ions. These
inverse processes are particularly connected when RDEC occurs for incident
fully-stripped ions and double photo-ionization for two-electron systems. RDEC
has been investigated sparsely, and new studies will address complications of
the previous data involving ion-solid interactions for oxygen and fluorine ions
incident on a C foil, and will build upon these results by investigating RDEC
for collisions with gas targets of He, N2 and Ne. An advantage of gas targets is
that they do not introduce the effects of multiple collisions present for solid
targets and the results are expected to clarify the questions that arose in the
earlier work. RDEC can be compared with several theoretical calculations that
differ by several orders of magnitude. By obtaining results for C-foil targets
and for gas targets, both to be studied under this project, and by comparing the
measurements with theory, it should be possible to obtain the first data that
provides input to the theoretical calculations. The measurements will be done
for fully-stripped fluorine ions using the tandem Van de Graaff at Western
Michigan University. The particular apparatus for the proposed experiment,
including the apparatus for the gaseous targets, is already in place (funded
previously by the US DOE). Measurements will involve recording coincidences
between x rays emitted and singly- and doubly-charged projectiles (the latter
coincidences represent a signature for RDEC). The measurements are difficult due
to the relatively small cross sections for RDEC (on the order of ~1 barn or
less) and will require long counting times of more than a month.