* 1401369
* GOALI: Distributed Active Acoustic Sensing using a Single Optical Fiber for Interfacial Structural Health Monitoring of Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Xingwei Wang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2018
* USD 304,800.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
investigates effective sensing methodologies to assess the integrity of the
interface between steel bars and concrete in reinforce concrete (RC) structures.
The approach consists in the application of active acoustic interrogation with
optical fibers-based sensing. The combination of the two modalities will allow
sensing a multiple locations, which will significantly improve the ability to
detect defects and structural degradations. The results of the research will
benefit structural health monitoring and nondestructive testing of many
structures components. One representative example is the detection of early-
stage steel rebar corrosion in concrete structures. NACE (National Association
of Corrosion Engineers) estimates the cost of corrosion damage repair in
concrete structures in the USA is approximately $125 billion per year. Corrosion
of steel rebars in RC structures is primarily responsible for the deterioration
and immature failure of RC structures. Sensing capability to detect early-stage
rebar corrosion can greatly reduce the cost for rebuild/repair, routine
maintenance efforts, and the unnecessary social costs (e.g., traffic closure) in
construction. More importantly, unpredictable structural failures can be
prevented, especially for signature buildings and bridges. This research will
not only change the current practice for monitoring steel rebar corrosion in RC
structures, but also wil be applied to the corrosion monitoring of prestressed
concrete structures, steel pipelines, nuclear power plants, and other critical
civil infrastructure systems using steel. Educational efforts will motivate K-12
and undergraduate students for research, especially those from the
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goal is to
study the sensing mechanism at the interface between steel reinforcing bars
(rebars) and concrete in reinforced concrete (RC) structures using distributed
active acoustic sensing. This will be achieved by i) investigating the active
single-point probing/ sensing problem in a circular geometry; and ii) creating a
distributed active acoustic optical fiber sensor. The sensor will be attached to
the surface of steel rebars burned inside concrete, capable of probing into the
steel rebars and assessing structural health of the interface between steel and
concrete.