* 1401489
* High-resolution, Assemblage-specific Records of Diatom-bound N Isotopes from the Indian Sector of the Antarctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 491,850.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The high concentration of the
major nutrients nitrate and phosphate is a fundamental characteristic of the
Antarctic Zone in the Southern Ocean and is central to its role in global ocean
fertility and the global carbon cycle. The isotopic composition of diatom-bound
organic nitrogen is one of the best hopes for reconstructing the nutrient status
of polar surface waters over glacial cycles, which in turn may hold the
explanation for the decline in atmospheric carbon dioxide during ice ages. The
PIs propose to generate detailed diatom-bound nitrogen isotope (&amp;#948;15Ndb)
records from high sedimentation rate cores from the Kerguelen Plateau. Because
the cores were collected at relatively shallow seafloor depths, they have
adequate planktonic and benthic foraminifera to develop accurate age models. The
resulting data could be compared with climate records from Antarctic ice cores
and other archives to investigate climate-related changes, including the major
steps into and out of ice ages and the millennial-scale events that occur during
ice ages and at their ends. The records generated in this project will provide a
critical test of hypotheses for the cause of lower ice age CO2.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to the goal of
understanding ice ages and past CO2 changes, which both have broad implications
for future climate. Undergraduates will undertake summer internships, with the
possibility of extending their work into junior year projects and senior theses.
In addition, the PI will lead modules for two Princeton programs for middle
school teachers and will host a teacher for a six-week summer research project.