* 1401717
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Israel Del Toro, DelToro                 Israel
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2017
* USD 254,864.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. The research and training plan for this fellowship to Israel Del Toro
involves forecasting impacts of climate and national boundaries on biodiversity
conservation and management along the southern U.S. border. The host
institutions for this fellowship are the Center for Macroecology, Evolution and
Climate at the University of Copenhagen and New Mexico State University, and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Nathan J. Sanders and Brandon Bestelmeyer. The
research investigates two arthropod taxa, ants and beetles, in the eight major
ecoregions along the border with Mexico where landscape and biodiversity
management strategies differ. This research integrates climate change ecology,
biogeography and political ecology. Results are expected to impact how the U.S
and Mexico can collaborate to maintain biodiversity. Training objectives include
learning modeling techniques used in ecology and social science research.
Undergraduate students from under-represented groups are conducting independent
subprojects at the Sevilleta Long Term Ecological Research Station.
Additionally, the Fellow is making results and data from this research
publically and freely available via a website during the final year of the
fellowship tenure. This fellowship is funded by both the Office of International
and Integrative Activities and the Directorate for Biological Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research tests the hypothesis that fragmentation and
different management and conservation strategies along, and on either side of,
the socio-political boundary profoundly impact the distribution and abundance of
ant and beetle species with trans-boundary ranges. Field sampling methods along
elevational gradients at multiple sites in the southwestern U.S. and northern
Mexico are being used to track changes in community assembly and species
richness patterns. These data are then used in species distribution models and
generalized dissimilarity models to predict future compositional changes along
the shared border ecoregions.