* 1401656
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Rebecca Kordas, Kordas                  Rebecca        L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2016
* USD 201,488.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Rebecca Kordas supports research and training to explore
temperature and predation on food web structure in natural streams. The host
institution for this fellowship is Imperial College London, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Guy Woodward. Field work is being conducted in Iceland.
Mathematical models integrating physical and biological parameters are being
developed and promise to be useful for predicting future environmental change.
The fellowship provides training in the development of model development and
novel data analysis techniques and is being funded by the Office of
International and Integrative Activities and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Icelandic geothermally heated
streams provide a realistic field representation of future warming regimes on
earth. One warm and one cold food web have been previously described in the
Hengill catchment but generalizations from these studies are limited due to the
presence of an apex predator in the warm stream, confounding this natural
experiment. The objective of this research is to disentangle the relative
contributions of warming, an abiotic factor, and trout predation, a biotic one,
to food web structure and thus elucidate the direct and indirect effects of
warming on food webs. This is being achieved via two complementary field
experiments. First, trout are being excluded from warm streams and the resulting
food web compared to that from upstream regions where trout remain. Second, food
webs are being assembled from a factorial combination of warm/cool, predator-
free/predator-rich streams, in the Hengill system and an undescribed trout-free
geothermal system (Torfajokull).