* 1401077
* Research Initiation Award: Development of New Halide-based Rare-Earth Scintillators
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Ei Ei Brown, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2017
* USD 239,660.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Hampton University has potential impact in the areas of high energy
physics, homeland security, and nuclear medicine through the development of new
halide-based rare-earth detectors. The results of this project will add new
knowledge on the optical, structural, electronic, and scintillation properties
of the proposed materials, impacting the development of efficient radiation
sensors. Every year, two undergraduate students will be directly involved in the
research. Outreach activities are planned to local K-12 schools and community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scintillators have attracted enormous interest
over the last decade for a wide range of applications such as homeland security,
monitoring nuclear materials, X-ray imaging screens, high-energy particle
physics experiments, industrial inspections, and gas exploration. Scintillators
are materials that are capable of converting high energy radiation such as
X-rays or gamma rays to visible light. The objective of this research is to
develop new halide-based rare-earth scintillator materials. Divalent europium
(Eu2+) doped lead halide based binary compounds such as PbCl2, PbBr2, PbI2 will
be used as scintillation crystals. The work will also involve the comparison of
high performing halide scintillators including Eu2+:SrI2 and Eu2+:BaI2 for
better understanding the optical properties and the scintillation mechanisms.
Spectroscopic characterization and the structural and electronic properties of
Eu2+ doped lead halides will be evaluated as potential scintillator materials.