* 1401510
* Digitization PEN: Partnership to Existing Macrofungi Collection Consortium--Digitization of an Important Regional Collection of Macrofungi at the Pringle Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* David Barrington, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 31,862.00

The University of Vermont's Pringle Herbarium (VT) will join the Macrofungi
Collection Consortium (MaCC), a Thematic Collections Network (TCN) dedicated to
increased understanding of mushrooms and their allies (macrofungi). The
Consortium includes 35 institutions' botanical gardens, natural history museums
and universities from 24 states. For this project, all 3,000 macrofungi
specimens at the Pringle Herbarium will be digitized, and the resulting data and
images will be released for worldwide computer access through the MaCC's online
MycoPortal and the iDigBio shared portal. The macrofungi collections at the
Pringle Herbarium will provide a unique focus on the macrofungi of northern New
England and significant representation from the early, poorly documented period
from 1840-1910.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Adding these collections to enhance the
Macrofungi Consortium will increase the research possible on the impact of
macrofungi on their host plants over time and space and how these changes impact
human health and economic enterprise. University of Vermont undergraduates will
perform the digitization and imaging and in the process increase their
understanding of research on biological diversity. The Pringle Herbarium will
engage the local community of macrofungi enthusiasts with mushroom
identification workshops to stimulate amateur interest in the impact of fungi on
human affairs. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).