* 1401800
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Rachel Mitchell, Mitchell                Rachel         M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

This NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology to Rachel M. Mitchell supports
research entitled `Using Hierarchical Bayesian Models to Predict Patterns of
Diversity.` NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and
training components to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas
where biology intersects with other scientific disciplines; this research is at
the intersection of biology and mathematics, specifically statistical modelling.
Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation`s scientific workforce of the
future. The host institution for this fellowship is Duke University and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Justin Wright and Dr. Alan Gelfand, who can help
train Dr. Mitchell in building a hierarchical Bayesian model. Thus Dr. Mitchell
is gaining valuable skills in hierarchical Bayesian modelling with applications
to ecology. She is also expanding outreach and teaching opportunities;
partnering with the Museum of Life and Science allows her to share with children
from diverse backgrounds a hands-on activity directly related to the research
question. She is also implementing an abbreviated science outreach and
communication seminar for graduate students at Duke
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has seen a tremendous growth of
interest in plant functional traits, which are measurable traits that impact
plant fitness. These traits are now understood to be actively selected on by
abiotic filters like rainfall, temperature, and soil conditions. Such selection
is hypothesized to determine how plant communities form and explain why some
areas have more species than others. Until recently, the trait variation among
individuals within a species (= intraspecific variation) has been largely
ignored, but recent research has revealed that this variation is substantial and
ecologically important. Although plant traits and intraspecific variation are
known to be critical in shaping communities, they have yet to be fully
incorporated into models predicting patterns of species presence and diversity.
The model being built by Dr. Mitchell incorporates plant functional traits,
abiotic filters, and intraspecific variation to predict patterns of diversity at
both large and small scales in the southeastern United States. This model - the
first of its kind - is a significant contribution to the fields of both ecology
and statistical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has implications for
conservation on local and global scales. The model quantifies how traits mediate
species presence in response to abiotic conditions, an issue of importance under
projected climate change scenarios. Furthermore, it serves to identify areas of
high diversity in terms of both species identity and functional traits; such
areas are of high conservation value in a changing world. It clarifies the link
between species and functional diversity, a link that must be understood if
ecosystems and the services they provide are to be preserved.