* 1401375
* RUI - Organometallic Porphyrins, BODIPY, and their analogues for light-harvesting and molecular electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Viktor Nemykin, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 105,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Viktor N. Nemykin of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at University of Minnesota Duluth (UMD) will prepare
and characterize donor-acceptor dyads and donor-antennae-acceptor triads of
organometallic porphyrins and the other aromatic macrocyclic analogues.
Professor Nemykin and other research groups have recently shown that
introduction of the organometallic substituents into porphyrin cores results in
long-range metal-metal coupling properties, which are essential for application
of such compounds in molecular electronics and in random access memory devices.
It was also shown that organometallic donor-acceptor dyads and donor-antennae-
acceptor triads can be used as active components for effective light-harvesting
in dye sensitized solar cells and organic photovoltaics. Therefore, this project
potentially could result in the preparation of efficient modules for molecular
electronics. UMD is a predominantly undergraduate institution and thus the
broader impacts include the training of undergraduate as well as graduate (M.S.)
students. The project also contributes to the building of an excellent
undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) chemistry program at UMD.

Organometallics, in particular ferrocene-containing porphyrins and their
analogues, display a rich redox and photophysical properties. Redox-driven
and/or photoinduced electron- or energy-transfer properties of these systems can
be tuned up by modification of the macrocyclic core or by substituents at the
ferrocene group. The proposed research will explore synthetic pathways for the
preparation of a variety of ferrocene-containing donor-acceptor dyads and donor-
antennae-acceptor triads, which could be potentially used in molecular
electronics and light-harvesting. A systematic investigation of the proposed
compounds will allow the investigators to understand how and to what extent
oxidation potentials, stability, as well as photoinduced electron- or energy-
transfer properties can be controlled. The factors to be examined include the
nature of the central metal ion, through-bond and potentially through-space
distance(s) between the transition-metal centers, the geometry (i.e. axial
versus equatorial coordination), and the electronic properties of the
macrocyclic ligand.