* 1401260
* RAPID:   Characterizing Sediment Mobilization and Landscape Response to the Combined Effects of Wildfire and Extreme Flooding along Fourmile Canyon, Front Range Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2014
* William Ouimet, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 10/31/2014
* USD 15,054.00

This RAPID project focuses on the impacts of flooding and erosion on Fourmile
Canyon in the Colorado Front Range following the exceptional September 2013
rainfall event. The catchment is still responding to a 25 km2 wildfire in 2010
and the team will test the hypothesis that the 2013 flood reworked and deposited
sediments initially mobilized by the earlier fires. The team will study the 2013
flood deposits, eroded hillslopes, side-tributary and gully deposits, and
deposits freshly exposed beneath terraces along the canyon. They will revisit
locations that have been part of an ongoing post-fire study, and will use short-
lived fallout radionuclides (7Be, 137Cs, and 210Pb) in these deposits to help
identify remobilized fire sediments. In addition, they will analyze the
geochemistry and stratigraphy of valley deposits and compare measures of short-
term wildfire and flooding-related erosion with ongoing studies documenting
erosion rates and hillslope processes over the past 10,000-30,000 years.
Sediment deposits and exposures that formed during the September 2013 flooding
must be sampled and studied soon, before they degrade and disappear as road
rebuilding, channel manipulation, and landscape recovery proceeds. These new
exposures greatly increase the ability to analyze and date Holocene slope and
valley stratigraphy using 14C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will enhance
understanding of consequences of increased incidence of wildfires and large-
magnitude floods on the landscape and those who live there. As such, the project
outcomes will inform hazard mitigation and resilience. The team will leverage
existing collaborations with USGS scientists and the Boulder Creek Critical Zone
Observatory, and will directly involve undergraduates and a graduate student.