* 1401126
* Dynamics, Geometry, and K-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Rufus Willett, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 126,000.00

Manifolds are geometric objects that can be parametrized using the standard
numerical variables of algebra and calculus. They are fundamental objects for
much of modern mathematics and its applications to the other sciences, where
they model physical space as well as many important data sets. The principal
investigator is planning to study properties of higher dimensional manifolds.
Here "higher dimensional" means that at least five variables are needed to
parametrize the manifold (think of a data set depending on five or more
variables). The extra flexibility inherent in a larger number of variables means
that many more tools can be brought to bear on problems. The geometry of the
expanding networks that are important in communications theory and the theory of
dynamical systems (i.e.,change under symmetries of a system) are particularly
important tools for the project. Throughout the period of the project the
principal investigator intends to mentor young scientists through their
involvement in the research, and to continue to work on structural improvements
to mathematical education and research in Hawaii.

One of the most important invariants of a manifold is its fundamental group,
which governs the way loops can be formed inside the manifold. Associated to
fundamental groups are algebraic group rings and analytic group operator
algebras. The theory of linear algebra over group rings and group operator
algebras is organized by their K-theory, and understanding the associated
K-groups is a difficult problem that is fundamental to the understanding of
higher dimensional manifolds via such problems as the Novikov and Borel
conjectures in topological classification and the Gromov-Lawson conjecture in
differential geometry. The Baum-Connes and Farrell-Jones conjectures postulate
techniques for computing K-theory and anchor the current approach to the
problems in manifold theory mentioned earlier. The principal investigator
intends to use techniques from index theory of elliptic differential operators,
operator algebras, topological dynamical systems, metric geometry of expanding
networks, and representation theory to study these conjectures and related
issues.