* 1401072
* Lasers in Medicine and Biology: From Basic Science Discovery to Translational Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2014
* Stephen Boppart, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

1401072&lt;br/&gt;Boppart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference funding
application is to support the registration fees and/or travel costs of
conference participants including graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
among these,under-represented groups, so that they may attend the Gordon
Conference on Lasers in Medicine and Biology, to be held July 13-18, 2014 at the
Holderness School, Holderness, New Hampshire. &lt;br/&gt;In this Gordon Research
Conference (GRC), there are 9 technical sessions covering topics that have been
determined by the co-chairs, co-vice-chairs, and general community to be
innovate, impactful, scientifically relevant, progressive, and expected to be
critical for the future of the field and the future of medicine and biology.
These sessions also provide a broad and comprehensive coverage of the
biophotonics field, while giving focus to some rapidly emerging sub-fields.
Sessions are balanced between being more fundamental in nature, with others more
applied toward current and future biomedical needs. The oral presentations in
all the sessions will be given by invited national and international experts,
and all invited speakers have already confirmed their participation. The theme
for the 2014 GRC is ?From Basic Science Discovery to Translational
Applications?. This theme was chosen based on attendee feedback in prior years,
identifying the need to emphasize basic principles and fundamental discoveries
in optics, imaging science, biology, and medical science, as well as establish
and demonstrate clear applications and pathways that showcase how these
discoveries can be translated via technological and engineeringbased solutions.