* 1401688
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Elucidating the genomic signature of mate competition in a pipefish using a population genomics approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Adam Jones, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,915.00

This study aims to understand how adult behavior can determine which genes are
passed from parents to offspring and how these processes vary among populations
within a species. These goals will be addressed by comparing the natural genetic
variation in adults and their offspring within a single population of pipefish.
This study will also quantify genetic variation in multiple populations across a
broad geographic range, which will provide data regarding how reproductive
patterns vary among populations. The focal organism is the straight-nosed
pipefish, Nerophis ophidion, which is found in Sweden, and the project takes
advantage of recent advances in DNA sequencing technology to analyze the genetic
variation at the scale of the entire genome. This species is of interest because
females compete intensely for access to mates and the males provide all care for
the developing offspring.

This project addresses a major subject in biology and genetics, namely how
behaviors at different stages during the life cycle affect how genes are passed
on from one generation to the next. Additionally, the analytical approach of
comparing genetic variation between adults and offspring using new sequencing
technologies is a novel combination of a mathematical model from the 1970's and
new statistical methods. This approach could have broad applications in many
fields and for many species, including as a diagnostic tool for understanding
what pressures are affecting threatened and endangered species and for
understanding multi-generational effects of human diseases.