* 1401639
* GARDE: Trackable Interactive Multimodal Manipulatives: Towards a Tangible Learning Environment for the Blind
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 264,165.00

PI: Pontelli, E. &amp; Cook, J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1401639&lt;br/&gt;Title: GARDE: Trackable Interactive Multimodal Manipulatives:
Towards a Tangible Learning Environment for the
Blind&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance &amp; Importance&lt;br/&gt; This
work targets visually impaired students engaged in math courses ranging from
basic number sense to basic algebra and graph and chart modeling. This group is
traditionally taught through the use of manipulatives, which are tangible
objects that can be used to create mental models or "images" of important
concepts in algebra, geometry, measurements, and science. With the availability
of touch and finger manipulatives, learning math for the visually impaired has
improved. However, the state-of-the-art still lacks a device that enables
independent exploration, collaboration with peers (both proven to enhance
learning), and general applicability to a range of mathematical concepts and
related domain sciences. We propose the development of, TIMMs (Trackable
Interactive Multi-modal Manipulatives). The TIMMs platform is independent of
Braille, enabling collaboration with peers, and provides multimodal and real-
time feedback to promote independent exploration and deeper learning of abstract
mathematical concepts. The platform is composed of intelligent active blocks
(that include a variety of sensors and feedback devices) along with an overall
multi-touch tracking infrastructure. The TIMM platform includes middle-ware to
access its features and APIs to facilitate the development of interactive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt; It is well-
known, and a national concern, that the future of the United States' lead in
technology is presently threatened by the decreasing number of scientists and
engineers that our educational system is producing. Much research indicates that
the lack of math preparation of students entering college weighs into their
decision to pursue a STEM degree and correlates to their successful degree
completion in STEM fields. Although in 2007, about 33% of 8th grade students
achieved at or above proficient rank in math literacy, for the same period only
7% of students with visual disabilities achieved such rank. The statistics
confirm that visually impaired individuals are significantly underrepresented in
STEM careers, both in industry as well as academia. While technology has become
ubiquitous in the teaching of mathematics and science in "traditional" classroom
setting - the same technology has not come to the aid of students with visual
disabilities. Recommended curricula for traditional classroom teaching often
rely on games and computer-based solutions that are highly visual and highly
inaccessible to blind students. At the same time, the recommended math curricula
for visually impaired students are still predominantly based on cumbersome and
primitive manual manipulatives (peg-boards, magnetic Braille tiles, Braille
blocks).&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this work lies in the unique
characteristics of the proposed infrastructure, and the research in teaching and
learning of the visually impaired that will be enabled through the availability
of TIMMs. Unlike state-of-the-art solutions, TIMMs implements physical, multi-
modal manipulatives with audio and haptic feedback, combining the best of both
the physical and the digital worlds to promote abstract learning with real-time
support and tutoring. Through simple, programmable interfaces, TIMMs can be used
to teach a range of mathematical concepts (most solutions focus on a single
concept or problem) that can be applied to several scientific
domains.&lt;br/&gt; Because of the generality of the proposed TIMMs device, the
potential user community impacted by this work is very large. 21.5 million
Americans reported vision loss in 2010; New Mexico has the 6th highest
percentage of population reporting visual disabilities in the US. Furthermore,
the investigators have established relationships with several programs (Student
Accessibility Services, New Mexico School for the Blind and Visually Impaired,
Math Adoptive Technology Lab) within New Mexico that serve at least 1,000
visually impaired students that will be impacted by this work.