* 1401280
* Electrochemical Capture of CO2 and Instant Conversion into Syngas: A Combined Mechanistic and Engineering Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kevin Huang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,492.00

Huang 1401280 University of South Carolina at Columbia

Stabilizing CO2 concentrations is conceived to be one of the best near term
solutions to mitigating the adverse effects on climate. An appealing alternative
to geologic storage of captured CO2 is to have CO2 recycled back to the fuel
form. The significance of this technological development is enormous: it
rebalances the carbon cycle in the ecosystem, and therefore enables a
sustainable energy future. With future renewable energy as the input to the
conversion, the making of synthetic fuels from CO2 can be a carbon-neutral or
even carbon-negative process. The objective of the proposed research is to
advance the engineering development of an innovative capture and conversion all-
in-one CO2 reactor by acquiring foundational science and engineering knowledge
on electrochemical capture of CO2 and conversion chemistry of CO2 into synthetic
fuels. The unified CO2 reactor proposed consists of two newly developed
electrochemical membranes for CO2/H2O capture and a solid-oxide electrolysis
cell for instant CO2 conversion into syngas. Such an integrated system has great
potential to be energy efficient and cost effective, offering an innovative and
viable solution to the realization of a carbon balanced ecosystem. In a
particular the research will focus on the elucidation of the parallel ionic and
electronic transport mechanisms, advancing the science of fast multi-
ionic/electronic transport in heterogeneous systems. The foundational knowledge
gained will help design more efficient and complex mixed ionic/electronic
systems. In addition, the parametric study and computational analysis complement
the fundamental understanding, providing engineering insights for the system
design and configuration, and potentially laying the foundation for
commercialization of this novel unified CO2 reactor. The importance and
potential impact of ongoing scientific advances in the area of CO2 capture and
conversion technologies will be disseminated to the general public via an annual
"Edison Lecture Series" program at the University of South Carolina. A joint
summer workshop on energy research topic with Benedict College, a historically
black college, will be held in the University of South Carolina to promote
education and workforce development for minority and underrepresented students.
A focused approach to introducing and engaging undergraduate students in
research will be implemented by delivering seminar series to the local ASME and
ECS student chapters.