* 1401045
* 2014 Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals Gordon Research Conference, July 20-25, 2014
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2014
* Emily Weiss, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2014
* USD 42,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry, the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of
Materials Research, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences support the "2014 Colloidal
Semiconductor Nanocrystals Gordon Research Conference" to be held at Bryant
University, Rhode Island on July 20-25, 2014. The conference is chaired by Prof.
Emily Weiss of Northwestern University. NSF funds will be used primarily to
support the participation of US scientists, especially graduate students, post-
doctoral researchers, and early-career scientists. The development of
nanocrystal-based technologies for bio-applications and materials for energy
conversion has potential broad impacts on society. This conference will provide
a stimulating environment for significant discussions on fundamental science and
technological advances at the frontier of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals
research. The conference participants will be diverse with respect to area of
expertise, academic level, country of origin, and gender. The interactions
between scientists from different but complementary backgrounds enable fruitful
discussions and catalyze new (inter)national collaborations. The conference will
also provide the opportunities for students, post-doctoral researchers and young
faculty, including women and members of underrepresented groups, to interact
with more established members and world-leading experts in their field and to
gain a better perspective of the field.