* 1401729
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Tanya Cheeke, Cheeke                  Tanya
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2017
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's
scientific workforce of the future. This fellowship to Tanya Cheeke supports a
research and training plan that integrates microbial ecology and bioinformatics
to characterize the role of soil microbes in the success or failure of native
plant establishment in disturbed ecosystems. Understanding the fundamental
differences in soil microbial communities in disturbed ecosystems is vitally
important for informing restoration efforts, especially in areas such as
prairies where plant-soil feedbacks have altered the native soil microbial
community. The host institution for this fellowship is Indiana University and
the sponsoring scientists are James Bever (Department of Biology) and Yuzhen Ye
(School of Informatics and Computing). The fellowship provides for a unique
collaboration to provide interdisciplinary research training for the Fellow.
Educational outreach is directed to a diverse group of undergraduate students
who will gain practical research skills in molecular biology and restoration
ecology.

This study tests novel methods of improving native plant establishment in
disturbed ecosystems and has broad applications in conservation biology and
restoration ecology. Specifically, the research evaluates the efficacy of re-
introducing native soil organisms, for example, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, to
improve native prairie plant establishment in tall fescue dominated grasslands.
The overall goal is to understand the mechanisms that drive monotypic dominance
in disturbed landscapes and to evaluate the role of plant-soil feedbacks in
improving, maintaining, or limiting plant community diversity in disturbed
systems. Research results are being shared with key stakeholders, including
farmers, ranchers, conservationists, and policy makers through public lectures
and by providing a research summary to local extension agents upon completion of
the project.