* 1401554
* Extremely Close and Not Alone: Exploring the Habitability of M-dwarf Multi-planet Systems
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Aomawa Shields, Shields                 Aomawa         L
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 251,500.00

Ms. Aomawa Shields is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California, Los Angeles and the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.
M-dwarfs, much smaller and cooler than our Sun, are the most plentiful stars in
the Galaxy, and are known to host systems with multiple planets, suggesting a
new, major planetary population. They are also the likeliest hosts for rocky
planets. For these reasons, there is a strong likelihood that the first
habitable, Earth-like planet will be found orbiting an M-dwarf star. However,
the question of whether any of the planets discovered so far around M-dwarf
stars are habitable is complicated by how close they are to their stars, and the
tightly packed nature of these systems. This close packing can result in strong
tidal effects, including changes in the rotation rate of a planet, and the
effect on climate has not yet been explored. Ms. Shields will conduct the first
comprehensive study of the effect of these interactions on the climate and
habitability of M-dwarf multiple-planet systems. This work will ultimately
provide an integrated model for assessing the habitability potential of M-dwarf
systems discovered by ground- and space-based telescopes. Ms. Shields will also
develop and implement an innovative, science communication-based astronomy
workshop entitled, "The Universe: More Than Meets the Eye" for middle-school
girls of color in Los Angeles, CA and Cambridge, MA. She will train high-school
girls as teaching assistants for future workshop sessions, and create a teaching
guide based on the workshop, providing a multi-tiered, bi-coastal approach to
interactive enrichment in astronomy for girls from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences.

To carry out this work, Ms. Shields will leverage her expertise in the climate
modeling of M-dwarf planets, and the observational data and planetary dynamics
expertise of collaborators at both institutions. She will run n-body and climate
simulations for eight of the known potentially habitable planets in confirmed
multiple-planet systems Kepler-32, Kepler-42, GJ 667 C, and Gl 581. This will be
the first time that n-body dynamical constraints will be coupled to global
climate models. She will apply her model to potentially habitable planets in new
systems as they are discovered. She will also leverage her background in
astronomy, theater, and science communication to create activities that excite
and engage ethnic minority girls in the field of astronomy at a crucial stage in
their development, using methods that encourage individual self-expression
interwoven with scientific engagement and discovery. Her training of high-school
girls to assume leadership roles as workshop teachers and junior mentors will
help empower the next generation of young leaders in STEM fields. Ms. Shields
will create and disseminate a teachers' guide that will expand the benefits of
this workshop beyond the girls she works with directly.