* 1401664
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Drivers of Carbon Uptake in Tropical Forests: Implications for the Future of the Global Carbon Sink
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Carlos Silva, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,120.00

The world's oceans and forests annually absorb half of all carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions from human activities. Recent studies indicate that intact forests in
the tropics may account for as much as one-third of the global uptake of carbon
emissions by forests. Carbon uptake in these forests is widely attributed to
increased plant growth as a result of rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations. CO2
is the raw material from which plants build leaves, roots, and wood, and
experiments in greenhouses and intact forests demonstrate that plant growth
often increases under higher CO2 levels, an effect known as CO2 fertilization.
Although climate models project that forests will continue to absorb carbon over
this century, the magnitude of this carbon uptake and the degree to which it
changes over time will depend on the availability of other resources required by
plants. Forests on higher fertility soils with sufficient water and sunlight are
likely to experience larger and longer-lasting increases in growth than forests
on lower fertility soils which lack sufficient levels of these resources. The
objective of this research is to estimate the degree to which resource
availability constrains forest growth in the tropics at the scale of entire
regions, such as the Amazon Basin. Using newly developed computer algorithms
that produce three-dimensional (3D) models from two-dimensional images, it is
possible to derive 3D models of tropical forests from high-resolution satellite
imagery. Carbon uptake by tropical forests can be estimated by calculating the
difference in forest models between two time periods. This work will analyze
variation in carbon uptake with factors, such as rainfall, temperature,
elevation, and soil age, in order to estimate the degree to which resource
availability limits forest growth throughout the tropics.

Quantitative information about the severity of resource limitation is necessary
to constrain estimates of how much carbon forests are likely to absorb over this
century, which is essential to improving climate projections. Furthermore, this
work has direct implications for the optimal design of emissions reduction
policy. The economic cost of achieving a given atmospheric CO2 concentration
depends on how much carbon forests can be expected to absorb. The more resource
limitation constrains carbon uptake in forests, the steeper emissions reductions
must be to achieve a given atmospheric CO2 concentration.