* 1401560
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Emily Kane, Kane                    Emily          A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Emily A. Kane funds a research and training plan to
address how interactions between swimming and feeding during prey capture in
fishes affect the ability to survive in different environments, using guppies as
the model organism. The host institution for this fellowship is Colorado State
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Cameron Ghalambor. Educational
activities include building upon an effort to supplement local northern Colorado
elementary and middle school classes at schools primarily serving under-
represented students with hands-on natural-selection experiments using guppies.
The fellowship facilitates training in research techniques and approaches,
communication, mentoring, and teaching.

Organisms survive by adapting as their environments change, but integration
among traits means that changes in a trait can have consequences on organismal
performance and survival across environments. Fishes are a model system for
understanding interactions among performance traits, as there is likely a
tradeoff between feeding and locomotor performance. Suction as a mechanism for
capturing prey is only effective over limited distances, thus necessitating
integration of locomotion with feeding to position the predator accurately
relative to the prey. Functional tradeoffs between locomotion and feeding and
the effects of performance integration on the ability to survive across
environments with divergent selection regimes have not been directly tested.
Trinidadian guppies (Poecilia reticulata) are a model system for understanding
adaptive evolution in natural populations. A combination of descriptive studies
of escape and feeding performance in wild individuals and experimental studies
of hybrid survival in laboratory selection experiments are being used to test
the trade-off and survival hypotheses. The research is important for
establishing the significance of performance integration in shaping ecological
and evolutionary trajectories in organisms.