* 1401864
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Michael Grillo, Grillo                  Michael        A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2017
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Michael A. Grillo is "Natural Variation for Specificity
Mediated by Signaling Interactions in the Legume-rhizobium Mutualism: A
Population Genomic Approach in Medicago truncatula". The host institution for
the fellowship is the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Katy Heath.

Training objectives include genomics, plant-microbe interactions, quantitative
and evolutionary genetics, association mapping, and population genomics. Broader
impacts include promoting Medicago and legumes as a teaching tool in high school
biology classes in the Chicago area that serve underrepresented groups in the
sciences.

The mutualism between legumes (Fabaceae) and rhizobia (nitrogen-fixing bacteria)
is one of the most economically and ecologically important interactions on the
planet. A striking feature of this mutualism is the high level of variation for
partner specificity, yet the mechanisms that control and maintain such
specificity remain poorly understood. This research aims to elucidate the
genetic basis of specificity between the model legume, Medicago truncatula, and
its primary symbiont, Sinorhizobium meliloti, through an integrative population
genomic approach that addresses the following questions: 1) Which signaling
genes demonstrate a genomic signature of selection that suggests a role in
partner choice, 2) What are the effects of natural allelic variation at
signaling genes on partner choice, and 3) What genes control incompatible
interactions between Medicago and Sinorhizobium? This line of research will
provide a comprehensive examination of natural variation underlying symbiotic
signaling in Medicago interactions with its mutualist rhizobia.