* 1401728
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Aaron Mertz, Mertz                   Aaron          F
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2016
* USD 140,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with physical
science. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific workforce of
the future. This fellowship to Dr. Aaron F. Mertz supports research on physical
and molecular crosstalk underlying epithelial stratification in vivo, as well as
training in mouse genetics, microscopy, and physical modeling. The host
institutions for this fellowship are the Rockefeller University in New York and
the Dresden University of Technology in Germany; sponsoring scientists are cell
biologist Prof. Elaine Fuchs and physicist Prof. Stephan Grill. Educational
outreach to under-represeneted groups includes mentoring college students with
independent research projects through the Howard Hughes Exceptional Research
Opportunities Program and involving underserved students from an economically
challenged high school in New York City in Rockefeller's Science Outreach Day
with lab tours and structured lab activities. How individual cells grow and move
to achieve their final shapes and locations within tissues remains a challenging
puzzle for both biologists and physicists. These processes are governed by a
complicated set of biochemical and transcriptional changes within cells, as well
as by active physical processes. Stratification of cells into multiple layers is
an essential developmental process in all squamous epithelia, including
epidermis, cornea, oral tissues, and esophagus; this distinguishes those tissues
from simple, non-stratified epithelia, such as those of the gut. Unraveling both
how stratification occurs at a biophysical level and how mechanics converges on
the biology and genetics of epithelial tissue is required to explain how the
skin becomes a barrier that retains fluids and protects an organism's surface
against harmful microbes. This research explores how mechanical tension and
viscoelastic properties of the epidermis play a regulatory role in epidermal
stratification by actively generating physical characteristics that will affect
cell shape, cell size, and proliferation rates. The research includes in vivo
imaging and genetic transduction of mouse epidermis, physical perturbations with
laser ablation, and modeling using theoretical physics. The goal is a correlated
understanding of mechanical and biochemical mechanisms, which will offer new
information about bi-directional crosstalk between the mechanics and biology of
epithelial tissue morphogenesis.