* 1401837
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* John Marino, Marino                  John           A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation?s scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to John A. Marino supports research and
training linking empirical and theoretical approaches to study and enhance
ecological inference and forecasting, with applications to critical threats
facing Great Lakes fisheries. The host institutions for this fellowship are
Michigan State University and the University of Michigan, and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Scott Peacor and Edward Ionides. Training goals include
learning new analytical approaches and tools. Outreach efforts includes students
and also non-government organizations, the public, fisheries managers, the
commercial fishing and recreation industries, and policy makers.

Inference and prediction of population dynamics and species interactions are
major ecological research goals, and recent methodological advances have vastly
improved approaches to meet these goals. However, these methodologies have not
yet been widely applied or well adapted for broad use in ecological research.
This research develops an inference framework that has provided new and valuable
insights in human disease for use more broadly in ecological research,
especially with respect to aquatic ecosystems - fitting theoretical models of
species interactions to ecological time series data. Using this approach, two
critical problems affecting fisheries in the Laurentian Great Lakes are
addressed: invasive species and global climate change. Specifically, the project
examines hypothesized interactive effects on important prey fishes of two
potential stresses: two major invasive species (dreissenid mussels and the spiny
water flea, Bythotrephes longimanus), and the joint effects of the water flea
and climate change.