* 1401193
* Understanding and Modifying the Band Structure of Nano-Graphene Ribbons
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edward Conrad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 399,881.00

This project is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program and
the Condensed Matter Physics Program.

Non-technical Description: Going beyond classical digital electronics to devices
based on quantum switches is a goal of modern materials research. Graphene grown
on trenches etched in silicon carbide have recently shown incredible electronic
and magnetic properties that potentially offer a new platform for quantum-based
electronics. Conductivities 100 times larger than theoretical predicted maximums
are now obtainable. However, the physical origin of these amazing properties is
not yet clear. This research project aims to understand the detailed structure
of sub-50 nanometer graphene ribbons and to develop new ways to reproducibly
grow and alter their electronic properties. The societal impact of developing
these graphene ribbons for near room-temperature quantum-switching networks
would have far reaching impacts. In addition to the influence on technology, the
project will train undergraduate students in this new field, as well as
educating high-school science teachers so that they may better advise their
students on the rewards of scientific and engineering professions.

Technical Description: It has recently been shown that graphene grown on the
sidewalls of SiC trenches has exceptional transport properties with mobilities
exceeding predicted limits for 2-dimentional graphene by more than two orders of
magnitude [Nature 506, 349-354 (2014)]. The high degree of order implied by
these exceptional properties offers an opportunity to make significant advances
in graphene electronics. However, the physical origin of the novel room-
temperature ballistic transport in these ribbons is not understood. This
proposal's goal is to correlate the nanostructure of the graphene sidewall
ribbons with their measured band structure. The research team intends to uncover
the role of strain, substrate bonding, and finite size effects on the electronic
properties of these unique ribbons and their spectacular transport. The team
uses a broad set of high-resolution surface sensitive probes that allow the
research to go beyond transport experiments alone to directly measure their
electronic structure. It employs high-resolution angle resolved photoemission to
measure their electronic band structure and correlate those results with ribbon
structure measured by scanning tunneling microscopy, low energy electron
microscopy and transmission electron microscopy.