* 1401066
* Research Initiation Award: Comparison of the Transcriptional Regulation of Genes Expressed in Drosophila Midline Glia and Trachea
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Mark Melton, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;St. Augustine's
University's RIA establishes a research program for undergraduates that aims to
attract, support and retain primarily underrepresented minority students
majoring in a science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discipline
who are interested in a pursuing a Ph.D. in a STEM discipline and a subsequent
career in STEM research. The program goals are to: 1) expose students to
cutting-edge bench research beyond summer internships 2) better prepare students
for the rigors of graduate studies and 3) increase the number of
underrepresented minorities, who elect and are well-prepared to pursue advanced
degrees and careers in the STEM fields. Although not limited to, the project
targets students at the institution who are majoring primarily in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments/research are designed to examine
Drosophila midline and trachea gene expression at several levels and to
understand how specific gene regulatory interactions combine to generate
different cells in the CNS midline. More specifically, the experiments provide
insight into how neurons and glia are generated during development, including
understanding the basic processes of neuron-glia interactions, and control of
gene expression and CNS development. These experiments will provide a platform
to learn about these basic processes at the undergraduate level. Knowledge
gained from these activities can readily be incorporated into undergraduate
courses such as molecular cell biology and genetics, and trachea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project promotes undergraduate student interest in
high demand specializations in STEM, particularly in the biological sciences. It
supports a larger STEM initiative that seeks to increase and strengthen
partnerships, networks and collaborations between HBCU and mainstream
universities, state and regional research laboratories, USDA and other STEM
research-related enterprises in efforts to increase the numbers of
underrepresented groups that enter and remain in the STEM pipeline. Through this
project, students have the opportunity to successfully complete their
baccalaureate degrees, engage in cutting-edge bench research and to pursue
graduate programs or enter careers in a broader range of science-related fields
that will meet the local, regional, national and global workforce needs.
Additionally, this project serves as a model for creating and adapting
successful activities for other minority-serving institutions seeking to promote
undergraduate research programs in STEM.