* 1401143
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Invasion phylogeography of Borrelia burgdorferi, a tick-borne pathogen
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Adalgisa Caccone, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2015
* USD 21,146.00

Tick-borne diseases pose a significant and growing global health burden due to
the expanding range of tick vectors, reservoir hosts, and pathogens, as well as
a suite of other environmental pressures. Lyme disease is the most prevalent
tick-borne disease in the US and the vast majority of cases occur in the
Northeast. Over the past forty years, it has rapidly spread from southern New
England through Maine as well as through the Upper Midwest. Despite its
epidemiological importance, the source and trajectory of the ongoing invasion
remains poorly described. This project harnesses the tools of next generation
sequencing to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the Lyme disease bacteria,
Borrelia burgdorferi. Surveying the genomic diversity of the pathogen will allow
us to infer the probable origin of invasion and pathways of spread and will
inform a better understanding of the environmental or ecological factors driving
the emergence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resolving the invasion history of B.
burgdorferi will inform models of continued spatial spread and targeted control
measures for this important human pathogen. Further, this project will support
the research of a team of three female scientists and the training of at least
four undergraduate assistants, including women and minorities, and several high
school students in field ecology, epidemiology, and evolutionary genomics
techniques.