* 1401537
* Understanding Continuum Models of Elasto-Plastic Deformations via Multiscale Analyses
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Celia Reina, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2018
* USD 304,185.00

Plastic deformation processes in metals are relevant to a wide range of
technological applications including manufacturing processes, energy absorption
systems, and permanent fixtures. As a result, there has been tremendous efforts
in developing models that can accurately describe the macroscopic behavior of
metals. However a complete understanding of the kinematic hypothesis underlying
these continuum models and their relationship to processes at the microscale is
still lacking. The objective of this research is to revise key model assumptions
in the context of crystal plasticity and to establish a more general applicable
and more accurate theory. The techniques and approaches that will be used for
this investigation have the potential to contribute more broadly to inelastic
deformations, which is generally based on similar kinematic assumptions. This
includes models of biological tissues that experience growth, damage models and
viscoelasticity theories. The results of this investigation will be included in
the undergraduate and graduate education and will serve as an example of
interdisciplinary effort that combines mechanics with material science and
applied mathematics. The kinematics of elasto-plastic deformations in
crystalline materials is very well understood at the atomistic and mesoscopic
level where dislocations are fully resolved. However, the effective kinematic
description at the macroscopic scale is still a topic of current debate. The
research objective of this work is to rigorously derive the continuum kinematic
relations describing plastic deformation from its discrete counterparts via an
upscaling procedure. This goal will be achieved via a careful mathematical
characterization of elasto-plastic deformations at the mesoscale and by use of
homogenization techniques in the calculus of variations. The assumptions
required to establish the discrete to continuum link will clearly determine the
limits of applicability of the continuum relations. The development of new
graduate level courses, the mentoring of students, and the targeted interaction
with the peer community will contribute to the broader impact of this research.