* 1401500
* Linear and nonlinear geometric evolution equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Lei Ni, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 166,744.00

Differential geometry studies the topological, geometric and analytic properties
of the spaces. Since all physical events take places in a space, by Einstein's
relativity the spatial metric properties of the underlying space have
fundamental impacts on the physical events happening in the space, including the
very one we live in. This relation places the subject of the differential
geometry in a central position of the mathematics and some fundamental issues of
sciences. Modern differential geometry appeals to the theory/methods of linear
and nonlinear partial differential equations. The proposal involves the study of
differential geometry via the method of the evolutional partial differential
equations with the focus on the study of the entropy, the monotonicity, and
related sharp differential estimates motives by thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics. The study of Gauss curvature flow has important consequences on the
subjects of the image processing, affine differential geometry and convex
geometry. The study of the Ricci flow in the proposal advances the understanding
of the differential topological structure of the spaces and is related to the
theoretic physics with direct bearing on the high energy physics. The resolving
of the problems involved in the proposal advances the above mentioned related
subjects in sciences. The out-reach components of the proposal disseminate the
new results to general public and contributes towards the mathematical education
in the community in the greater area of San Diego and beyond. It also
contributes to the training and the early career development of under-
represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of
the proposal involve the development of the sharp monotonicity of the entropy
and related sharp point wise estimates. The study of differential geometric
problems relies on solving evolution equations such as the Ricci flow equation,
Gauss curvature flow equation or other nonlinear evolution equations, and/or the
study of delicate properties of the solutions obtained. The theory of modern
partial differential equations reduces the study of the solutions of various
linear and nonlinear equations to the monotonicity of certain entropic
quantities and related point wise estimates. The de-regularizing estimates
proposed in this proposal broadens the scope of the already far-reaching
gradient estimates, Hessian estimates and curvature estimates techniques
developed in the last several decades to more general settings, by requiring
less regularity of the solutions involved, while encoding far more geometric
information. They have produced and will produce much powerful geometric
consequences. The techniques developed can in turn advances the study of the
related partial differential equations, which usually occupies a central role in
the theory of the partial differential equations.