* 1401490
* Nonlinear free boundary and evolution problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mikhail Feldman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 213,602.00

Free boundary problems arise naturally in many models in physics, fluid
dynamics, economics. Free boundaries correspond to sharp changes in the
variables describing the problem. Significant progress has been made during last
several decades in the study of free boundary problems. However in the case of
nonlinear partial differential equations and especially equations of mixed type
many important questions are yet to be studied. Better understanding of
properties of free boundaries, such as stability, regularity and geometric
structure, makes possible to study complex phenomena in models and applications.
First area of this project is the study of shock reflection problem in gas
dynamics, one of the most fundamental multidimensional shock wave problems. This
study involves several challenging difficulties in analysis of free boundary
problems for nonlinear partial differential equations. Another area of project
is semigeostrophic system, a model of rotation-dominated atmospheric/ocean
flows. It exhibits a rich mathematical structure based on Monge-Kantorovich mass
transport theory. We plan to study physically realistic case of variable
Coriolis parameter in semigeostrophic model. Broader impact resulting from the
project will be achieved since the project addresses fundamental mathematical
models in engineering and atmospheric sciences. Closer interaction with
engineering and meteorological communities is one of the priorities of the
project. Graduate students will be involved in the project.

The project consists of two main topics: (1) Free boundary problems in shock
analysis. The PI will continue his work on self-similar shock reflection for
potential flow and for full and isentropic Euler system. Shock reflection
problems arise in many physical situations. Moreover, such problems are
important in the mathematical theory of multidimensional conservation laws since
their solutions are building blocks and asymptotic attractors of general
solutions to the multidimensional Euler equations for compressible fluids. Self-
similar equations of compressible fluid dynamics are of mixed elliptic-
hyperbolic type. Shocks correspond to discontinuities in the solution for Euler
system, and in the gradient of the solution for potential flow equation. Type of
equation may change from hyperbolic to elliptic across the shock. Shock
reflection problem can be formulated as a free boundary problem in which unknown
are the elliptic (subsonic) region and solution in the elliptic region. The PI
will continue his work on existence, stability and regularity of global
solutions of the regular reflection, to extend the global existence results to
the case of compressible Euler system, which is a fundamental model of gas
dynamics. Further study includes uniqueness and stability for regular reflection
problem. (2) Another area of the proposed research is semigeostrophic system.
The PI will study semigeostrophic system with variable Coriolis parameter on a
Riemannian manifold. Such model arises from taking into account the curvature of
the Earth. The PI also plans study solutions with low regularity, which come
from modeling of flows with neutrally stable regions. These projects involve
study of Monge-Kantorovich mass transport problems, and Lagrangian solutions of
transport equations with vector fields of low regularity.