* 1401737
* Biomolecular Characterization via Radical Directed Dissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ryan Julian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 433,711.00

Professor Ryan R. Julian of the University of California Riverside is supported
by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR) Program
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences to further develop his mass
spectrometry methodologies, which were initially developed for the
identification and characterization of peptides and proteins. The project will
expand the scope of biomolecules to which mass spectrometry can be applied,
opening up new avenues of scientific research in numerous fields including
molecular biology, biochemistry and medicine. Specifically, the proposed methods
for improved oligosaccharide analysis are destined to be broadly useful as these
are biologically and biomedically important molecules for which existing tools
are only moderately useful. In this context, the project promises to enhance our
understanding of life processes. In the course of conducting this research,
graduate and undergraduate students will acquire valuable skills in
bioanalytical technologies, mass spectrometry and chemical synthesis. The PI
will actively participate in UCR programs (GradEDge and AGEP) that are focused
on the successful advancement of minority students within the graduate school,
and the research team will participate in science fairs and science
demonstrations at local K-12 schools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
organized in three specific objectives: (1) to explore the utility of radical
directed dissociation (RDD) for the elucidation of the structure of
oligosaccharides and to delineate the unique fragmentation pathways that RDD
produce in oligosaccharides. The focus of this objective will be on a range of
targets including glycosaminoglycans, O- and N- linked glycans and
glycopeptides; (2) to use RDD to identify antioxidant peptides and determine
their solution phase antioxidant capacity. The inherent antioxidant capacity of
biologically relevant proteins and the factors that influence antioxidant
capacity will be investigated, and a combination of sequence substitution and
MS/MS experiments will be used to reveal information about how radicals are
sequestered; and (3) to utilize photocaged covalent labels and photochemistry to
map the higher order solution phase structure of proteins, in particular
multiprotein complexes.