* 1401064
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nations as Destinations: Tourist Sources as Local Fields of Global Production
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Jeffrey Goldfarb, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2015
* USD 9,088.00

SES-1401064 Jeffrey Goldfarb Tim Rosenkranz New School University

This research explores how destination marketing functions as a key mechanism
through which the nation-state adapts to conditions of globalization and, in
turn, co-constitutes global socio-economic processes. Tourism is one of the
world?s largest industries, moving one billion people and 1.3 trillion US
dollars in 2012. Nation-states compete for these global movements of consumers.
Destination marketing, as tool to attract tourists, has become a central
activity of the nation-state as tourist destination. The problem for the nation-
state's actors, the National Tourist Offices, is that they have to rely on the
cooperation of the local travel media and industry at the source, the places
from which tourist come. This interpretative-comparative research analyzes the
destination marketing efforts of several nation-states in two different field-
sites (USA and India) to address the question of how do National Tourist Offices
manage their production as tourist destination in local travel media and
industry? This research breaks down the large scale of the global tourism
economy into two distinct local sites, hypothesizing that these local, socio-
economic arenas (fields) of interaction between destination marketing, travel
media and industry significantly limit the nation-states? efforts to control the
production of its commodity image. Situated in the literatures of Economic
Sociology, the Sociology of Globalization and the Sociology of Culture, this
study contributes to the debate about the relation between globalization
processes and the nation-state. While engaging with the research on
branding/marketing institutions that translate culture into an economic
resource, transforming the nation-state into an actor and subject of global
competition, this study moves from the ideology of branding to the empirical
research of its practices. It therefore applies qualitative methods, including
participant observation, interviewing as well as content and discourse analysis.

Broader Impacts

The research contributes to a better understanding of the production of the
global environment that forces nation-states to reorder their societies under
economic competition. Image constitutes value within this global competition,
exemplified by the desire to "brand the nation," an imperative that treats
people as stakeholders and assets. This study challenges tradition explanations
by analyzing the local organizational fields' contestations of the nation-
state's control over image production. Research findings contribute to
scholarship in social sciences and also to tourism destination studies that are
directly implicated in the ideological production of state policies. The
collected data will be de-identified and made available for further study of the
processes of informal practices in the spheres of marketing, media and industry.