* 1401826
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Pleistocene/Holocene Climate Reconstruction from a Pamir High Resolution Deep Ice-Core
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Vladimir Aizen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2019
* USD 890,877.00

Central Asia is highly dependent on glacier meltwater for its water resources.
Its high mountains hold great volumes of glacial ice, with seasonal snow melt
supplying up to 80% of the region's fresh water needs. However, since the 1960s,
central Asia has lost over 14% of its glacier covered area and ~18% of its ice
volume. Changes in glacially-fed hydrologic systems impact water availability
and biodiversity in these regions. However, these observations cover only a
fraction of the climate history of this region. Ice cores from glaciers in the
high Himalayas preserve records of millennia of climate changes. Understanding
the natural variability recorded in such records is of critical importance for
interpreting the vulnerability of the region to modern and future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will recover a surface-to-bedrock ice
core from the Pamir, Tajikistan, which will be used to develop detailed records
of climate changes in central Asia during the Holocene and beyond. The results
will be used to reconstruct the dynamics and rates of moderate, abrupt, and
threshold changes in climate in Central Asia. Specifically, the research team
will generate annually-resolved, multivariate geochemical records from the ice
cores (including stable isotopes, trace elements, major ions, and dust
particles), recover pollen and other biological materials, and compare the
results with ice core and other paleo records from the interior of Asia.
Chronological control will be established with a variety of techniques (layer
counting, radiocarbon, beryllium-10, lead-210, and tritium). The project
involves scientific collaboratio with international research partners from
Germany and Japan as well as from local government departments in Tajikistan.
Graduate students from two US institutions would be involved in the
international activities, which will include both field expeditions to collect
the ice cores and follow up sampling and collaboration
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Paleoclimate Program of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences, the
EPSCoR program, and the Division of International Science and Engineering.