* 1401582
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of resource mutualisms in plant adaptation to abiotic environments
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,953.00

Plants can overcome environmental stress by dispersing to less stressful
habitats, adapting to the stress, or associating with other organisms, such as
microbes, that help reduce the stress. Although the third strategy of coping
with stress has received very little attention, there is increasing evidence
that it is both common and effective. Soil bacteria called rhizobia act like
natural fertilizer by converting nitrogen in the atmosphere into a form that at
least some plants can use. In return, those plants provide energy to the
rhizobia. The goal of this study is to determine whether rhizobia help plants
survive under extreme water stress. This research is important because
increasing drought stress is predicted for much of the world under global
climate change and rhizobia are one of the most likely ways that plants may
overcome that stress. This has practical implications. For example,
understanding the plant-rhizobium partnership may help reduce application of
synthetic fertilizers or unnecessary use of water in agriculture systems.
Results will be shared broadly through presentations at national and regional
meetings as well as in high school classrooms and in newsletters for naturalists
and land managers. The researchers will also create and publish inquiry-based
activities for high school students that are aligned with the Advanced Placement
(AP) biology Curriculum.

Specifically, this research will investigate how resource mutualists influence
plant adaptation to soil moisture in the field. Using the legume-rhizobia
mutualism as a model system, investigators aim to expand understanding of the
mechanisms contributing to local adaptation, how species interactions influence
local adaptation, and the traits underlying adaptation. Three specific questions
will be addressed: (1) Are plants locally adapted to soil moisture conditions?
(2) Do resource mutualists contribute to plant adaptation to soil moisture? And,
(3) what plant traits drive adaptation to wet vs. dry environments? These
questions will be tackled with an integrated set of reciprocal transplant
experiments across multiple sites differing in soil moisture, with manipulative
greenhouse experiments, and with molecular analyses.