* 1401449
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Many-Body Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Theodore Kirkpatrick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education with the aim to advance understanding of the electronic
properties of both traditional and exotic metals. The PI will focus on quantum
mechanical effects that become increasingly important as the dimensions of
electronic devices continue to shrink. The PIs will investigate electronic and
magnetic properties, as well as quantum mechanical noise that has important
consequences for the manipulation of quantum mechanical states to perform
computation, and for quantum information science in general. The research
involves in part the study of a new kind of material, Weyl metals, that are
predicted to exist from the application of new ideas forged from the fusion of
concepts from theoretical condensed matter physics and the branch of mathematics
that describes the properties of objects that remain unchanged under
deformation, twisting, and bending. The PIs will also investigate the
possibility that the standard model for the electronic properties of metals
naturally fails as the strength of interactions among electrons increases,
leading to a new kind of quantum mechanical state of electrons. The PIs will
also harness ideas from quantum information science to develop a way to measure
the strength of the correlation in the motion of electrons in a material.
Progress on these problems contributes to the knowledge base leading to the
discovery of new materials and materials-related phenomena that may lead to
future technological innovation. This research provides a training environment
for Ph.D. students in an area that can spawn new technologies. The PIs aim to
convey the excitement of modern condensed matter physics and materials science
by working with a local education consortium to develop a science kit for K-12
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education with an aim to explore electronic properties of metals at low
temperatures, making use of field-theoretic methods. The PIs will focus on low-
temperature phases where broken symmetries lead to strong fluctuations, and on
phase transitions between such phases. A unifying physical aspect of the entire
project is the concept of soft or gapless modes, and the fluctuations and long-
ranged correlations that result from them. Using this concept, the PIs will
investigate the properties of a new class of materials known as Weyl metals,
which are theoretically predicted to occur due to accidental band crossing and
would represent a realization of relativistic fermions in materials. They will
also investigate more broadly mechanisms for the breakdown of the Fermi-liquid
concept; in particular, the PIs will search for instabilities of the Fermi
liquid that are caused by strong fluctuations. A third project deals with
measures of the correlation strength in electronic systems, and in particular
with relations between the entanglement entropy and more directly measurable
physical properties or phenomena. The PIs will continue to mentor students and
postdoctoral researchers and will develop educational materials that aim to
convey the excitement of quantum materials and matter to high school students.