* 1401070
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Nutrient Enrichment and Salinization on the Fate and Persistence of Soil Organic Matter in Tidal Freshwater Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Ellen Herbert, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 19,503.00

Coastal wetlands are a globally significant sink for carbon due to high rates of
plant growth and low rates of microbial organic matter breakdown. These
ecosystems, however, are increasingly threatened by salinization, nutrient
enrichment and other human disturbances. Salinization and nutrient enrichment
are known to alter plant growth and microbial breakdown, however there is
uncertainty regarding their effect on the carbon balance of coastal wetlands.
Changes in plant and microbial communities brought on by human disturbances may
lead to either increased net carbon release from wetland soils or to increased
storage of carbon as soil organic matter. The soil organic matter pool,
therefore, reflects feedbacks between plants and microbes and integrates them
over long time-scales, providing a useful tool for assessing the cumulative
impacts of salinization and nutrient enrichment on the wetland carbon cycle. In
order to assess the impacts of salinization and nutrient enrichment on wetland
carbon cycling, soil will be collected from tidal freshwater wetlands in coastal
Georgia where either salinity or nutrients have been experimentally increased
above natural levels. In addition, the interactive effects of salinization and
nutrient enrichment will be explored by transplanting vegetated soil cores
between nutrient-enriched and salinized wetland sites. Soils will be incubated
for one year and analyzed for changes in 1) quantity and composition of soil
organic matter 2) microbial demand for different types of soil organic matter
and 3) rates of microbial organic matter breakdown. Results from this study will
be integrated with previously collected data on plant and microbial processes at
each site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to a fundamental
understanding of ecosystem scale carbon cycling by examining two of the most
common human activities affecting wetlands on a global scale: salinization
resulting from rising sea level and freshwater management, and nutrient runoff
from agricultural activities. Understanding the impacts of these disturbances is
important for protecting wetland ecosystems and maintaining their ability to
provide key ecosystem services, such as carbon sequestration and wildlife
habitat. Environmental science and policy students from the School of Public and
Environmental Affairs at Indiana University and k-12 educators from the Georgia
Coastal Ecosystems LTER Schoolyard Program will be involved in all aspects of
this study. The implications of this research will be discussed as part of the
School?s Wetlands Biology and Regulation course. Results will be communicated in
scientific meetings, peer-reviewed publications and directly to coastal Georgia
residents and resource managers through ongoing collaborations with the Sapelo
Island National Estuarine Research Reserve, The Nature Conservancy and the
Georgia Department of Natural Resources.