* 1401178
* Documenting Traditional Ecological Knowledge in the Sierra Nororiental de Puebla, Mexico, in Synchronic and Diachronic Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2022
* W. John Kress, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 04/30/2022
* USD 510,370.00

In order to understand the diversity and potential benefits of plant life around
the world and to assess the impact of the loss of biodiversity, it is necessary
to create an accurate floristic inventory of bio-diverse regions and to record
the evolving interactions of humans with that rich environment. To this end,
botanist John Kress of the Smithsonian will use innovative DNA barcoding
methodology to facilitate rapid identification to species of the flora specimens
collected in five Nahuat and two Totonac villages in the 28 municipalities of
the Sierra Nororiental de Puebla, Mexico -- an incredibly bio-diverse region of
the world. Working in tandem with Kress, linguist Jonathan Amith of Gettysburg
College will use state-of-the-art language documentation techniques to create an
extensive digital database of recordings of native experts discussing
traditional nomenclature and classification of local flora. The linguistic and
botanical databases will support the preservation of indigenous knowledge about
the biodiversity of this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amith and Kress
hypothesize that accessing botanical information from endangered languages will
help track changes in the ecology of the ancestral homelands of endangered
language communities. In addition, Amith and Kress theorize that comparative
botanical information across geographically proximate villages will reveal
historical patterns of migration, cultural contact, and language change. Using
data from the endangered language discussions about plant life in the region and
DNA barcode reference library, Amith will study shifts of biotaxa nomenclature.
He will use clues from lexical borrowing and calques to map the spread of
knowledge about particular botanical specimens and link that spread to community
migrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be stored in various herbariums in
Mexico and at the Smithsonian Museum. Linguistic data will be accessible at the
Archive of Indigenous Languages of Latin America. This project supported by
NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities because it enhances
research excellence through international collaboration with faculty at
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) and will benefit from use of
local resources such as the National Herbarium of Mexico and the Comisión
Nacional Para El Connocimineto Y Uso De La Biodiversidad.