* 1401048
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do environmental constraints on photosynthetic symbionts alter the community structure of their fungal partners? A case study with canopy lichens.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jessica Coyle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,450.00

Most organisms, including humans, live in close association with other species.
When such partnerships are obligatory, the ability of one species to tolerate a
particular environment may limit where its partner species can live. Lichens are
thought to provide a good example of this type of constraint. All lichens
consist of two, mutually-dependent organisms: a fungus and an alga. Lichens have
adapted to some of Earth's harshest environments and play an important role in
several ecosystems. Despite lichens' ubiquity, relatively little is known about
the diversity of their algae and whether the environmental tolerances of those
algae constrain where lichens can grow. The goal of this project is to determine
how light availability impacts the health and distribution of algae and lichens.
Understanding how communities of mutually-dependent species shift along
environmental gradients is a necessary precursor to predicting how these
interactions will respond to global environmental change. This research will
provide interdisciplinary training in molecular biology to a graduate student
studying ecology. Such training facilitates cross-disciplinary communication and
will enable a broader variety of future collaborations. The project also
supports an undergraduate student to conduct independent research in canopy
ecology. Participating in an independent research project develops a student's
critical thinking and communication skills and builds self-confidence. Special
effort will be made to recruit a student from a demographic under-represented in
the sciences. In addition, the researchers are involved in an ongoing
partnership with the North Carolina School of Science and Math to develop
educational units that use lichens to teach key concepts in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goal of this project is to
determine whether environmental gradients in forests impose differential
constraints on fungal and algal partners, with cascading effects on lichen
diversity. Molecular community profiling methods will be used to relate
community composition of lichen-forming fungi and algae to light and temperature
gradients in tree canopies in North Carolina. By concurrently measuring fungal
and algal diversity, the researchers can test whether light constraints on algae
subsequently limit their fungal partners. Results will be used to construct a
general model of stochastic community assembly of mutualist populations. This
model can then be applied more generally to interpret how environment changes
will constrain or facilitate the structure and occurrence of other mutualistic
networks.