* 1401293
* "Research Initiation Award" - The Genetic Code of Protein Molecules
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Joseph Onyilagha, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 11/30/2017
* USD 199,431.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Arkansas-Pine Bluff (UAPB)'s HBCU-UP RIA project updates scientific knowledge on
the biosynthesis of the 20 genetically encoded amino acids of the standard
genetic code. The project's major objectives are to: (1) explore the current
assertion that the 20 standard amino acids of the genetic code comprise a
mixture of early versus late amino acids, (2) analyze the metabolic pathways at
work in living organisms so as to provide clear information into ancient
molecular evolution and (3) to mentor undergraduate students in biological
research and support retention in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this project entitled "The
Genetic Code of Protein Molecules" is that, the network of metabolic pathways
for amino acid biosynthesis contains plausible molecular fossils. The research
investigates and determines whether any evidence exists that connects pathways
of amino acid metabolism to claims for early versus late amino acids and also
whether metabolic pathways found in living organisms are an accurate guide to
ancient evolutionary events. The investigation uses the following
procedures:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-identification of the enzymes associated with
each step of amino acid biosynthesis,&lt;br/&gt;-identification of which of
these enzymes occur within all three domains of life; &lt;br/&gt;-verification
of which enzymes are missing from one or more domains of life;
&lt;br/&gt;-reduction/simplification sequence data sets for each step of a
metabolic pathway and building phylogenies for the enzymes of each step of an
amino acid biosynthetic pathway; &lt;br/&gt;-identification and elimination of
examples of lateral gene transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary data from
databases such as KEGG, MetaCyc, EcoCyc, REACTOME, Molecular Ancestry Network
(MANET), and Pathway Localization (PathLoc) databases will be used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to disease-related research in
plants and pests. UAPB is an Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) institution. Thus, the project will build research capacity
and capability at this institution (a minority-serving institution) and within
the state in computational biological sciences. In addition, the project
contributes to increasing a diverse scientific workforce for the nation.