* 1401259
* SBIR Phase I:  Mapping Driver Behavior: Toward an Active Safety Knowledge Base
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Christopher Wilson, Vehicle Data Science Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2014
* USD 79,999.00

The innovation put forth in this proposal consists of a database that captures
and describes expected behavior of vehicles at any point of a road network. The
range of driving behaviors on a particular road, e.g. speed and lateral
position, can serve as a reference for other drivers and systems to increase
driving safety and efficiency. Deviations from the normal range may indicate a
risky driver, training opportunities, or the need for immediate intervention
from on-board driver assistance systems. The project brings together two
innovative features. The first one is the use of vehicle data as a primary
source to build a digital map. The second feature lies in representing behaviors
rather than the physical road structure that current digital maps focus on. This
has significant advantages for the intended applications. To enable this
feature, this project will demonstrate a novel core map architecture that allows
the accurate capture of maneuvers and behaviors. This is nearly impossible using
currently available map formats. In this project a simple driving behavior
database will be built and will validate that the proposed data representation
can be effectively constructed and scaled to cover large geographic
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of the proposed
innovation will be significant gains in driving safety and efficiency. Capturing
behaviors allows their analysis to assess risk and identify optimal maneuvers.
This enables feedback to drivers to either nudge or actively pull them toward
safer and more efficient patterns. This database will address needs and
applications in several transportation markets: 1) driver assistance systems
triggering personalized warnings based on nominal maneuver parameters and
driver?s habitual style; 2) risk assessment for fleets and insurance companies-
identifying outlier drivers, providing training/feedback and setting insurance
rates; 3) providing inputs to autonomous vehicle systems to set trajectories
that are comfortable for humans and are understood by other drivers; 4) roadway
safety for infrastructure managers- observing perturbations in vehicle movements
to diagnose problems and engineer remedial upgrades; and 5) identifying driving
practices that reduce fuel usage and improve the range of electric vehicles.
These are large target markets with considerable societal value and revenue
potential. The proposed database can be built automatically from vehicle data
alone, significantly reducing costs compared to existing map databases. Novel
and valuable roadway and driving attributes can also be captured.