* 1401784
* Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior, &amp; Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Cyrus Safinya, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of California at Santa Barbara (UCSB) aims
at discovering and understanding the structures that form inside neurons. The
protein-based skeletal structures inside nerve cells are multifunctional; for
example, they give mechanical stability to neurons while at the same time
enabling efficient transport of molecules (e.g. neurotransmitters) from the cell
body to the synapse region, which is a critical function and enables
communication between neurons. The cell free studies of this project, with
carefully selected neuron-derived proteins (and variations of the proteins),
will lead to the identification of protein components that assemble correct or
aberrant cytoskeletal structures. The studies are important since aberration in
the cytoskeleton structure invariably leads to neurodegeneration. The research
team members are all involved in the educational training components of the
project, through Science and Engineering internship outreach programs at the
UCSB. Undergraduate students from UCSB, and summer intern undergraduates from
community colleges as well as national colleges and universities participate in
this program. The research team's outreach activities also extend to mentoring
and providing education and research experience to teachers from local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This award is to develop a scientific
understanding of the out-of-equilibrium phase behavior and structures in
mixtures of tubulin, microtubules, and microtubule-associated-proteins derived
from neurons. The functional significance of the heterogeneous dynamical
microstructures observed in different neuronal compartments (i.e. axon, cell
body, and dendrites) is poorly understood. Thus, the significance of the cell
free studies is that they will enable scientists to develop an understanding of
how different proteins derived from neurons contribute to distinct structures
observed in vivo, and how these structures enable functions including mechanical
stability and facilitated transport within neurons. The project will impact
several nascent fields of biomaterials, including (1) intrinsically-disordered-
proteins where the studies will lead to a mechanistic understanding of the role
of unstructured proteins in hierarchical assembly, and (2) non-equilibrium
biomaterials where the studies are expected to discover new protein structures
due to the local dissipation of energy (as it happens in cells). The project
offers excellent opportunities for the educational training of students (both
undergraduate and graduate) in cutting-edge structural research techniques
including synchrotron small-angle-x-ray-scattering and electron microscopy at US
National facilities.&lt;br/&gt;