* 1401014
* Dissertation Research: The role of gene duplication and symbiont association in the evolution of sea anemone venom
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,687.00

The diversity of venoms within a group of organisms is largely the product of
gene duplication and subsequent DNA sequence diversification. The specifics of
this process remain obscure in most organisms. The planned research uses sea
anemones (Cnidaria: Anthozoa, Actiniaria) as a model to understand the genome-
level processes like gene duplications in shaping venom repertoire. The
incidence of gene duplication and the processes by which duplicated genes
diversify or become non-functional can be inferred through the analysis of the
sequences that flank functional venom genes and the regions of the genome in
which venoms are particularly common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea anemones are part
of the oldest and largest group of extant venomous animals. Their venoms exhibit
a variety of functions, including disrupting the control of ion channels,
destabilizing cellular membranes, or inhibiting synthesis of lipids. The
functional and structural diversity of venoms is underpinned by an even greater
degree of diversity at the genetic level. This more detailed account of venom
diversity thus has potential for studies of function and structure of venom, and
may have applications of interest to pharmacological or medical research.
Additional benefits to the broader community include the training of graduate
and undergraduate students, outreach to general and technical audiences through
presentations, and published scientific studies of gene diversity and evolution.