* 1401795
* Dissertation Research: Examining Anti-predator Cascades Over Four Trophic Levels
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Ian Kaplan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,015.00

Predators can affect prey populations in complex ways. Predators that eat
herbivores, for example, can reduce herbivore pressure on plant communities
directly by consuming the herbivores or indirectly through what is known as
"non-consumptive effects". Non-consumptive effects often occur when the mere
presence of a predator causes prey species to reduce feeding activity to avoid
being eaten, themselves. This anti-predator behavior has important impacts on
herbivore survival and likely on the plants that would otherwise be eaten by the
herbivores. Such effects on plants are further complicated by the fact that many
predators are omnivorous, feeding on both plants and animals. This project
examines how ground beetles, which eat seeds, and mice, which eat both seeds and
ground beetles, influence each other and affect the abundance of a common plant
(lambsquarters), whose seeds they consume. Because lambsquarters is a weed
species of agricultural importance, results of this study have direct
implications for weed management by farmers. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training for a graduate student and will involve mentorship of
an undergraduate researcher. Concepts and results of this project are being
integrated into Purdue's teaching curriculum, and will be presented at
scientific conferences, as well as at farmer-focused agricultural conferences.
This work will also be interpreted for the public at various outreach events
including farm tours, Master Gardener courses, and educational webinars.

More specifically, this project will use a seed predator food web to examine the
environmental and behavioral factors that drive complex predator-prey
interactions over multiple trophic levels. Preliminary data suggest that
predator-mediated use of refuge by rodents interferes with beetle activity and
seed removal. Reductions in seed removal by beetles in the presence of mice
could be attributed to intra-guild predation (consumptive effects) or anti-
predator vigilance (non-consumptive effects; NCEs). These two distinct, but non-
mutually exclusive trophic pathways have different long-term implications for
plant population dynamics. This project will build on these concepts with an
experiment on seed-foragers' responses to predation risk. It will address three
specific questions: 1) Is seed predation affected by NCEs of intra-guild
predators? 2) Do structural refuges mediate NCEs on seed predation? 3) Does
refuge habitat affect the frequency of vertebrate/invertebrate predation events?
The experiment will examine how granivore foraging behavior on seeds of
lambsquarters is impacted by the presence of predators and the availability of
protective cover.