* 1401141
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Hospitals' Choices and Environmental Pressures
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Brian Gran, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Brian Gran Cory E. Cronin Case Western Reserve University

This research will study the ways in which environmental pressures affect the
choices hospitals make regarding community benefit and business-like practices.
Hospitals are important social institutions that play multiple societal roles
and inevitably respond to pressures exerted upon them by policy changes,
societal expectations, and fiscal realities. Previous research documents the
long history of hospitals as centerpieces of their communities, but in recent
years, much attention has been paid to efforts of cost control and revenue
production and the resulting shift to a more corporate culture within health
care organizations. New regulations by the IRS and the passage of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), however, have brought a renewed focus
on the ways in which hospitals contribute to and care for their communities,
raising the question of how hospital behaviors have changed in the evolving
landscape and what the impacts of these changes might be.

This study aims to: 1) understand the ways in which hospital environments
(including policy implementation and market characteristics) affect hospital
choices surrounding community benefit and business-like practices; 2) identify
how these factors affect the presence of hospitals in the market; and 3) explore
the ways in which market presence and hospital choices regarding practices
affect the well-being of their communities. To accomplish these goals, this
longitudinal study will use multi-level analysis to examine data collected by
the American Hospital Association, the U.S. Census, and the Dartmouth Health
Atlas for the years leading up to and immediately after the passage of the ACA.

This research has three potential broader impacts. First, it will contribute to
the scholarship surrounding institutional theory and institutional logics in its
consideration of community benefit as a central logic to the institution of
health care. Second, it will provide to leaders of health care organizations a
demonstration of how organizations across the field are making decisions in
these areas and how these decisions affect organizational and community
outcomes. Third, policy makers may be better able to create guidelines for
hospitals surrounding community benefit based on an understanding of outcomes of
these practices.