* 1401236
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Function and Evolution of Rapid Color Change as a Social Signal
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Kevin McGraw, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 19,622.00

To date, most studies on visual signals have focused on the fixed appearances of
animals and, specifically, of their color. As a result, dynamic color signals
remain poorly understood from ecological, behavioral, and evolutionary
standpoints. To begin to address this discrepancy, the researchers previously
conducted detailed studies of the control and function of rapid color change in
male veiled chameleons, Chamaeleo calyptratus. However, a broader context is
required to understand the evolutionary origins of and constraints on these
unusual color change signals. In this study, the researchers will conduct a
comparative study of Bradypodion dwarf chameleons to investigate how and why
color change signals evolved. Dwarf chameleons exhibit marked variation in color
change and display behavior among species, making them ideal for testing
evolutionary hypotheses about the origin and function of this rare signal type.
This study seeks to determine whether color change evolved to accentuate
behavioral displays (or vice versa), or arose as a signal independent of complex
behaviors and evaluate potential phylogenetic constraints on color change. In
addition to communicating findings in scientific journals, the researchers will
partner with outreach programs at Arizona State University and the South African
National Biodiversity Institute to share major research findings via customized
learning activities for middle school students in Arizona and South Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand whether elaborate behavioral displays
evolved before, after, or concurrently with complex color change signals, the
researchers will measure natural suites of intraspecific behavioral (i.e.
aggressive/submissive) and color signals in 12 species of dwarf chameleons using
high-definition video cameras to record staged, aggressive interactions between
conspecifics in each species natural habitat. Still photos of the animals,
concurrently with video, will be taken during aggressive trials and colorimetric
data will be collected throughout behavioral displays and bouts of rapid color
change. Felsenstein's independent contrasts and phylogenetic generalized least
squares (PGLS) analysis will be used to evaluate the evolutionary relationships
between multiple aspects of display colorimetrics and display behaviors, and the
strength of the phylogenetic signal will be evaluated for all color and
behavioral signals. Lastly, the program Mesquite will be used to reconstruct
ancestral states of behavioral displays and color signals in an attempt to
disentangle the order and patterns of signal elaboration.