* 1401164
* Collaborative Research: Temperature-Dependence of Atomic-Scale Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2019
* USD 379,237.00

Reducing friction in engineered systems can substantially reduce worldwide
energy consumption and detrimental environmental emissions. Improvements in
lubricants, engineered surfaces, and mechanical design have led to significant
progress, but a new set of challenges emerges when considering friction at very
high or very low temperatures. High temperature friction is relevant to many
applications that either operate in elevated temperature environments or are
designed to manage temperature rise. The temperature dependence of friction is
also important in aerospace systems such as satellites, which possess thousands
of moving, contacting parts exposed to temperatures ranging from a few hundred
degrees Celsius down to near absolute zero, but cannot be serviced once deployed
in space and so must not fail. Understanding, predicting, and controlling
friction as a function of temperature is therefore critical. This research is
focused on mechanisms that determine the temperature dependence of friction for
nanoscale single asperities. This work can ultimately contribute to a deeper
understanding and more precise and predictive approach to designing reliable,
energy-efficient systems. The project will also have impact from an outreach
perspective through activities including development of friction-based learning
modules disseminated through participation in programs focused on women in
engineering, and involvement of undergraduates and high school teachers in the
research.

The intellectual merit of this research lies in advancing the fundamental
understanding of the temperature dependence of friction for single asperities.
Atomistic simulations and atomic force microscopy experiments will be conducted,
where state-of-the-art methods are used so that the conditions in the
simulations and experiments are optimally matched, allowing results to be
directly compared and validated, maximizing the understanding gained. This
tightly-coupled approach will enable the atomic structure, mechanics, dynamics,
and thermal behavior of the contact to be deterministically linked with friction
forces and the corresponding energy dissipation. Key features of this unique
collaborative approach are: integration of advanced variable-temperature atomic
force microscope measurements and atomistic simulations of optimally-matched
systems; use of novel thermal probes that enable rapid variation the temperature
of the contact; and modeling and simulation at the same sliding speeds through
the use of accelerated simulations and ultrafast atomic force microscope
scanning. Studies will be performed in three different environments to isolate
distinct temperature-dependent contributions: ultra-high vacuum environment, in
the presence of water vapor, and in the presence of hydrocarbon vapors. With
this comprehensive approach, the underlying mechanisms governing the temperature
dependence of interfacial friction can be definitively established.