* 1401660
* Nuclear Properties and Interactions from Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Silas Beane, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2017
* USD 165,858.00

Nuclei are among the most complex systems that emerge from Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD), the fundamental theory of the strong interaction, and it
is of great importance to understand their emergence quantitatively. This goal
is only now beginning to be realized in practice using Lattice QCD and effective
field theory methods. The focus of the proposed project is on obtaining physical
predictions for basic nuclear interactions and properties with controlled
uncertainties - arising primarily from extrapolation to the physical quark
masses and to the continuum limit - accounted for systematically. Among the
nuclear physics questions that this research project is focused on answering
are: Which two- and three-baryon systems are bound and what are their binding
energies? Are there three-body bound systems involving hyperons? What are the
low-energy hyperon-hyperon and hyperon-nucleon phase shifts, and how will
knowledge of these quantities help unravel the role of hyperons and hypernuclei
in dense matter such as might occur in the core of neutron stars?

This research will help provide a link between long-observed properties of
atomic nuclei and the theoretical framework that is believed to provide a basis
for these observations, by taking advantages of advances in computing technology
and developments in theoretical physics that have only recently made this effort
possible. Graduate student training forms an integral part of this project, and
will provide education in theoretical physics as well as forefront computing
methods.