* 1401984
* Experimental Particle Physics Research at High Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2017
* George Alverson, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 10/31/2017
* USD 1,375,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the premier Energy
Frontier particle accelerator operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva
Switzerland. It is currently one of the foremost facilities for answering these
Beyond the Standard Model questions and studying the properties of the Higgs
boson. One of the primary functions of the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
experiment at the LHC is to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model. The
work carried out within this project will focus on the analysis of data from the
CMS experiment looking for signals of beyond the Standard Model physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the
search targets are mentioned in this paragraph. A discovery of leptoquarks would
provide a link between the quark sector and the lepton sectors and help to
explain why both sectors contain three generations of matter. Detection of
substantial invisible decays of the Higgs boson would answer important questions
about the nature of electroweak symmetry breaking. Invisible decays of the Higgs
are a signature of various beyond the standard model physics theories. In these,
the Higgs can interact with new heavy particles which decay into particles that
are usually not detected by the experiment (like neutrinos). Limits on the
invisible decay rate of the Higgs boson also provide constraints on models of
Dark Matter. The proposed studies also include measurements of the differential
cross section measurements of Standard Model processes, such as ZZ production,
and W+jets production, that have sensitivity to new physics. These studies are
tightly coupled with the new physics searches because the processes they measure
are important backgrounds to the specific searches targeted. The presence of a
signal in any of these channels would have profound impact on our understanding
of particle physics, while establishing its absence would provide important
constraints on models of physics beyond the Standard Model of particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
strong cooperative education program at Northeastern University, the group will
continue to routinely involve undergraduates in meaningful six-month projects at
CERN. The PIs will also continue their involvement with the Boston Area QuarkNet
group (now in its 14th year) where they are able to reach out to local high
school teachers and their students. The group members also share the excitement
and knowledge of the discoveries and results with the broader public through
lectures and presentations to audiences outside of particle physics.