* 1401840
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Michelle Afkhami, Afkhami                 Michelle       E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 12/31/2015
* USD 117,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Michelle Afkhami is "Multiple Mutualist Effects: Linking
Functional Genomics to the Ecology of Mutualist Diversity in Plant-microbe
Interactions." The host institutions for the fellowship are Michigan State
University and the University of Toronto, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Maren Friesen, Yair Shachar-Hill and John Stinchcombe. Training objectives
include expanding the Fellow's research from pairwise to multispecies mutualism
and gaining training in state-of-the-art molecular and genomics technologies,
such as high-throughput sequencing and data analysis. In addition to informing
agriculture, conservation and restoration practices, broader impacts of this
research include mentoring of undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds,
development of educational modules for children, and online scientific writing
for the public.

Crop breeding has focused on high plant yield under high fertilization. However,
these practices damage both the environment and human health. To meet the
challenge of sustainably providing nutrition for growing human populations,
high-performing crop and forage plants that require minimal inputs are needed.
Mutualisms -- species interactions in which all organisms benefit -- between
host plants and microbes provide a key avenue for meeting this goal. Previous
research has focused on pairwise mutualisms (a single host and partner), but in
both natural and agro-ecosystems organisms often interact with many mutualists
simultaneously. To improve agricultural outputs, research elucidating how multi-
species mutualisms impact plant performance is required. This research combines
ecological and cutting-edge next generation genomic techniques to study how
associating with multiple partners impacts Medicago truncatula, a close relative
of important food and forage plants. M. truncatula associates with two groups of
microbes that benefit plants by increasing nutrient supply: mycorrhizal fungi
(fungi that enhance phosphorus uptake) and rhizobia (bacteria that fix
atmospheric nitrogen for plant consumption). Using factorial experiments,
genome-wide association mapping, and transcriptomics, this research will
investigate how combinations of microbes impact plant performance, uncover the
genes underlying these effects, and determine how gene expression is impacted by
multi-species mutualism.