* 1402033
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Zakary Ratajczak, Ratajczak               Zakary
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 236,936.00

NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology combine research and training
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
economics. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Zak Ratajczak supports research and
training that address the question, "Does economic connectedness undermine
environmental stability?" The host institutions for this fellowship are the
University of Virginia and Stockholm University and the sponsoring scientists
are Drs. Paolo D'Odorico and Carl Folke, respectively. Training goals for the
fellowship include developing skills in theoretical modeling of modern social-
ecological systems, including nonlinear dynamics and network theory. The
research results are expected to be useful to public policy and are being
disseminated through workshops with multiple stakeholder groups and policy
recommendations. Educational outreach to K-12 and undergraduate groups seeks to
foster deeper thinking of how humans and ecosystems affect each other. This
fellowship is jointly funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, the Directorate for Geosciences, and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

This research addresses the extent to which ecological and social-ecological
systems are capable of abrupt and difficult-to-reverse transitions, referred to
as 'tipping points.' The research represents ecosystems as a series of
ecological components interconnected over long distances by human economies an
advance over many models that consider only naturally occurring connections
between ecosystems. It addresses whether these economic connections accentuate
existing tipping points and create large-scale ecological tipping points that do
not exist in the absence of humans. Using these models, the research seeks to
identify adaptive strategies to avoid tipping points, including alterations of
underlying biological diversity. Analyses of different modes of market behavior
and resource sharing should provide strategies for navigating stochastic
fluctuations in natural resources. Furthermore, by explicitly integrating
conspicuous components of ecosystem structure and the price indexes of key
biological goods into the models, it should be possible to detect dynamic
behaviors that often emerge near tipping points in social-ecological networks.
Being aware of such behaviors could help avoid large ecological tipping in
economically important ecosystems such as croplands, rangelands, and fisheries.