* 1402907
* Arcs, Valuations, and Multiplier Ideals on Algebraic Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tommaso de Fernex, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 130,999.00

This research project is in the field of algebraic geometry. At the core of
algebraic geometry is the quest for classification of algebraic varieties, which
are sets of solutions of systems of polynomial equations (or various
generalizations of this concept). Classification roughly splits into two parts:
birational classification, in which varieties that look alike almost everywhere
are organized in the same class, and moduli theory, where continuous
deformations of varieties are studied. The minimal model program is the major
tool for the birational classification of algebraic varieties, and it has
important applications to the theory of moduli. Designed over the model of
classification of surfaces, the minimal model program has become one of the
major trends in algebraic geometry, earning S. Mori the Fields Medal for work on
three dimensional varieties. Recently, there has been groundbreaking progress
which brings the subject very close to a complete program in all dimensions.
There are however many fundamental questions that still remain unanswered, and
some of these constitute the main objectives of this research project. The local
study of algebraic varieties and their singularities is a natural component of
this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two main objectives. The first
objective concerns a conjecture of Shokurov from 1988 which predicts that a
certain local invariant of singularities, known as the minimal log discrepancy,
varies semicontinuously. This property is closely connected to a conjecture on
termination of flips which has implications to the minimal model program, and
relates to a series of specific questions concerning the geometry of spaces of
arcs and their connections to valuation spaces and Berkovich analytic spaces.
The second objective deals with multiplier ideals on algebraic varieties. There
are various notions of multiplier ideals on singular varieties, and the PI will
explore a unifying approach which incorporates all theories and explains their
connections. This part of the project contains various applications, from a
Reider-type theorem on the global generation of twists of the dualizing sheaf of
a normal surface, to the comparisons between certain notions of singularities
defined in characteristic zero and in positive characteristics. The project also
includes educational activities and other broader impacts. These include the
participation in outreach programs, various forms of dissemination including the
writing of a book on the birational geometry of algebraic varieties, and the
organization of several activities at various levels, ranging from undergraduate
summer schools to international conferences.