* 1402740
* Gamma-Ray Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Philip Kaaret, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 325,854.00

Astrophysical objects can accelerate particles to energies beyond the reach of
any ground-based accelerator yet built. What drives this acceleration is an
important question in astrophysics. High energy gamma-ray emission is a key
diagnostic and can be used to probe the acceleration mechanisms. With this award
the University of Iowa particle astrophysics group will use the VERITAS imaging
air Cherenkov telescope for a systematic study of pulsar wind nebulae, the most
common galactic high energy gamma-ray sources. Studies of Pulsar Wind Nebulae
address central questions in high-energy astrophysics including the acceleration
mechanism and the propagation of relativistic particles in the interstellar
medium. To extend the broader impacts of this work, each year the Iowa group
will host an undergraduate summer intern from an underrepresented minority who
will be directly involved in the research. This program will draw on the success
of the minority recruitment program of the Math Department at Iowa, including
their extensive network of colleges with large minority enrollments, and the
connections of the Adler Planetarium with minority-serving institutions in the
Chicago area. In addition, the group will work to increase public interest in
astronomy and broadly disseminate the results of their research through the
public astronomical observing program run by the local chapter of the Society of
Physics Students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pulsar wind nebulae are powered by
relativistic particles accelerated in the termination shocks of the winds
emanating from rotation-powered pulsars. The Iowa group will study the whole
population of pulsar wind nebulae in the northern hemisphere using VERITAS
follow-up observations of sources discovered by Milagro and in the near future
by HAWC forming an unbiased survey. The goal is to produce a complete inventory
of powerful, nearby leptonic particle accelerators in the northern sky. The
group will also conduct detailed observations of selected pulsar wind nebulae at
multiple wavebands to constrain their physical properties. The Iowa group will
also continue to operate and maintain the VERITAS pointing monitors and
contribute to VERITAS operations.