* 1402456
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Adam Ferguson, Ferguson                Adam           W
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 141,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Adam W. Ferguson supports research and training to understand the
role of human disturbance in shaping the parasite dynamics in a small African
carnivore, the genet. There are two host institutions in Kenya: Karatina
University under the sponsorship of Dr. Paul Webala and the University of
Nairobi under the sponsorship of Dr. David Odongo. Training goals include
learning analytical methods for studies in parasite ecology and career
development activities. Educational outreach includes a network of U.S. and
African scientists interested in understanding the role of wildlife in disease
transmission in East Africa. This fellowship is supported by both the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International and
Integrative Activities at NSF.

The research examines how the cat-like, mammalian carnivores known as genets,
Genetta spp., mesocarnivores of the family Viverridae, respond to different land
use practices and interact with local communities and their associated domestic
animals such as cattle and dogs. Specifically, the goal is to understand how
these interactions affect the genets' health and parasite loads, which could
have ramifications for parasite transmission dynamics to both humans and other
wildlife species. Given the abundance of small carnivores, e.g., raccoons,
skunks, red foxes, and their important roles in disease dynamics in other rural
systems, results from this study, using a model organism, provide information
useful for managing parasites and diseases that pose a risk to both humans and
domestic animals inhabiting other rural systems worldwide. In East Africa, where
local people living in close proximity to diverse wildlife communities depend
heavily on livestock, land-use practices could result in changes to parasite
communities of local wildlife by altering host density, physiology, and contact
rates with domestic animals.