* 1402872
* GOALI: A Comparative Study of Electrochemical Codeposition with In-Situ Electron Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2013,08/31/2015
* Daniel Steingart, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,892.00

This proposal intends to use a variety of tools, with support and collaboration
from IBM, to study the nanoscale mechanics of electrochemical codeposition in
real time. For the zinc-bismuth and bismuth-tellurium codeposition systems
potentiostatic, galvanostatic, and pulsed control will be applied while
simultaneously imaging the developing morphology of the deposited structure - in
situ, within the liquid electrolyte - with good temporal resolution (30 images
per second) and spatial resolution (better than 20nm). This will provide unique
metrological information on the evolution of the deposit morphology at the
nanoscale during electrochemical processing. This study addresses a significant
gap in current understanding of codeposition processes: how morphology and
stoichiometry vary under different process control regimes and electrolyte
compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two model codeposition systems outlined
in this proposal have promise for use in energy related technologies. In
electrochemical storage structures zinc anodes have long been attractive for
reasons of 1) high energy density when paired with air or low-cost cathodes, 2)
abundance, and 3) cost. To date secondary zinc anodes have been difficult to
achieve due to a tendency toward dendritic structures. Bismuth is known to
suppress hydrogen evolution in a working zinc battery and is added to increase
shelf life, thus is an additive of interest to plated zinc structure. For
another application, slight non-stoichiometries of bismuth telluride are the
workhorse structures for thermoelectric devices, both cooling devices and
electrical generators. The efficacy of the thermoelectric is determined by the
relative chemistries of the complementary p and n type structures. Outside the
laboratory the proposed research will serve a core topic of in-situ microscopy
and seed lectures, demonstrations and online media for high school and
undergraduate students.