* 1402886
* Exploiting Novel Device Structures for Deep Ultraviolet Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Hongxing Jiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 324,919.00

Abstract Title: Exploiting Novel Device Structures for Deep Ultraviolet Emitters
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of chip-scale deep ultraviolet (DUV) light
sources is required for a wide range of applications such as probing intrinsic
fluorescence in a protein, medical equipment/personnel decontamination, and
photocatalysis. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of Light Emitting Diodes
(LEDs) operating in the region around 250 nm is still quite low (below 3%).
Currently, AlGaN semiconductors are default choice for the DUV light sources.
The poor p-type conductivity of Al-rich AlGaN alloys is the major obstacle that
limits the EQE of these devices. Significant advances in the EQE of DUV emitters
will require the exploitation of disruptive device concepts. This project aims
to explore DUV device structures that exploiting new p-type layer strategies to
overcome the intrinsic problem of low p-type conductivity in Al-rich AlGaN. The
proposed efforts would not only yield breakthroughs in methods for the
fabrication of DUV light emitting diodes (LEDs) with improved EQE, but would
also lead to technological advancements in novel photonic materials and devices
for a range of applications. Through the involvement in the research, students
will be trained in the areas of nano-fabrication techniques, material/device
design and processing using the state-of-the-art experimental facilities. The
project will provide junior researchers with opportunities to participate in
conferences and workshops, and gain exposure to the real world applications of
DUV photonic devices. Educational activities will also include the integration
of undergraduates into research via senior design projects and required project
lab courses. Outreach activities include having the PIs serve as mentors of the
prestigious Clark Scholars to bring an appreciation of science and technology to
highly gifted high school students from around the nation and to increase
diversity in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DUV
emitter layer structure is based on hexagonal boron-nitride (hBN) and AlGaN
heterostructure bandgap and doping engineering. By implementing the direct wide
bandgap and highly conductive hBN p-type layer strategy in nitride DUV emitters,
p-type conductivities and DUV transparency of the electron blocking layer and
p-type contact layer will be dramatically increased. This will significantly
improve the free hole injection and EQE, reduce the operating voltage and heat
generation, and increase the device operating lifetime. Control over the p-type
electrical resistivity and conductivity type of epitaxial h-BN films will be
established by in-situ doping via MOCVD growth. DUV emitter structures
incorporating p-type hBN will be grown on sapphire with thick AlN templates to
reduce the dislocation density. Ohmic contacts processing including annealing
conditions will be optimized. DUV LEDs will be fabricated and their I-V, L-I
characteristics, and wall plug efficiency will be correlated with the device
structures and fabrication processes.