* 1402163
* Searching for missing matter in the Universe using advanced computer simulations and synthetic observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Devin Silvia, Silvia                  Devin          W
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Devin Silvia is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Michigan State
University. From the moment the first star ended its life in a catastrophic
supernova explosion, elements heavier than hydrogen and helium have been
"polluting" the once pristine gas left over from the Big Bang. Understanding the
nature of this evolution from a simple universe containing only hydrogen and
helium to the one we know today, rich with the elements that have become the
building blocks of life, is of great interest to the astrophysics community.
However, accurately modeling and understanding this process has proven
difficult. The research program to be carried out by Dr. Silvia is aimed at
solving one particular mystery: why does some of the matter in the Universe
appear to go missing as a function of cosmic time? While observational
astronomers have endeavored to locate this matter using the powerful Hubble
Space Telescope (HST), much of it continues to elude detection. Dr. Silvia will
employ state-of-art cosmological simulations capable of accurately tracking the
matter contained in the Universe and calculating its physical properties. By
using the results of these simulations to produce synthetic observations that
mimic those captured by the HST, Dr. Silvia will be able to answer the question:
where is the missing matter is hiding? Alongside this research program, Dr.
Silvia is driven to address the apparent lack of diversity within STEM
disciplines by developing and teaching a new astronomy course that will leverage
innovative educational practices shown to increase learners' identification as
members of the STEM community. The course will also serve to provide learners
with an enduring understanding of scientific topics and the ability to think
critically about observed phenomena.

A significant obstacle in understanding the chemical evolution of the
intergalactic medium is turning observations of quasar absorption lines into
reliable estimates of metal content. In an effort to address this obstacle, the
primary objectives of this work will be to characterize the mass content and
ionization properties of the intergalactic and circumgalactic media and use the
results to interpret current observations and inform future ones. The PI will
meet these objectives by carrying out a suite of state-of-the art cosmological
simulations that employ a newly-developed chemical network solver, enabling non-
equilibrium calculations of the ionization structure of the intergalactic and
circumgalactic media. Using completed simulations, the PI will leverage a novel
technique for generating synthetic quasar absorption line spectra and compare
the results to observations from the Hubble Space Telescope's Cosmic Origins
Spectrograph. The PI will then compile a catalog that links spectral features to
the physical conditions that generated them. Alongside this research program,
the PI plans to design and teach a new course for first year undergraduate
students that focuses on topics in astronomy and is built using the elements of
inquiry-based learning. Distinct from traditional teaching practices, an
inquiry-based approach to teaching and learning can be very effective at
creating an enduring understanding of scientific topics and increasing the
likelihood that students of all backgrounds identify as members of the STEM
community.