* 1402140
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Rodrigo Olarte, Olarte                  Rodrigo        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's
scientific workforce of the future. This fellowship to Dr. Rodrigo Olarte
supports a research and training plan to understand genetic elements, called
cryptic alleles, in the fungus Aspergillus flavus which can contaminate foods by
producing aflatoxins. Research results are expected to be useful in formulating
better control strategies that target the reduction or elimination of aflatoxin
contamination in agriculturally important crops susceptible to A. flavus
infection such as corn, cotton and peanut. The host institution for this
fellowship is the University of Minnesota and the sponsoring scientists are Drs.
Georgiana May and Yaniv Brandvain. The Fellow?s training goals include learning
mathematical modeling techniques and applying ecological experimentation to
determine the origin, composition and distribution of the cryptic alleles in a
global context. Educational outreach activities include training and mentoring
undergraduates in programs, such as the Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program.

Fungi produce a wealth of metabolic compounds but little is known of the
evolutionary origin or ecological importance of these diverse compounds. In this
research, aflatoxin production by A. flavus is being used as a model system to
investigate the ecological factors affecting the evolution of microbial toxins.
Cryptic alleles are suggested to have arisen early in the evolution of the
species and since been maintained in A. flavus populations for long periods of
time. This research aims to understand the functional significance of these
cryptic alleles as they pertain to the competiveness of isolates expressing
quantitative and qualitative variation in mycotoxin production. The overall goal
of this project is to gain a better understanding of how ecological and
evolutionary processes affect variation at the aflatoxin gene cluster and
population-level variation in A. flavus.