* 1402780
* RUI: Numerical Simulations of Black Holes, Neutron Stars and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Baumgarte, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Einstein's theory of general relativity describes all gravitational interactions
in the universe, ranging from the force that pulls a falling apple to the Earth,
to the expansion of the Universe itself. The equations of general relativity -
called Einstein's equations - are sufficiently complex so that they can be
solved exactly only under very special circumstances. To understand the merger
of two black holes, for example, and to predict the signals that we hope to
observe soon with the LIGO gravitational wave observatory, requires computer
simulations. This award supports research efforts aimed at developing methods
and approaches for such computer simulations. In particular, the focus is on
methods that are well suited for the self-consistent treatment of the
gravitational forces in supernova explosions. These extremely energetic
explosions play an important role in the evolution of the universe, even the
development of life, lead to the formation of black holes or neutron stars, and
yet we still lack a detailed understanding of the explosion mechanism.

The scientific goals of this research effort in numerical relativity include the
development and implementation of numerical algorithms for the solution of
Einstein's equations of general relativity, as well as their application in the
numerical modeling of relativistic objects, in particular neutron stars and
black holes. The focus of this work is methods in spherical polar coordinates,
which have distinct advantages over Cartesian coordinates for many applications,
including gravitational collapse, accretion disks, and supernova calculations.
This is done in collaboration with colleagues at the Max-Planck-Institute for
Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, on including these methods in relativistic
astrophysics simulations with a state-of-the-art treatment of microphysical
phenomena. Among the long-term goals are supernova simulations that adopt both
these advanced microphysics methods and a self-consistent treatment of
relativistic gravitational fields. These results will advance our understanding
of these processes and will predict their observational signatures in neutrino,
electromagnetic and gravitational wave signals. The latter will be important for
the new generation of gravitational wave laser interferometers, including the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO).