* 1402883
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Matan Shelomi, Shelomi                 Matan
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 176,624.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Dr. Matan Shelomi supports a research and training plan for
analyzing plant cell wall degrading enzymes in leaf-feeding insects. The host
institution for this fellowship is the Max Planck Institute of Chemical Ecology
in Jena, Germany, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Yannick Pauchet. From a
scientific viewpoint, how and when insects acquired the genes required for
breaking down plant cell walls, an ability found primarily in microbes, is an
intersting question: were they present in a common ancestor or were they
acquired from microbes? From a practical viewpoint, leaf-feeding insects are
common pests and discovering the chemical basis for their digestion could
provide avenues for control. The same enzymes are also used in human industry,
from wastewater treatment and biofuel development to papermaking and juice
production. Insect-derived enzymes could be more powerful than extant microbial
chemicals and leaf-feeding insects are the most promising source for such
enzymes. The region around Jena is home to several technology incubators like
the Innovation and Founders' Laboratory for New Materials and Processes, which
are expected to expedite societal applications for the research findings. Thie
fellowship is funded jointly by the Office of International and Integrative
Activities and the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

The research objectives of the fellowship are to inventory the digestive system
of the stick and leaf insects (Phasmatodea), starting with the model species
Peruphasma schultei, Medauroidea extradentata, and Ramulus artemis, for
endogenous plant cell wall degrading enzymes, with an emphasis on
endopolygalacturonases (pectinases). On a diet solely of leaves, phasmids are
able to reach large sizes in a short period of time, including that of the
world's longest insect, the half-meter-long Phobaetica chani. Given the large
amount of lignocellulosic matter they ingest, the ability to digest plant cell
walls completely would provide an obvious nutritional benefit and fitness boost
to the phasmids. The study further investigates the evolution of plant cell
degrading enzymes in these insects with the potential for biotechnolgy
applications.