* 1402621
* 7th Africa Materials Research Society (A-MRS) Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Sossina Haile, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 11/30/2014
* USD 40,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation, Division of
Materials Research will provided funds to support the participation of US
students and faculty at the 2013 Africa Materials Research Society Conference to
be held at the United Nations Conference Center (UNCC) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
This meeting is comprised of a series of symposia, workshops and short courses.
Each symposium will last 1-3 days, with 5-6 parallel sessions running at all
times. Most sessions will be technical, with international and African leaders
in their respective field making extended presentations and students making
shorter presentation or presenting posters. The workshops and short courses will
be more pedagogical in structure and content than the regular symposia. The
topical areas of the conference include: &lt;br/&gt;Materials for Energy;
Materials for Life, Health and the Environment; Basic Materials and NanoScience;
Computational Material Science; Manufacturing; Metallurgy, Foundry, Processing
and Infrastructure; and Materials Education and
Networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide funds that will enable the participation of
US students and faculty at the 2013 Africa Materials Research Society
Conference. The conference will: &lt;br/&gt;- Promote excellence in materials
research in Africa and between Africa and the US. &lt;br/&gt;- Build a network
of US-based materials researchers who are capable of working in multi-national
and multi-disciplinary collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;- Promote information and
resource sharing, exchanges, and development goals in academic, industrial, and
national laboratory settings. &lt;br/&gt;- Demonstrate how materials research
contributes significantly to strategies for social equity and poverty
alleviation in a constructive and sustainable manner. &lt;br/&gt;- Encourage
downstream materials manufacturing and value-adding activities, with a focus on
applications in energy, health, construction, transportation, biology, and
electronics. &lt;br/&gt;- Strengthen facilities and other resources for
materials science education, focusing on the higher education sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US participants will include a significant percentage
of women and underrepresented minorities.