* 1402733
* Crystal Isomorphism and Nanodomain Approach toward Novel Ferroelectric Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Morton Litt, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Novel ferroelectric behaviors, namely, narrow single and double polarization
loops, have been observed in semicrystalline polar polymers and are promising
for advanced electrical applications. Based on recent finding from
poly(vinylidene fluoride)-based random copolymers, it is proposed that
repeating-unit isomorphism having bulky comonomers inside ferroelectric crystals
is an effective strategy to expand interchain distance and pin nanosized
ferroelectric domains (i.e., nanodomains). In this proposal, the hypothesis of
pinned nanodomains via crystal isomorphism is employed to rationally design new
ferroelectric nylon copolymers and testify the working mechanism. First, nylon
11 random copolymers with various n-nylon comonomers will be synthesized to
mismatch amide groups in the crystal, disrupting hydrogen-bonding interactions
for enhanced ferroelectricity. Second, N- or C-methylation will be further
employed in nylon 11 random copolymers to expand the interchain distance and
facilitate faster dipole switching. Third, nanodomains will be pinned either
physically (by larger comonomers) or chemically (by UV-crosslinkable comonomers)
in ferroelectric nylon crystals to realize narrow polarization loops. If
successful, this study will not only confirm the mechanism of pinned nanodomains
responsible for novel ferroelectric behaviors, but also provide better polymeric
materials for various electroactive applications.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Electroactive polymers with high field response are smart soft materials, which
are highly attractive for numerous electrical applications in electrical energy
storage, smart actuators/artificial muscles, and energy harvesting. However,
comparing with electroactive ceramic materials, current electroactive polymers
show inferior electric field responses. This impairs their usage in practical
applications, despite the superior processability, light weight, and low-cost
characteristics for polymers. Stimulated by recent research results, this
project aims to realize a nanoconfinement effect on electric responsiveness of
semicrystalline polar polymers via rational polymer design, synthesis, and
electrical property characterization. If successful, these novel electroactive
polymers will be able to achieve ultrahigh electric field responses and the
above-mentioned applications will become practically feasible to benefit
society. In addition to the scientific research activities, this project also
provides a broad education and training platform for minority and under-
represented high school students, and undergraduate and graduate young
professionals. An interactive feedback educational theme, involving faculty
members, graduate students, undergraduates and high school students, will be
implemented and emphasized throughout the proposed project to enhance the
awareness of nano-science and technology of polymers in the general community.