* 1402466
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A phylogenetic study of speciation in whirligig beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kelly Miller, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,606.00

Whirligig beetles are a family of aquatic beetles containing approximately 1,000
species. All whirligig beetles live in very similar ways, yet exhibit a great
morphological diversity. What can explain the diversity of species in this
family of beetles, who all behave and live in similar ways? This research
attempts to establish if selection on reproductive traits has been a major
factor in the evolution of this group leading to its diversity of species. The
investigation will look at numerous reproductively selected features in these
beetles, then using a phylogenetic tree, compare related groups to see if
branches of the tree with more species, also show a larger number of selected
traits. One of the traits to be studied is sperm shape. Whirligig beetle sperm
show a diversity of forms and the reconstructed evolution of sperm in this group
will be compared to the rate of speciation. Selection on reproductive traits has
long been promoted as a powerful force for creating new species. However, few
studies supporting this idea have looked at large evolutionary scales. The study
of sperm within this group can be used to test previously established hypotheses
about sperm and female reproductive tract co-evolution, as well as make known
the diversity of whirligig beetle sperm, including several types of conjugation
and a variety of sizes. This project will train graduate student in evolutionary
biology and this student will mentor several undergraduate students in
systematics and arthropod curation. Identified specimens will be accessioned at
UNM and included in a publicly accessible database enhancing infrastructure for
research and education.