* 1402249
* Rare and Exotic Nonlinear Effects in Cold Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Maxim Olchanyi, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 06/30/2017
* USD 210,000.00

Symmetries provide both means for unification of otherwise disparate branches of
science and a language for communication between scientists and non-scientists.
Two symmetries are prominent in this project: multidimensional kaleidoscopes and
the quantum-mechanical supersymmetry that relates the motion with obstacles to
the motion in free space. Through these symmetries some real physical effects---
prohibition of chemical processes and slowdown of relaxation in waveguide-
confined gases, transparency of solitary waves for other waves, etc---are
tightly intertwined with tiling with polygons, Platonic solids, and cat-eye
reflectors. The PI's presentation at the "Meet the Scientists!" at the Science
Discovery Museum, entitled "Kaleidoscopes, tilings, Newton's cradles, and atoms
at a billionth degree above absolute zero", scheduled for the beginning of May
2014, has effectively the same content as one of the three parts of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constitutes an indispensable
pedagogical tool for training undergraduate and masters-level students. Each of
the three sub-projects, while touching upon a range of advanced methods of
modern theoretical physics, from Lie groups to quantum mechanical supersymmetry,
does so gently, dealing with objects as graspable as ordinary differential
equations. The sub-projects are also modular, divisible into several year-long
smaller projects, and so ideal for an honors or MS thesis. Many qualitative
ideas developed in the course of preparation for the project greatly contributed
to the development of an undergraduate-oriented
book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear physics is famous for its archipelagoes of
small under- or unexplored islands. The ultracold atomic gases are the ideal
vehicle for visiting such islands. The nonlinear phenomena considered in this
project are as follows: a protocol for an experimental generation of a Gross-
Pitaevskii breather, in a waveguide for cold attractive bosons. (A further study
will address the integrability-induced robustness of the chemical composition of
one-dimensional Bose gases.); an analysis of the transparency of the Andreev-
Bogoliubov-de Gennes BCS soliton to quasi-particles, using information
previously acquired in a study of transparency of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes
equations for known integrable partial differential equations. At the moment, it
is not clear what physical phenomenon the BCS soliton transparency is supposed
to enable, with the primary candidate being the Andreev reflection. A systematic
study of quantum and classical cases of the three body scattering without
diffraction associated with non-crystallographic and exceptional
crystallographic root systems (kaleidoscopic mirror arangements) will also be
performed. A particular sequence of mass triplets-with ( sqrt(5) + 2) : 1 :
(sqrt(5) + 2) being the first nontrivial member that behave similarly to the
Newton cradle will be identified. Here, the momentum distribution remains
invariant under three-body collisions. The plan includes a systematic molecular-
dynamics study of many-body mass mixtures, with masses controlled by optical
lattices, with an expectation that the relaxation time will show peaks at the
"extended Newton cradle" mass ratios.