* 1402074
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Colin Kremer, Kremer                  Colin          T
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Colin T. Kremer involves
mathematical modeling of the evolutionary responses of marine organisms to
changing global oceans. The host institutions for this fellowship are Yale and
Princeton Universities, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. David Vasseur and
Jorge Sarmiento. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine phytoplankton (tiny plant-like
organisms)contribute roughly half of all annual primary productivity on earth
and form the basis of marine food webs. Rising ocean temperatures affect the
growth of marine phytoplankton and thus are having effects on global nutrient
cycles. To survive changing environmental conditions, organisms must adapt or
migrate. This research investigates interactions between ecology and evolution,
that is, competition and migration versus mutation and selection, that govern
the distribution and abundance of phytoplankton communities. It uses existing
numerical ocean circulation models describing physical, chemical, and even
ecological processes in the ocean but adds the role of evolutionary processes.
The research synthesizes evolutionary theory, marine ecology, and physical
oceanography to study the response of phytoplankton to environmental change
using and modifying existing models and exposes the Fellow to interdisciplinary
research and training, including career development activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results are of interest and are being shared with both
scientific and general audiences. Knowledge gained from research on effects on
nutrient cycling and food webs in changing ocean environments can inform policy
making. Other outcomes include interactive educational materials and outreach
efforts focusing on explaining how scientists use mathematical and computational
tools to study the natural world.