* 1402911
* Collaborative Research: CybeR-Enabled Demand-Interactive Transit for the  Next-Generation Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

Being a mode of collective transport, transit tends to thrive in densely
populated areas. In the US, unfortunately, suburb sprawl has made the condition
progressively unfavorable for transit development since the 1950s. To reverse
the trend of declining transit use in the US requires a concerted effort of
planning, policy-making and engineering. Critical to this effort is to transform
the way by which transit systems are designed and operated. In order to succeed
in lower density areas where traditional transit systems fail, the next-
generation transit systems must better interact with passengers, more closely
cater to their demands, and operate efficiently to minimize costs. This award
investigates a new kind of transit system called the CybeR-Enabled Demand-
Interactive Transit system that takes into account these needs. The knowledge
and insights gained from this project benefits the design and implementation of
next-generation transit systems. The proposed evaluation framework, including a
smartphone-based transit routing and data-collection tool, offers a platform to
engage transit users, agencies and students. The passenger GPS traces collected
in this project will form a large crowd-sourced database of high-fidelity
transit demands that does not exist today. This wealth of the new data source
will benefit researchers, policy-makers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create
theories and methods to characterize, analyze, operationalize, and evaluate the
CybeR-Enabled Demand-Interactive Transit system. This system can be viewed as a
hybrid system that integrates traditional fixed-route service and demand-
responsive transit. The research activities are organized under three interwoven
thrusts. The first thrust addresses the characterization and strategic design of
the proposed system. The second thrust investigates mathematical problems
arising from the need to operationalize the system which are: (1) the vehicle
routing problem that determines the on-demand vehicle itineraries according to
passenger requests; (2) the tactical design problem that coordinates schedules
and adapts services to demands; and (3) the trip planning problem that generates
optimal trip guidance for passengers using a data-driven and simulation-based
framework that is based on a discrete-event simulation platform and a
smartphone-based transit trip planning application known as TransitGenie.
Different system designs and operational policies will be evaluated using case
studies, which will be created from synthesized transit supply and demand data
obtained from open sources and local transit agencies. TransitGenie will be
instrumented with the ability to collect de-identified GPS traces from its
users.