* 1402746
* Biennial African School on Fundamental Physics and its Applications at the Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal, August 3-23, 2014
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

Overview: Particle physics considers a vast range of scientific questions, from
subatomic to cosmic scales. These studies are relevant to the understanding of
the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting fraction of a second
just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. To meet
the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new detectors and
accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and analytical
methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader impact for the
training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement of
technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to introduce the science
and the needed research tools for this research to university students in sub-
Saharan Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This award provides
partial support for US students and lecturers to attend the third "Biennial
African School on Fundamental Physics and its Applications" to be held at the
Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar, Senegal, August 3-23, 2014. There will be
four main topics at the school: 1) theoretical physics, 2) experimental sub-
atomic physics, 3) accelerators and technologies and 4) analysis and grid
computing. The contents will be aimed primarily at doctoral students and on
students finishing their last year of university studies, but young researchers
will also be encouraged to apply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
school will serve as an opportunity for US students and professional physicists
to interact with their counterparts in sub-Saharan Africa and to form
collaborations and partnerships.