* 1402266
* EAGER: An Exploratory Study of Multi-Hazard Management through Multi-Source Integration of Physical and Social Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2017
* USD 308,000.00

Natural and man-made disasters can cause significant material damages and human
suffering. For example, Superstorm Sandy of 2012 is estimated to have caused
more than $68 billion in damages and killed at least 286 people in seven
countries. Improving the preparation for, response to, and recovery from
disasters can reduce damages, relieve human suffering, and speed up recovery.
Among disasters, a multi-hazard is a sequence of disasters in which the first
disaster causes the subsequent disasters, making it far more difficult for
emergency response teams to handle all of them. For example, the March 11, 2011,
Tohoku, Japan, earthquake triggered an unprecedented tsunami, which led to
flooding at, and partial meltdown of, the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant.
A more frequent example of multi-hazards is landslides, which can be triggered
by many causes including earthquakes, rainfall, and man-made environmental
changes.

While the detection of a single disaster usually only requires one kind of
dedicated sensor, for example, seismographs can detect earthquakes reliably,
multi-hazards often require a combination of various kinds of sensors for the
detection of the multiple events in the sequence. Indeed, the detection of
multi-events in general and multi-hazards in particular is a non-trivial problem
due to the various kinds of events involved and the large number of combinations
that make offline combinatorial analysis impractical. In the case of landslides,
their detection is complicated further by the several possible and unrelated
causes of landslides (e.g., earthquake and rainfall), each requiring a different
kind of sensor.

In this project, the team is building a landslide detection system, called
LITMUS, that integrates data from two physical sensors -- USGS Global
Seismographic Network (GSN), NASA Tropical Rainfall Monitoring Mission (TRMM) --
with data from pervasive social media platforms. This integration of multiple
heterogeneous sensors in LITMUS is an illustrative example of successfully
applying big data software tools and analytics techniques to solve real-world
problems. Specifically, the team is extending geo-tagging to relevant data
items, which are filtered in several stages to reduce noise and false positives,
and applying machine learning, information retrieval, and semantic web
techniques to each data stream. Finally, filtered social media data are being
cross-referenced with physical events from the same geo-location to generate
supporting evidence for landslide detection. A LITMUS prototype has been
detecting more landslides around the world than traditional landslide reporting
systems: tests with live streaming data show that the combined result is a list
of landslide events that has included the USGS authoritative list, plus many
other confirmed landslides around the world.