* 1402065
* CAREER: Coral Health Genomics: Transcriptome Analysis of two Caribbean Species and their Algal Symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Monica Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,645.00

Coral reefs are shallow benthic communities that harbor the highest biodiversity
in tropical seas. These ecosystems are endangered due to global climate change
and anthropogenic pressure from coastal areas. Coral health has been decaying at
unprecedented rates in the past decades and is therefore in need of immediate
attention. A healthy reef requires a stable coral-algal symbiosis. Thus,
understanding the processes required for this mutualism is fundamental for coral
reef preservation. Examining how corals respond to bacterial pathogens can also
shed light onto how host-pathogen interactions may be the same or differ from
processes that affect symbiotic interactions. The use of high throughput gene
expression profiling (transcriptomics) is a relatively new genomics approach
that promises to enhance the study of these interactions. This project will
examine the transcriptome as it varies from natural (i.e., healthy) to disturbed
states (i.e., bleached or diseased) in two coral-algal symbioses from the
Caribbean: the corals Acropora palmata and Montastraea faveolata and their
dominant dinoflagellate symbionts. The outcome of this research will contribute
to the study of symbiosis as well as to applied fields such as conservation and
management, including the development of coral health diagnostics. This project
will train underrepresented minorities at the University of California, Merced.
This new campus offers higher education and research opportunities to the
disadvantaged Central Valley communities. This educational effort will be
enhanced by a partnership with the DOE Joint Genome Institute to develop a
course in Genome Biology. Students will also have the opportunity to be involved
in environmental podcasting through the UC Merced website in three languages
representative of the Central Valley populations (English, Spanish and Hmong).
The project will also continue with successful outreach activities in
collaboration the California Academy of Sciences through teacher training
workshops.

