* 1402570
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Jacob Allgeier, Allgeier                Jacob          E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Jacob Allgeier supports research to measure, monitor,
and improve current efforts to protect endangered salmon in the Pacific
Northwest and provide tools for sustainability efforts elsewhere. The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Washington, and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Daniel Schindler (University of Washington) and
Chris Jordan (NOAA, Northwest Fisheries Center). Training goals for the Fellow
are to learn cutting-edge modeling techniques for predicting ecosystem function
and population sustainability and measuring effectively river restoration. A
plan to broaden participation consists of an outreach program for eighth grade
students including groups under-represented in science about the connections
between humans, ecosystems, and sustainability. An interactive website permits
students to track migrating fish from ocean to spawning grounds; and personal
in-classroom teaching modules allow the students to discover the various factors
that impact salmon lifecycles.

Restoring degraded habitat represents a critical national goal as it has direct
consequences for the sustainability of important ecosystem services, for
example, fisheries, timber, recreation. Current restoration efforts for
endangered salmonid species throughout the Columbia River Basin account for ~88%
of all U.S. river restorations. This research uses animal movement to assess
restoration by linking feedbacks between ecosystem function and habitat
characteristics. Existing datasets of spatially explicit individual fish
movement behavior of more than 150,000 individuals of two endangered salmonids
across streams at various stages of restoration are being used to develop
population models and quantitative metrics for assessing watershed restoration
efficacy. The research promises to link population, community and ecosystem
ecology through spatial dynamics and advance ecological theory by enhancing
understanding of the ecological consequences of individual variation. Societal
impacts include implementing the research findings into the adaptive management
framework being applied throughout the Columbia River basin.