* 1402183
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Chad Niederhuth, Niederhuth              Chad           E
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2017
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Chad E. Niederhuth is "Epigenomic Engineering in Soybeans
to Unlock Cryptic Genetic Variation" The host institution for the fellowship is
the University of Georgia and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Robert J. Schmitz.

Genomes possess an additional layer of information found not in the underlying
DNA sequence, but in the modification of cytosine residues by methylation. As
DNA methylation is a mechanism of regulating gene expression, it sits at the
boundary between genotype and phenotype. Variants in the methylation status, or
epialleles, not only affect the phenotype, but can also be heritable, being
stably inherited across multiple generations without alteration to the
underlying DNA sequence. Together with the proteins that make up chromatin
structure, DNA methylation is part of a code that has come to be called the
epigenome. Unlocking the nature of this code and finding mechanisms to
manipulate it will add additional tools for breeders to translate discovery to
application towards improving plant health and production. Training objectives
include plant genetics, DNA methylation, epigenomics, bioinformatics, and
quantitative genetics. Broader impacts include the mentoring and training of
students, including outreach programs to underrepresented groups. This will
include local outreach and aiding in the development of new courses.

This research proposes to uncover the links between methylation and phenotypes
by using a multipronged approach to disrupt DNA methylation in soybeans followed
by identification of methylation variants through whole-genome bisulfite
sequencing. As part of this work, novel experimental populations of soybean for
mapping epigenetic quantitative trait loci associated with phenotypic variation
will be developed. In addition, new methods of targeted epigenome engineering
will be used to confirm these associations and enable the use of the epigenome
for plant improvement.