* 1402041
* I-Corps:  Holographic NxN Optical Switch for Data Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Pierre Blanche, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This team is developing an optical switch for optical data communication based
on holographic patterns loaded onto Micro Opto Electro Mechanical Systems
(MOMES). At the nodes of a fiber optic network, and increasingly appearing in
massive data centers, optical switches dynamically redirect the output beam of
one fiber to the input of another one, establishing a communication link between
two points. The current technology for optical switches (3D MOEMS) employs an
array of millimeter size mirrors on gimbal supports to steer the light beam from
one fiber to another. The principal barriers to the deployment of these optical
switches have been their cost, inadequate switching speeds, insufficient number
of ports, and reliability. In the switch developed by this team, the light is
not reflected but diffracted toward a predefined direction. This principle of
diffraction allows the interconnection of any of the input fiber ports to any of
the output fiber ports, making the switch truly non-blocking. This also allows
for a faster reconfiguration speed, about 100 times faster than the current
technology, enhanced robustness and scalability to a large number of ports. Due
to the nature of the diffractive technology, the proposed switch has the added
benefits of lower power consumption and price per port than commercially
available alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the introduction of mobile
devices such as smartphones and tablet PCs the need for new connections has
increased dramatically. Applications such as cloud computing, videoconferencing,
social media, online gaming, and video-on-demand rely on high bandwidth to
provide content from the data center to the end user. Any device that can assist
in increasing available bandwidth and lowering costs has a strong chance to be
commercially successful. Current switch technology is not sufficiently matching
the growth rate due to their speed, power consumption, and scalability
limitations. In order to meet the challenge of a faster and more cost effective
Internet, the team has demonstrated a new type of optical switch that can
perform 100 times faster than the current state of the art technologies. The
system they propose will also offer improved reliability and scalability.