* 1402231
* Autoignition Characteristics and Chemistry of Surrogate Diesel Fuels at Conditions Relevant to Advanced Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Chih-Jen Sung, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2019
* USD 325,000.00

1402231&lt;br/&gt;Sung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes
to develop comprehensive chemical kinetic models for diesel fuel combustion. The
methodology will also be important to fuel research for many other applications,
including aviation, propulsion, industrial combustion, power generation, and
several other chemical processes. The chemical kinetic models and the underlying
methodology will be widely disseminated through the principal investigator's
research website, presentations, and publications. The PI's research group
participates in the NSF GK-12 program, where local high school students
experience ongoing research through laboratory tours and presentations, to
promote interest in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-year research
program is proposed to fill in gaps in fundamental combustion data on fuel
components and mixtures relevant to diesel fuel that is commonly proposed for
use in next-generation engines. These newly-acquired data, along with the
available literature data, will be used to develop and validate predictive
chemical kinetic models (in collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory) to predict combustion chemistry at engine relevant conditions.
Specifically, autoignition characteristics of lean-to-stoichiometric mixtures of
various fuels will be investigated at pressures and temperatures in the ranges
of 10-75 bar and 600-1100 K, respectively. Rapid compression machines will be
used to determine ignition delay while species evolution will be measured using
in-situ mid-IR absorption spectroscopy and ex-situ gas sampling. The outcome of
the proposed study will greatly help reduce the design cycle for improved engine
efficiency and reduced emissions.