* 1402342
* I-Corps:  Flash in Action for High-Performance and Low-Energy Web Content Storage
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses the use of flash memory as the foundation for multi-
tiered storage systems. Digital content (e.g., text, image, sound, video, etc.)
has experienced explosive growth. Internet media providers (e.g., Facebook,
Flicker, YouTube, Hulu, Netflix, etc.) are facing huge I/O demand for delivering
content. And, due to the increasing video traffic on the web, backend storage
servers not only need increased storage capacity but also increased storage
bandwidth to serve the web clients in a timely manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hard disk drives (HDDs) have advanced in capacity per
dollar while main memory (in the form of DRAM) has advanced in speed per dollar.
Recently, flash memory technology has been getting attention from industry due
to its significant cost decrease. Flash-based Solid-State Drives (SSDs) are now
at the price point where they can bridge the capacity-speed gap between HDDs and
DRAM. In addition, energy consumption of flash memory is far less than the two
traditional storage technologies. This project proposes that multi-tiered
storage architecture is a compelling vehicle to optimize capacity, speed, and
energy consumption of storage by exploiting the advantages of all three
technologies &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storage devices make up nearly 40% of the
energy consumption of a typical data center -- consequently, storage servers
should not only have high capacity and deliver high performance, but also be
energy efficient. From an environmental perspective, it is extremely important
to devise solutions that can reduce the carbon footprint of data centers. A
multi-tiered, web storage system that uses flash memory for caching is a
promising solution for performance, capacity, and energy efficiency. This
project's technology presents an opportunity for CDN providers and web service
providers to optimize the performance and energy efficiency of their storage
systems. While the primary customers of this technology will be corporations
that run a large number of web servers, there is an environmental benefit from
the carbon emission reduction of the data centers run by such big web
corporations.