* 1402978
* In Situ Characterization of Effect of Rapid Thermal Cycling During Additive Manufacturing on Deformation-Induced Transformations and Micro-Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Todd Palmer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2018
* USD 325,000.00

This award supports fundamental research on additive manufacturing of metallic
materials, in which the primary goal is to uncover the relationships between
thermal processing cycles, microstructure, and mechanical properties in parts
made through additive manufacturing. In the laser-based additive manufacturing
techniques studied here, a powder feedstock material is delivered to a desired
location, and a laser locally melts the powder to fuse it to the material below,
building up a component one layer at a time. The thermal cycles generated by the
subsequent laser passes affect the microstructure of the underlying material,
and therefore the mechanical properties (e.g., strength and ductility) of the
component. Here, two materials systems will be examined: a titanium alloy that
undergoes diffusion-based phase transformation upon cooling, and a stainless
steel alloy that undergoes diffusionless deformation-induced phase
transformation upon mechanical loading. This research aims to: elucidate the
effect of thermal history on the local microstructure and mechanical properties
in additive manufactured materials, and develop physically based plasticity
models that take into account the effect of thermal history, resulting
microstructure, and microstructural evolution on the local plasticity
properties.

Additive manufacturing has great potential to transform U.S. manufacturing,
allowing for the production of custom-designed structural components for
countless applications where the cost to develop tools for forging, casting, or
forming of metal components is not warranted for the small number required
(e.g., replacement parts for aging Department of Defense airplanes, ships, and
submarines) in an economical procedure with less waste material than traditional
subtractive manufacturing. Fundamental research will lead to the development of
fully integrated computational models in which the processing parameters (e.g.,
laser power, path, and speed) are determined to produce an end net shape
component with specified mechanical properties, providing the infrastructure for
a design space with practically no limitations on geometries that can be
fabricated.