* 1402756
* Engineering a DNA-based nanodevice to enable cytosolic transport of enzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Silvia Muro, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1402756 &lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Muro,
Silvia &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College
Park&lt;br/&gt;Title: Engineering a DNA-based nanodevice to enable cytosolic
transport of enzymes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at designing tools
to enable safe, specific, and efficient access into the interior of live cells,
which is elusive to current technologies. This is achieved by leveraging on the
material that cells naturally use to store their genetic information and re-
engineering this material into tiny devices capable to interact and be
transported into cells. The project encompasses characterization of these
devices, evaluation of their interaction with live cells, and investigation of
their effects. By providing access into live cells, this technology has a very
broad potential: it can be used to study how cells function and also to
manipulate their activity, which is important to enable research, to exploit
cells as factories and machines, and to design new diagnostic and therapeutic
tools. This has relevance to advance fundamental knowledge in a variety of
disciplines, such as molecular and cellular biology, biomaterials,
bioengineering, nanotechnology, etc., and to impact biotechnological production,
biopharmaceutical development, and medical applications. The fundamental
concepts, methods, and tools developed are also integrated into educational and
training components, which involve high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, hence, contributing to training future scientists, engineers,
educators, and other workforce. Products of this project are used for scientific
divulgation to the specialized and broader community, as well as interaction
with industry, to maximize its fundamental and translational impact at a local,
national, and global level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to design and optimize a DNA-based nanodevice to enable safe, specific, and
efficient access of biomolecules to the cell interior, which currently remains
elusive. This is achieved by exploiting newly discovered properties of DNA,
which arise from engineering this natural polymer into architectures different
from those available in nature. Briefly, DNA is engineered to acquire a
dendrimeric conformation functionalized to carry biomolecules and to target
specific cell-surface markers, which renders precise interaction with selected
cells, uptake via precise endocytic pathways, and cytosolic delivery with
transport to intracellular sites of choice. The three aims explored include
characterization of DNA systems with different biophysical properties,
evaluation of their interaction with cells, and investigation of their effects
in cells. This enables intracellular access of probes, modulatory agents,
diagnostics, therapeutics, etc., which has applications in fundamental research,
biotechnological production, biopharmaceutical development, and medical
applications. By leveraging on diverse disciplines such as cellular biology,
biotechnology, bioengineering, nanotechnology, and biopharmaceuticals, this
project also contributes tools, methods, and knowledge pertaining to these
areas. This is further integrated into educational and training components,
which involve high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students,&lt;br/&gt;contributing to training the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical,
and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the
Instrument Development for Biological Research Program of the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.