* 1402345
* Holographic angular-domain elastic scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Andrew Berger, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 406,404.00

1402345&lt;br/&gt;Berger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance:&lt;br/&gt;The
familiar saying "every journey begins with a single step" has a special meaning
in the human body: many large-scale changes are triggered by a few "early
responder" cells. Examples include allergic reactions, wound healing, and
cancerous transformations. Even when many "identical" cells are exposed to the
same conditions in a laboratory, some respond faster; such differences are clues
to understanding how an entire process unfolds, and perhaps how medicine can
influence it. Unfortunately, most methods of measuring cellular responses have
one of the following limitations: (a) they only calculate averages over many
cells, (b) they measure each cell only once, or (c) they inject chemicals that
alter the cells' function. In this project, a new microscope system will be
built without these limitations. Using only low levels of light, many individual
cells will be monitored for extended periods of time, producing chemical and
structural "histories" of the cells as they respond to stimuli. This measurement
technique will be useful for identifying early-responding cells and
understanding how they lead to large-scale behavior in the human body. In a
particular case of interest, a cellular transformation called "platelet
degranulation" will be studied because it is associated with increased levels of
neurological illness in HIV-positive
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a new biophotonic measurement
technique, holographic angular-domain elastic scattering (HADES), to studies of
single cells responding to stimuli. Angular scattering is highly sensitive to
the average size of organelles, and therefore to changes in cellular contents.
Holography will enable first-principles analysis of single cells? angular
scattering for the first time. The HADES technique will be combined in a
microscope with Raman spectroscopy, a complementary technique that provides
chemical specificity. This instrument will acquire morphological and chemical
"histories" of single cells as they undergo changes, for example (a) endothelial
cells receiving damage to their mitochondrial membranes, (b) immune cells being
stimulated, and (b) platelet cells undergoing degranulation, a process of
interest to research on HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND). Such
reactions can vary greatly from one cell to the next, and these differences can
be important parameters to study. Yet many analytical methods do not provide
single-cell data, and many that do so require exogenous labels that alter the
very process being studied. There is therefore a need for non-labeling, non-
destructive methods that can obtain detailed information repeatedly from single
cells, without affecting cellular function or viability. The HADES microscopy
platform will provide rich information for characterizing cellular
transformations and their variability on a cell-by-cell
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by two Programs-
(1) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2)
Biophotonics, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).