* 1402729
* Collaborative Research: Engineering a Multienzyme Complex with Synthetic and Mechanistic Goals.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edgardo Farinas, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 168,000.00

Because life at the molecular level is the chemistry of carbon containing
compounds, reactions that make carbon-carbon bonds are particularly valuable. A
challenge for making compounds from carbon is the formation of closely related
versions or isomers as products from a single reaction. The most closely related
isomers are called stereoisomers, otherwise identical compounds, but mirror
images of each other. The proposal envisions harnessing the power of biological
transformations for carbon-carbon bond formation that make single stereoisomers
for the production of practical compounds like pharmaceuticals. The reactions
would not only be exquisitely specific, but also environmentally friendly, or
"green" by using only natural materials and gentle conditions. The research plan
involves the re-engineering of proteins using recombinant DNA technology so that
they specifically make high-value products. The projects that make up the plan
will enable interdisciplinary training of graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and undergraduates in the fields of enzymology, molecular biology,
protein engineering, and chemical synthesis.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Frank Jordan and Edgardo T. Farinas, of Rutgers
University-Newark Campus and the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
respectively, to undertake enzymatic synthesis of chiral alpha-hydroxy ketones
for pharmaceuticals, and fine chemicals for synthesis of larger molecules. For
the first time the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex (OGHDc),
both human and E. coli, and 2-hydroxy-3-oxoadipate synthase from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (HOAS), will be engineered to create these compounds. The principal
investigators have already demonstrated that the first OGDHc component (E1o) is
an efficient biocatalyst using the physiological substrate. To enhance the power
of this carboligation reaction, they will: (1) Engineer residues from the
substrate binding site selected from X-ray structures of the E1os and HOAS to
accept a variety of substrates for efficient enzymatic synthesis of alpha-
hydroxy ketones, with high enantiomeric excess (ee) and yield; (2) Explore
alterations in the chemical nature of donor 2-oxo acid and of acceptor aldehyde.
(3) Advance the field of biocatalysis by engineering not only E1os but the
second E2o core component of OGDHc to accept unnatural substrates leading to
acyl-coenzyme A analogues participating in many metabolic pathways; (4) Explore
the mechanism of intra-E2o component acyl transfer to coenzyme A.