* 1402803
* Bidirectional Wireless Optoelectronic Device for Interfacing Brain Circuits
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Arto Nurmikko, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 420,002.00

Proposal CBET - 1402803 "Bidirectional Wireless Optoelectronic Device for
Interfacing Brain Circuits"

The proposed research aims to contribute to the field of neurotechnology by
providing a new class of brain "write-in"/ "read-out" devices with unique
attributes for bidirectional communication with neural circuits. By developing
the new technology for the broader scientific community, the project aims to
have an impact on basic neuroscience, especially for primates, while providing
an important piece of technology to development of future prospects for treating
severely neurologically impaired individuals via direct electronic
communications with brain circuits. The proposed technology is based by
innovative use of special types of optoelectronic materials combined with
advanced microdevice design and fabrication from microcircuits to mobile
microsystems. The PI seeks to develop a compact, combinatorial
stimulating/recording device system platform for accessing the brain circuits at
spatial and temporal specificity not possible before. Further, the entirely
wireless, high speed bidirectional electronic communication link to brain
circuits will enable testing the new capability in in-vivo mobile animal models
for fundamental brain science and neurotechnology development purposes.

Technical Description: The goal of this neuroengineering project is to enable
access to a crucial piece in our understanding of the brain, namely mapping of
targeted brain circuits to advance fundamental understanding of how units
composed of hundreds or thousands of individual neural cells act as a dynamical
system while computing e.g. a primate's planning of such motor action as
reaching and grasping coupled to perception and other sensory modalities. While
sub-centimeter imaging of the functioning brain can be visualized by functional
magnetic resonance equipment, we currently lack the full ability to track
network dynamics at the spatial and temporal level which defines the most
meaningful, yet simplest truly functional computational circuit. The term
"mesoscale" has been recently introduced to designate such basic modular
constructs which might contain hundreds to thousands of interacting neural
cells. The PI proposes to engineer a powerful wireless neurotechnology platform
to create a real-time link between targeted brain microcircuits for animal
models including non-human primates. The engineering core of the system is a
compact, lightweight photonic-microelectronic device, implanted and head-mounted
on a subject, with high-speed radio-frequency link to external information
processing systems. In summary the aim is to implement a broadband bidirectional
wireless neural interface for targeted brain areas of interest. Bidirectionality
implies simultaneous neural recording and neural stimulation. The proposed high-
speed wireless device technology accomplishes this task for simultaneous
recording and stimulation with spatial and temporal resolution to single neuron-
level resolution. Having means for precisely controlled spatio-temporally
patterned neurostimulation capability of neural circuits enables the tracking
and identification of the dynamical trajectories of the associated perturbed
brain states by precisely controlled stimulus (excitation and/or inhibition).
The recorded neural signals capture all of their relevant temporal information
across the multiple probe points, namely as action potentials (spikes), high-
frequency oscillations field potentials (LFP), and the underlying low-frequency
brain rhythms. The project is a fusion of sophisticated microelectronics and
computational neuroscience. Embedded in the research are multiple disciplinary
components: photonics, microbiology (of optogenetics), material science and
nanofabrication processing, ultralow-power integrated circuits design, high
speed microwave telemetry, and computer engineering hardware/software for neural
signal processing.



.