* 1402506
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Eliot Miller, Miller                  Eliot          T
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Eliot Miller supports research and
training to incorporate species interactions in species distribution models. The
host institution is the University of Idaho; sponsoring scientists are Drs. Luke
Harmon and Scott Nuismer. Training goals include gaining skills to incorporate
currently unexploited mathematics-like network theory into species distribution
models. Educational outreach consists of mentoring and training undergraduate
students at the University of Idaho. A citizen science component includes
building a large database of quantitative natural history data to inform the
models. Current species distribution models use environmental variables to
predict where a species occurs but do not incorporate information on the
presence or absence of other species with which the focal species might
interact. Clear cases exist where one species determines the occurrence of
another species but, on a broad scale, there is no general consensus on whether
species shape one another's distributions, which has been called the 'Eltonian
noise hypothesis.' Incorporating species interactions into species distribution
models takes advantage of quantitative natural history data to calculate
pairwise niche overlaps of interacting species. Two software products emerge
from the project, one designed to incorporate species interactions into species
distribution models, the other designed to elucidate dominance hierarchies among
a group of interacting species. Implementing such models requires both
biological and mathematical knowledge; they offer a strong means of testing the
Eltonian noise hypothesis. Incorporation of species interactions into existing
models is needed to forecast community assembly and disassembly in the face of
environmental change.