* 1402051
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Is richer always better? Testing the biotic resistance hypothesis in ornamental fish microbiomes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Victor Schmidt, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,865.00

The sum of microorganisms living on and in a host is called the "microbiome". A
host's microbiome often has more cells and functions than the host itself, and
plays important roles in nutrition, health and disease. Antibiotic treatment
disrupts microbiomes in mice and humans and increases the likelihood of
bacterial infections after treatment. Fish depend on their microbiome and are
often treated with antibiotics in commercial settings, particularly along
ornamental trade routes where suppliers must deliver a disease-free product to
retail pet shops. This study will test if antibiotics have the unintended
consequence of disturbing fish microbiomes during shipment, thereby reducing
disease resistance after fish have arrived in retail store tanks. The
researchers will collaborate with the Woods Hole Partnership in Education
Program to involve underrepresented groups in the laboratory research.
Additionally, the researchers will continue ongoing collaborations with
ornamental fish industry members, engaging the private sector in science-based
solutions to disease. This research will provide valuable insight into the role
microbiomes play in aquaculture diseases and potential probiotic treatments, and
contribute to the advancement of science-based solutions to aquaculture
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A reduction in biotic resistance, or the
ability to protect the host from colonization and&lt;br/&gt;proliferation of
external pathogens, often accompanies antibiotic treatments. The first aim of
this research is to assess the influence of antibiotics on disease resistance in
fish microbiomes, using aquarium-based experiments in the laboratory. Ornamental
fish shipments with and without the use of antibiotics will be simulated,
followed by a spike of a known fish pathogen. Biotic resistance will be measured
by mortality, and the relative abundance of the spiked pathogen within fish
microbiomes. In humans and mouse models, re-inoculation after antibiotic
treatment with a high-richness microbial community restores biotic resistance.
The second objective of this research will be to test a range of bacterial
inoculates for their ability to restore biotic resistance in fish microbiomes
after antibiotic treatment. These inoculates will vary in their richness and
composition, and biotic resistance will be assessed as above, alongside
resulting microbiome richness. The researchers will test the hypothesis that a
low-richness recovery inoculum of probiotic species representing a variety of
disease resistance mechanisms will provide the strongest possible microbiome-
mediated biotic resistance.