* 1402726
* Bicontinuous Nanocomposite Refractories
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Jonah Erlebacher, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 410,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and development of new metals is
critical for technical applications where high strength and ductility are
necessary. In this program, we explore a new class of bulk nanostructured metals
made by an advanced processing method called liquid metal dealloying, in which
an alloy of a refractory metal such as tungsten and titanium is immersed into
molten copper under conditions in which the titanium is dissolved away and the
refractory metal re-organizes itself into a nanoscale network, a kind of truss
network whose ligaments are only a few hundred atoms across. Upon cooling, the
composite material is bicontinuous, i.e. comprised of two interpenetrating
networks of distinct materials, a hard refractory phase and a ductile copper
phase, combining the best attributes of each metal to make a novel strong and
ductile material. In this program, we will explore processing methods to make
these new materials and test their properties in systematic ways so as to
understand the fundamental materials physics that govern their behavior. We will
disseminate this understanding via student participation and the development of
classroom resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the structure/processing/property relationship of a new
class of nanostructured metals, which possess a bicontinuous ?spinodal
decomposition?-like microstructure, but where one phase is a hard refractory
metal such as tungsten and the other phase is a ductile metal such as copper.
These materials are made using a new method we call liquid metal dealloying
(LMD), in which titanium/refractory alloys are immersed in copper alloy melts at
elevated temperatures. Whereas titanium dissolves out into the copper, the
refractory is immiscible in the melt so during immersion it reorganizes via
interface diffusion into a highly porous structure (were the copper phase to be
removed), with a tunable lengthscale from approximately 50 nm to 5000 nm. The
process is akin to electrochemical dealloying, such as is used to create
nanoporous gold, except that dissolution in LMD is driven by thermodynamic phase
behavior, and not electrochemical dissolution. Our focus here is on the kinetics
of formation and the mechanical properties of non-porous composites fabricated
by this method, which have potential utility in the diverse number of
applications for ultra-strong materials with high toughness. More generally and
fundamentally, the spontaneous formation of the bicontinuous microstructure
during LMD is a platform on which to examine phase transformations, kinetics,
and mechanical of metallic materials at the nanoscale. In addition to the
scientific technology drivers, this program will involve students in the
development and dissemination of kinetic Monte Carlo simulation code for the
simulation and study of the kinetics of morphological evolution in
nanostructured materials that will complement the development of a new
undergraduate textbook on Kinetics and Phase Transformations for Materials
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;