* 1402750
* Advanced Raman Spectroscopic Methods for the Identification of Trace Evidence
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* John Lombardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 465,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program,
Researchers from the City College of New York, John Jay College of Criminal
Justice, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art will develop methods for the
evaluation of trace evidence and the examination of questioned documents by
surface-enhanced Raman scattering. The focus is on pursuing non-destructive
methods of analysis and techniques involving combination of Raman spectroscopy
with other separation methods for the analysis of complex samples. This
multidisciplinary collaboration seeks to achieve significant advances in the
application of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) analysis to the
evaluation of trace evidence and the examination of questioned documents. The
project will continue to develop the core of a searchable spectral library of
substances of forensic interest such as organic dyes and pigments,
pharmaceuticals, and drugs of abuse. The involvement of undergraduate, Masters
level, and PhD students in the research will also result in a substantial
contribution to the training of the future generation of forensic scientists.

In this research, the investigators plan to focus on approaches for SERS
analysis by developing standardized reproducible protocols for analysis of ink
(including gel pen inks and black inks) and fiber samples, controlled
substances, as well as colorants used in fabrics and paints. They will also
develop procedures to deal with matrix interferences in SERS spectra, and
continue to work on methods for completely non-destructive SERS analysis of
documents and textiles, expanding the range of solvent systems and gel
formulations to include easily available gelling materials such as agar and
methylcellulose. The researchers will develop extraction procedures for gel pen
and black inks suitable for SERS analysis and hyphenated techniques such as high
performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC)-SERS for the separation and
identification of mixtures.