* 1402054
* Collaborative Research: Deep Drilling of Lake Junin, Peru: Continuous Tropical Records of Glaciation, Climate Change and Magnetic Field Variations Spanning the Late Quaternary
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 100,002.00

Our ability to understand the full complexity of climate change and forecast
future regional trends requires that we extend the available instrumental
records into the geologic past. Over the past several decades
paleoclimatologists have developed myriad proxy indicators of past regional
climate that are recorded in natural archives such as ice cores, cave deposits,
and lake sediment, among many other archives. Proxy paleoclimate records from
the tropics are particularly important because this region is the ?heat engine?
of Earth. Long- and short-term changes in ocean-atmosphere circulation that are
manifested in such phenomenon as the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the
mean position of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, and the response of the
tropics to high latitude climatic ?events? are critical to understand because
these phenomena can have a profound impact on regional water balance, which
directly affects potable water supplies, hydroelectricity generation, and
agricultural productivity. &lt;br/&gt; The longest continuous records of climate
change in the tropics are limited to those derived from the relatively few old
lake basins in the region. Lake Junin, the largest lake located entirely within
Peru, is among the oldest lake basins in South America. It contains a sediment
record that is at least 200 m long that may extend more than 250,000 years. Lake
Junin is exceptional in the length of record that it contains, but also in the
climate signals that it records. Considerable prior research has documented that
Lake Junin records the waxing and waning of nearby alpine glaciers and changes
in regional water balance through the isotope geochemistry of calcium carbonate
deposited on the lake bottom at a rate of approximately 0.2 to 1.0 mm/yr. This
research will develop these and other proxy climate records for the full length
of recovered core; the records generated will comprise one of the longest
continuous records of climate and environmental change from the inner tropics.
&lt;br/&gt; The Lake Junin Drilling Project has several broader impacts. These
include the joint renovation of an abandoned lodge for future shared use as the
first shoreline outpost for officials of the Junin National Reserve, as a
visitor center, and as a lake access point for ecotourism. Capacity building
activities in the Junin Project include collaboration with Peruvian
universities, training of geoscientists, as well as Peruvian and American
student training. A specific team will be responsible for the organization of
lectures at villages in the region to inform citizens about the significance of
the drilling, and will work closely with the national park service to instruct
the rangers on how to use the science to promote conservation efforts around the
lake. During the drilling, a team will facilitate interactions with local and
international media. The team expect to involve U.S. and Peruvian students in
all aspects of Junin drilling, and much of the paleoecological research related
to the Junin cores will be conducted by graduate students. Training
opportunities during the drilling phase of operations are also planned for
geoscientists from Peruvian universities. Numerous U.S. undergraduate and
graduate students, and one postdoctoral fellow will be involved in all phases of
the proposed research. The material collected during this project will set the
stage for significant future research. LacCore, the National Lacustrine Core
Facility at the University of Minnesota, will facilitate this by overseeing the
long-term storage, curation, and access to data and samples obtained in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Explanation&lt;br/&gt; Lake Junin,
located at 4000 m asl in the inner-tropics of the Southern Hemisphere, is a
prime target for drilling because it contains a thick (&gt;200 m) sediment
package deposited at a high rate (0.2 to 1.0 mm/yr). Abundant research conducted
on and around Lake Junin provides a compelling rationale for deep drilling.
Moraine mapping coupled with cosmogenic radionuclide dating indicate that
paleoglaciers reached the lake edge, but have not overridden the lake in as much
as one million years. Lake Junin is one of the few lakes in the tropical Andes
that predates the maximum extent of glaciation and is in a geomorphic position
to record the waxing and waning of glaciers in nearby cordillera. Sediment
coring of Lake Junin began in the 1970s; two cores spanning the past 50,000
years reveal that sedimentation has alternated between clastic sediments
deposited during peak glacial periods and authigenic calcite (marl) precipitated
from the water column during interglacial times. The lake also contains ideal
sediments for multiproxy analysis that can be reliably dated using both the
radiocarbon and U/Th methods. The oxygen isotopic composition of marl and
ostracod carapaces demonstrate that authigenic calcite in Lake Junin primarily
records the isotopic composition of precipitation and secondarily the degree of
evaporative enrichment of lake water. Lake Junin contains a continuous record of
tropical hydroclimate over interglacial and interstadial intervals for much of
the past several hundred thousand years that is both comparable to, and an
extension of stable isotope records from regional ice cores and speleothems. New
organic geochemical proxies compliment the marl isotope record and offer the
potential for a truly continuous isotope paleoclimate record through glacial and
interglacial intervals alike. Lake Junin is ideally situated, both from
logistical and scientific standpoints, to provide continuous high-resolution,
independently-dated, long-term records of glaciation, and the variability of
phenomena such as ENSO, the South America Summer Monsoon, and the Intertropical
Convergence Zone. Because of the strong, demonstrated U/Th dating potential of
Junin marl, we will be able to address critical issues regarding the synchrony
of climate change in the tropics with that in high latitude regions of both
hemispheres, the rate and timing of ecosystem response to climatic
perturbations, and the dynamics of the geomagnetic field from a tropical
perspective. Lake Junin is a scientifically mature site that will yield critical
scientific insights that only drilling coupled with analysis can
unlock.&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed research is to develop
the first continuous, high-resolution, absolute-dated late Quaternary record of
climate change, water balance (P/E), glaciation, vegetation, and paleomagnetic
secular variation for the tropical Andes. The well-dated Junin record will allow
the team to develop proxy records spanning &gt;200,000yr, which will document
the timing of wet/dry cycles, glacial advances/retreats, and the impacts of
climatic phenomena such as the changing strength and variability of ENSO, the
South America Summer Monsoon, and shifts in the location and range of the
Intertropical Convergence Zone. In addition, this study will provide an
opportunity to date (via U-Th) the &gt;40ka sections of both the Titicaca and
Sabana de Bogota records through correlation of pollen, stable isotope, and
paleomagnetic time series. This study will also enable important insights into
the response of tropical vegetation to climate change in the upper Amazon Basin,
and will provide a rare southern equatorial perspective on the evolution of
Earth?s geomagnetic field.