* 1402287
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Leone Brown, Brown                   Leone          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2017
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case mathematics and
physical sciences. Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Leone M. Brown supports a research
and training plan to investigate how long distance migration influences animal
immunity and infectious disease dynamics. The host institution is the University
of Georgia and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Sonia Altizer and Dr. Richard
Hall. Training objectives include epidemiological mathematical modeling, data
management, and laboratory skills to determine animal infection status and
immune function. The Fellow plans workshops to train professionals and students
in statistical analysis of ecological data and educational outreach to
predominantly low-income K-12 schools to communicate how concepts in mathematics
can address real-life problems in ecology, conservation biology and public
health. This fellowship is funded jointly by the Office of International and
Integrative Activities and the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

Animal migrations can alter infectious disease dynamics through effects on host
immunity and exposure to pathogens. Human activities transform landscapes and
create barriers to animal migration, causing some animals to migrate shorter
distances or form sedentary populations. Because migratory animals can transport
pathogens that infect humans, understanding interactions between migration and
infection dynamics, and how pathogens respond to the loss of migration, can help
forecast changes in disease risk for humans and wildlife. This project focuses
on host characteristics and pathogen dynamics in Tyrannid flycatchers, a diverse
group of birds with migratory and sedentary populations across the Americas.
Field data on infection prevalence and immune function are being combined with
statistical and mathematical models to estimate pathogen transmission and host
survival across the annual cycle. This research promises to improve
understanding of the role of animal migration in infectious disease spread, with
broad relevance to other migratory species.