* 1402656
* Directed Evolution of peptides that bind protein targets only in the presence of calcium: A new tool for bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Scott Banta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 06/30/2017
* USD 359,771.00

Banta, Scott &lt;br/&gt;1402656 &lt;br/&gt;Columbia University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The separation of important molecules from complex
solutions is often accomplished using proteins or peptides that have been
engineered to bind the target with high affinity and selectivity. One challenge
in this approach is the recovery of the target, and reuse of the binding
peptide. The PI has been working with a unique peptide (called the beta roll)
that is unstructured in the absence of calcium, and folds into a flattened
corkscrew shape in the presence of calcium. The PI has previously engineered one
face of the corkscrew for self-assembly, and has preliminary data showing the
peptide can be engineered to bind to a model target protein (lysozyme). The goal
of this NSF project is to develop a high throughput method to engineer new beta
roll mutants that can bind to different protein targets that are important in
biotechnology. The incorporation of these new engineered peptides into a
bioseparations platform would be very beneficial, as it would allow for target
proteins to be bound in the presence of calcium and then released upon calcium
removal. This process could improve performance and reduce the costs associated
with critical protein molecules, especially therapeutic proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key challenges in affinity-based separations is
the elution of the target molecule from the affinity binding reagent. The PI
proposes to expand the directed evolution approach to substantially increase the
affinity of the beta roll peptides to desired targets and expand the number of
targets for molecular recognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A method for selection
from a randomized library has been developed, but higher affinity binders will
require a directed evolution approach where genetic diversity is incorporated
into the library. New beta roll peptides with high affinity for GFP and two
common protein expression and purification tags will be researched: the maltose
binding proteins (MBP) and the glutathione S transferase protein (GST). By
immobilizing these evolved, high-affinity beta roll peptides on a suitable
support, the PI may be able to demonstrate the use of these peptides to affinity
purify MBP- and GST-tagged proteins, and use calcium chelation to elute the
purified proteins. The resin can be regenerated via calcium addition and the
performance of this system can be compared to traditional methods for
purification with these fusion tags (amylose resin and GSH resin).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this proposal results from the
use of a unique peptide with an intrinsic triggered conformational change as a
starting scaffold for the engineering of biomolecular recognition. The calcium-
induced conformational change of the beta roll peptides is a powerful molecular
switch that can be exploited to reversibly disrupt engineered biomolecular
interactions. Using this peptide as a starting scaffold, we will be able to
generate a collection of peptides that can bind target proteins in a calcium-
dependent fashion, and these new peptides will be valuable biomolecular
recognition elements for affinity bioseparations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impact of this proposal arises from the use of protein engineering to
develop a new binding motif for use in applications such as biosensors and
bioseparations. The use of intrinsically disordered scaffolds for biomolecular
recognition has not yet been reported in the literature, and this proposal will
demonstrate that these systems can be engineered to be high affinity binders,
which will be boon to those working in areas such as biosensors, smart drug
delivery, bionanotechnology, and bioseparations. Funding will also be used for
the mentoring of students and to continue existing outreach activities in the
local community.