* 1402682
* Design, Synthesis, Crystallization and Materials Properties of Rotary Dipolar Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 475,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With support from the Division of Materials Research from
the National Science Foundation, this research is aimed at the development of a
new class of materials, known as amphidynamic crystals, which have switchable
physical properties based on the reorientation and rotational motion of groups
contained within their constituent molecules. With well-selected electric,
magnetic and optical properties, these crystalline molecular rotors will be able
to respond to external fields and change the physical properties of the
material. The structures proposed for this project can be viewed as an ordered
array of compasses, where every compass needle is held within a box, and it is
able to affect the orientation of its closest neighbors. Since every rotating
needle has positive and negative charged poles, each needle is referred to as a
"dipole". It is predicted that some specific molecular compass arrangements will
cause all the dipoles to point in the same direction, while others will cause
adjacent dipoles to point in opposite ways (these opposite arrangements are
known, respectively, as ferroelectric and antiferroelectric). Furthermore, the
reorientation of a single dipole can be transferred from one to another, as in a
chain of falling dominoes, such that changes in orientation and rotational
motion is expected to be transferable over long distances. Under some
conditions, all the dipoles are expected to spontaneously rotate in the same
direction, such that the transmission of linearly polarized light would make the
crystal blink, from very bright to dark, in a spontaneous manner. By contrast,
it is expected that the application of a strong homogenous field will result in
the alignment of all dipoles along the of direction of the electric field, which
can be used to change the color of transmitted light from red to blue (a
nonlinear optical effect). While these new materials have the potential of
displaying interesting electric, magnetic, and elastic capabilities (so-called
multiferroic properties) that can be controlled with external fields, in this
proposal, experiments are outlined to analyze their interaction with light,
including changes in refractive index, polarization, and nonlinear optical
properties that may result from changes in the orientation of the constituent
dipoles. These materials are expected to be among the fastest, most efficient
optical switches. With molecules designed to maintain a state rotation in the
solid state, the UCLA group will be able to control the speed of sound and
create devices that will help control the rate of signal transmission. Research
on amphidynamic crystals based on inertial dipolar arrays will provide the PI
with opportunities to educate and train talented materials chemists and to carry
out research activities aimed at increasing the number of students from
underprivileged backgrounds that enter the field of materials chemistry. Active
collaborations for the project have also been established with Faculty at local
Community Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Engineered rotation
relies on structural elements that combine a set of relatively static, lattice-
forming units, with dipolar components that possess the ability to rotate and
reorient about structurally established lattice directions. With components that
display motion at the two ends of the dynamic spectrum, these materials are said
to be "amphidynamic". One of the most intriguing aspects of engineered rotation
comes from the fact that it offers the potential for controlling the properties
of the thermal bath, potentially helping modulate a variety of quantum effects
that rely on phonon coupling. Depending on the structure and components,
engineered rotation can have a range of frequencies that vary from a few Hertz
to several Teraherz, with activation energies (thermal coefficients) that range
from nearly zero up to ca. 15-20 kcal/mol. Notably, one can have faster rotation
in well-designed crystalline solids than in non-viscous liquids. While the
ultimate goal of crystalline rotor design is the precise control of dynamics
properties over a wide range of time scales in order to interface them with
various materials properties, the realization of inertial polar molecular rotors
described in this proposal offers some of the most interesting possibilities.
Inertial polar rotors constitute a new frontier of chemical and crystallographic
design. Inertial polar rotators will have rotational barriers that are lower
than thermal energy, such that under some conditions they will be able maintain
a constant angular velocity for as long as there are no forces acting on them.
They will also be able to reorient very rapidly in the presence of internal and
strong external influences, such that their emergent polarization will make it
possible to study dipolar self-organization to permit the emergence of a new
class of designer ferroic materials with electric, magnetic, and elastic
switching capabilities. With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project will
center on the design, synthesis and dynamic characterization of inertial polar
rotators. To test their properties, an emphasis will be placed on measurements
that will help disclose inner dipolar order in the form of temperature-dependent
transitions between paraelectric and ferroelectric or antiferroelectric states.
Experiments are also envisioned to analyze their dynamic correlations resulting
from rotational motion and dipole-dipole interactions, which are predicted to
follow either conrotatory (ferroelectric arrays) or disrotatory
(antiferroelectric arrays) trajectories. Studies are also formulated to analyze
rotational correlations (gearing) based on mechanical (steric) forces.