* 1402161
* Signatures of Cosmic Inflation: High-Resolution Studies of the Cosmic Microwave Background
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jason Henning, Henning                 Jason          W
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Mr. Jason W. Henning is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Chicago. The fellow will investigate signatures of inflation in the polarization
of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), the afterglow light from the big bang.
Cosmic inflation is a theorized period of rapid expansion in the earliest
moments of the universe. It generates features in the polarization of the CMB
that are contaminated by other polarization sources. To accurately measure these
features and learn more about inflation, these other sources of polarization
must be well-characterized and removed from the observations. Mr. Henning will
develop techniques for characterizing contaminants, and will also contribute to
design and testing efforts to construct a new camera designed specifically to
measure CMB polarization with high resolution and fidelity. Furthermore, to
demonstrate that research is an exciting and engaging enterprise, Mr. Henning
will design new content for several outreach venues providing an insider's look
into scientific research. Through interactive displays, live talks, and real-
time social media, he will provide access to how research takes place while it's
happening.

Primordial B-modes are expected to be imprinted in the CMB by gravitational
waves generated during inflation. This primordial signal, however, is
contaminated by lensing B-modes difficult to measure and remove by low-
resolution experiments. Mr. Henning will focus attention on two high-resolution
CMB polarization experiments probing primordial B-modes in order to constrain
inflation. He will lead a campaign of detector characterization and design
efforts for the upcoming SPT-3G experiment. He will also extend and develop
techniques to analyze datasets from the SPT-POL and SPT-3G experiments at large
angular scales, which will include methods for polarized foreground removal and
de-lensing in particular, a unique ability made possible by high-resolution
experiments. For outreach education, Mr. Henning will expand several successful
programs by generating new content with the goal of providing a window into
research. He will contribute to new Adler Planetarium exhibits about microwave
detection technologies and the South Pole Telescope and lead audiences through
them during live Astronomy Conversations. He will also integrate SPT data into
the WorldWide Telescope and create a guided tour of data analysis. Finally, Mr.
Henning will organize and generate content for several social media outlets to
relay the everyday activities of current research to the public in real-time.