* 1402736
* Collaborative Research: Electrokinetic Transport and Separation in MEMS-fabricated Nanofluidic Channels
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sumita Pennathur, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 05/31/2017
* USD 257,118.00

1402736 Pennathur/Gillespie UCSB/Rush Pres St Luke Med Ctr

This project aims to investigate novel separation mechanisms that exist in
nanofluidic devices. In such nanochannels, a sample of solution is moved down a
slit with two walls that are 10 to 100 nanometers apart. In nanoscale
electrokinetic channels, molecules not only interact with each other, but also
with the charged walls of the device, to the point that these solid/liquid
interface interactions dominate the performance of the device. This project
tests whether specially-fabricated nanochannels and novel buffer electrolyte
solutions can greatly enhance separation of two similar analyte ions.
Specifically, this project aims to embed electrodes in the walls to directly
manipulate the wall charge and therefore the relative speed of the analytes.

The fabrication technique embeds electrodes into the walls and can produce slit
heights of <10 nm. The novel buffer ions will vary in size from small to large
and charge from +1 to +3. This project aims to investigate new separation
techniques based on nanofluidic ion transport at high surface charge, high ion
valence, and confining channels using a synergistic collaboration between theory
and experiment. Specifically, experiments will be used to validate a model based
on classical (not quantum) density functional theory of fluids. Then, the model
will be used to predict new separation mechanisms because exploring the large
parameter set by numerical modeling is orders of magnitude faster than using
hardware in the lab. Potential mechanisms discovered will be then be validated
in the lab and the theory used to understand the physics of separation.

This project has the potential to show the full range of what is possible for
nanochannel-based separations. Specifically, the fundamental properties of the
nanofluidic channels will be explored to define how the electrical double layer
can be harnessed for ion transport and analyte separation. If successful, this
project will, for the first time, systematically measure how changing surface
charge and ion properties like size and valence define the double layer and
transport/separation properties.

This new basic knowledge will not only be applicable to separation science and
engineering, but to any area of physics, chemistry, and biology where electrical
double layers play a role. For example, the new physical insights can be applied
to heavy metal processing, environmental monitoring, energy conversion,
desalination, batteries, and electrochemical supercapacitors to increase their
efficiency and possibly lead to new designs.

Proposed outreach activities include development of course materials,
international activities and high school student outreach. All are well
described and appear achievable.