* 1402896
* Activators to Maximize Algal Oil Production
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Ronald Cerny, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

Proposal Number: 1402896 &lt;br/&gt;P.I.: DiRusso, Concetta
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Nebraska-Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Activators to Maximize Algal Oil Production &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petroleum
fossil fuels are an essential, but limited source of energy. In the search for
sustainable renewable fossil fuel source replacement, the microalgae have
garnered much interest. Algae are attractive due to rapid growth and ability to
accumulate lipid to 20-40% dry weight, potentially yielding 100-fold more oil
per acre than soybeans or other oil-seed bearing plants. Additionally, various
algal species grow well in poor quality water and under a large variety of
environmental conditions. During photosynthesis algae fix CO2 into biomass thus
addressing concerns due to carbon emissions. In addition to biofuels, algae can
be used to produce a wide range of other byproducts. However, at the present
time algal oils are not ready for commercialization due to high costs in
producing and processing sufficient biomass given the primitive state of
knowledge of algal biology and biotechnology. Current methods of inducing algal
lipid production and storage requires conditions that stresses the cells and
stops growth; this limits the total yield of biomass and oil. In preliminary
studies the PI's identified 3 families of small synthetic chemicals that induce
oil storage in algae without affecting growth. The proposed studies will
investigate the 3 best hits from each family to provide: [1] important
information on basic algal biology and biochemistry leading to lipid storage,
[2] insight on maximizing both algal oil and biomass production, and [3]
products (the lipid inducers) useful for commercial production of algal
biofuels. The knowledge base generated will advance our understanding of algal
biochemistry and molecular biology. This information will be useful in the
fields of stress biology, biofuel production and in the production of other high
value co-products. The lipid activators will also be useful products that will
find a market in the biofuels industry and in the research community as
experimental tools. Additionally, the proposed experiments will provide
workforce enhancement by training undergraduate and graduate students as well as
post-doctoral fellows. The scientific team will bring their findings and
expertise to the lay public by offering a short course in biofuels for
sustainable energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global energy demand
continues to increase and fossil fuel sources will likely become limited within
the century. One attractive sustainable alternative is oil derived from algal
sources. However, knowledge of the biochemistry and molecular biology of the
microalgae is incomplete and there are no known methods to induce oil storage in
algae without inducing a stress response that stops growth as occurs when cells
are starved of essential nutrients. Therefore, there is a pressing need to
experimentally define components and mechanisms that lead to lipid synthesis and
storage without stress induction if these organisms are to be employed as
commercially viable sources of bioenergy. In preliminary work, the investigators
conducted a screen of 44,000 synthetic chemicals for those that would increase
lipid production without stopping cellular growth and subset of 360 were
identified with these properties. This set was rescreened and final hits were
further divided into three groups based on structural similarities. From each
group the compound with the highest activity was selected as a hit lead. The
goal of the present proposal is to characterize these 3 selected hit compounds
as activators of lipid production. The research objectives are to: [1] further
assess the potency and specificity of the hit compounds to induce lipid
synthesis and storage without inducing a global stress response or limiting the
photosynthetic capacity in C. reinhardtii and additional algal species; [2]
assess alterations in the metabolome, of cells treated with one hit compound
from each structural group to define the metabolic shifts and impacted pathways
that contribute to lipid accumulation upon compound treatment; and [3] assess
alterations in the proteome of cells treated with hit compounds to define the
proteins and biochemical pathways that contribute to lipid accumulation upon
compound treatment. The expected outcomes include: [1] important information on
basic algal biology and biochemistry leading to lipid storage, [2] insight on
maximizing both algal oil and biomass production, and [3] products (the lipid
inducers) useful for commercial production of algal biofuels. This information
will be useful in the fields of stress biology, biofuel production and in the
production of other high value co-products. The lipid activators will also be
useful products that will find a market in the biofuels industry and in the
research community as experimental probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET
Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.