* 1402757
* Second Harmonic Generation imaging and optical scattering probes of ovarian cancer.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Paul Campagnola, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 410,803.00

Proposal Number: 1402757&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Campagnola, Paul J.&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Second Harmonic Generation imaging and optical scattering probes of ovarian
cancer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Importance of
Project:&lt;br/&gt;Five year survival rates of ovarian cancer remain poor
(~30%), where this arises in part due to inadequate screening technologies as
well as poor understanding of how cancer cells interact with the host tissue.
There remains a compelling need for new technologies that have both sufficient
resolution and specificity to image microscopic malignant ovarian tumors or
precursor lesions. It is also equally important to understand how these changes
occur and how they evolve between early stage and advanced disease. This project
will develop new microscope-based methods that address these needs. The methods
to be developed will be applicable to other cancers as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description of the Project&lt;br/&gt;It is
important to understand the changes that occur in the extracellular matrix (ECM)
in the tumor microenvironment in ovarian cancer and how these evolve between
early stage and advanced disease and between disease grades (e.g. borderline vs
high grade). In this project, we will implement multimodal forms of Second
Harmonic Generation (SHG) microscopy with optical scattering measurements to
address this need by characterizing macromolecular changes in collagen and also
in the 3D fibrillar architecture. The methods will i) compliment histology which
primarily focuses on cells, where a non-negligible fraction of tissues are mis-
classified; ii) provide prognostic information based on ECM changes from other
patients; and iii) afford the development of an ex vivo or ultimately in vivo
imaging/screening device of either ovaries or fallopian tubes. SHG has already
been shown to be a highly sensitive and specific imaging tool for quantitatively
describing changes in the collagen organization in several diseases, including
many cancers, fibroses, and connective tissue disorders. This success is due to
the coherent nature of the process where detailed information on fibrillar
assembly can be obtained through analysis of morphology, polarization
properties, and emission directionality. Similarly, optical scattering
measurements have proven to be powerful for delineating cancers from normal
tissue in several organs. We will now leverage our previous results on ex vivo
human ovarian tissues and develop new tools to further understand changes in the
collagen architecture, both in terms of collagen macromolecular assembly and 3D
fibrillar organization. These are both important considerations as: i) we have
demonstrated that dramatic morphological changes occur between normal and high
grade malignant tissues, and ii) it has been reported that several minor
isoforms become up-regulated in ovarian cancer and these may be effective
biomarkers. We will also interrogate the collagen fibrillar architecture using
SHG and optical scattering probes, separately and in conjunction and will
compare remodeling across a spectrum of ovarian cancer types (e.g. serous vs
endometroid, high grade vs low grade, fallopian tube vs primary ovary) as well
as primary vs metastatic tumors. Measuring the wavelength dependences of optical
scattering and SHG will provide detailed structural information across different
length scales and delineate different tumor types based on their structural
characteristics. To this end, a classification system based on the collagen
molecular changes and fibrillar architecture alterations will be developed. Key
to this work is the development of a suite of new label free SHG polarization
analyses to specifically probe changes in collagen molecular alignment within
fibrils, the รก-helix pitch angle, and the overall chirality of the collagen
triple helix. All these properties can change due to increased protease activity
or changes in collagen isoform incorporation (e.g. Col III) in carcinogenesis
and tumor growth. These will be benchmarked in self-assembled fibrillar gels
that mimic the collagen assembly in the ovarian stroma and extended to ex vivo
human tissues. In sum, this project will develop tools that probe all levels of
collagen organization and will serve as new label-free biomarkers for ovarian
cancer. Moreover, these methods will be generally applicable to other cancers
and diseases characterized by changes in collagen architecture.