* 1402899
* RUI: A Study of Laser-Assisted Electron-Atom Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bruno deHarak, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 197,971.00

This work aims to answer the question: what happens when an electron (one of the
fundamental building blocks of all atoms) scatters from an atom or molecule in
the presence of light from a laser? One of the simplest classes of things that
can happen is "elastic scattering" in which the electron and the atom do not
exchange energy and continue on their way after the collision with the same
energies that they had before the collision (but perhaps changing their
direction). These are called laser-assisted free-free (LAFF) processes because
the electron is free (i.e., not bound to an atom or molecule) both before, and
after, the collision. This work will involve experimental LAFF studies, with the
broad aim of increasing our basic understanding of these processes. Particular
attention will be paid to resolving long-standing discrepancies between theory
and experiment (there are several sets of experimental data that have defied
theoretical explanation for over twenty years) and examining how two-color laser
fields affect, and can be used to control, scattering processes. In addition to
the advancement of our basic understanding of scattering processes, this work
has applications to a variety of fields, both basic and applied. For example,
similar processes are important for understanding the interiors and atmospheres
of stars. Free-free transitions also play a major role in the gas breakdown that
occurs in electrical discharges, and provide a method for laser heating of a
plasma (a gas of ionized atoms). Understanding these processes helps form a more
solid scientific foundation for the field of plasma physics which underlies the
manufacturing of the microelectronics at the heart of our computers and cell
phones. This work will primarily take place at an undergraduate institution, and
will directly involve several undergraduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the above stated aims, two
different sets of experimental LAFF studies will be performed. The first set of
experiments will continue this group's previous work which is well described by
theory in spite of the fact that some similar experiments done by another group
contradict current theoretical understanding. There are three significant
differences between the experiments performed by the two groups: the electron
energy, the photon energy, and the photon polarization. The new experiments will
investigate a range of incident energies, as well as geometries that have not
previously been investigated; e.g., laser propagation direction perpendicular to
the scattering plane, and laser polarization direction perpendicular to the
scattering plane. Essentially, the experiments will go from perturbative, to
non-perturbative regimes. This data will test current theory, as well as provide
insight to the development of more complex theoretical descriptions of the LAFF
processes. In addition, the new experiments will look for interference effects
in LAFF experiments that use a two-color (photon energy = 1.17 eV, and 2.34 eV)
laser field. Electrons scattered in such a two-color field that have an energy
2.34 eV below the elastic peak may have emitted either a single 2.34 eV photon
or two 1.17 eV photons. The research group will perform experiments that vary
the relative phase of these two colors to observe predicted interference
effects.