* 1402845
* Active Regulation of Thermal Boundary Conductance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2019
* John Kieffer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2019
* USD 294,441.00

CBET-1402845&lt;br/&gt;Kieffer (Univ. of Michigan, Ann
Arbor)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular-scale simulations have shown
that when applying an electric field to an electro-active polymer it causes it
to constrict and it becomes mechanically stiffer. As a result, the thermal
conductivity of the polymer increases by up to 40%. Similarly, when the polymer
adheres to a metallic substrate, which serves to apply the field, the adhesive
forces are intensified and simulations predict that the heat conductance across
this interface increases by a factor of six. Accordingly, one can devise a heat
valve by sandwiching a thin electro-active polymer film between two metallic
films, and by applying a few tens of volts to these metal films, depending on
film thickness, one can turn alter the heat flow rate across this multi-layered
structure by a factor of three to four. The objective of this project is to
demonstrate this heat flow switching mechanism experimentally, to clearly
elucidate the underlying physical principles, and based on these insights, to
improve the materials design, for example by creating nano-porous structures of
molecularly bonded polymer and ceramic components that exhibit larger
deformation amplitudes, so as to achieve bigger heat flow amplification ratios.
The expected outcome of this research is a technology with application in
numerous situations that require thermal management, including regulating heat
flow in confined environments, e.g., living organisms, engines, fuel cells,
sensors, and chemical reactors, and even thermal diodes, i.e., devices that
allow one to control the direction of heat flow. The research findings may
inspire technologies such as actuated membranes for controlled selective
filtering, sensors with time-differential sampling capability, deployable
medical devices for targeted drug and heat delivery, e.g., for localized cancer
treatment. Finally, the research strategy employed here may impact science and
technology beyond a specific discipline by validating an emerging research
simulation-guided approach and by demonstrating an innovative materials
development approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
explore novel nano-structural materials designs that allow for the in situ
regulation of thermal transport properties at interfaces and surfaces, i.e.,
switching between extreme levels of heat transfer or continuously adjusting the
thermal conductance within that range. This functional response is achieved by
optimizing the structure and topology of electro-active polymers incorporated
into dense and nano-porous hybrid materials, i.e., in which the organic and
inorganic components are dispersed at the molecular level and chemically bonded
to one another, so as to make most efficient use of their inherent properties.
To accomplish this goal computation is used to explore the fundamental
principles that govern materials behavior and determine the most effective
molecular configurations for the targeted functional response. The design
principles so obtained guide materials development and appropriate chemical
synthesis routes, and are validated by characterizing the dielectric,
mechanical, and thermal transport behavior of the resulting materials. First,
the underling materials design concepts, which ensues from a molecular
simulation-based proof-of-concept study, predicting a 40% thermal conductivity
and a six-fold thermal boundary conductance increase when applying an electric
field to an ultra-thin layer of piezoelectric polymer deposited on a metal
substrate, is verified experimentally and the underlying mechanisms are
identified. From these insights, blueprints for the design of materials design
that yields maximal thermal transport regulating behavior are derived.
Accordingly, nano-porous polymer-inorganic hybrid materials are explored as
materials that potentially yield magnified changes in thermal transport
properties because of their large strains in response to piezoelectric
actuation. Conversely, large-amplitude actuation in purposely designed nano-
porous structures are investigated for application as adjustable membranes for
selective filtration, detection of pathogens, time-selective sampling, targeted
drug delivery, and fluid flow regulation.