* 1402673
* Magneto-mechanical Sensors and Actuators for Platelet Biomechanics under Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Nathan Sniadecki, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2018
* USD 309,541.00

This project will investigate the physics of blood clotting. It will elucidate
the role of platelet forces and viscoelasticity during clot formation and will
establish a translational tool that can generate biomechanical-specific data on
platelets. The project will enable a greater understanding of the coagulation
process beyond the classical coagulation cascade. It will not only advance the
fields of hemostasis and thrombosis, but also biomechanics, nanomaterials, and
nanomagnetics. The educational plan focuses on integrating research concepts
into courses on biomechanics at the awardee's institution as well as organizing
K-12 and undergraduate outreach events that focus on research opportunities. The
research and educational plans provide training experience for future
generations in nanoscale biomechanics and biotechnology by involving graduate
students and undergraduate students in the research.

The research objective of this award is to develop a microfluidic platform that
can test the biomechanical properties of platelets and measure their contractile
forces during clotting. Platelets are the smallest cells in the human body, but
are indispensable in hemostasis. In clot formation, the platelet cytoskeleton is
necessary for changing cell shape and for producing actin-myosin forces. The
first task of this award will work to fabricate strong magnetic nanowires by
increasing the size and improving the composition of the nanowires. The second
task will work to embed nanowires into microposts inside a microfluidic device
so that an external magnetic field can be used to apply forces to platelets. The
third task will work to build nanoscale magnetometers underneath each magnetic
micropost to measure their deflection by platelet forces.