* 1402639
* GRC Crystal Engineering: Form Meets Function, June 1-6, 2014
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2015
* Michael Zaworotko, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Crystal Engineering Gordon Research Conference
(GRC), partly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
follows the highly successful previous GRCs on Crystal Engineering (2010 &amp;
2912) which had numerous student and international participants. Crystal
engineering is the design and synthesis of functional solid-state structures
(e.g., new organic molecular crystals and metal-organic co-ordination polymers
and framework solids (MOFs), based on a bottom-up approach from smaller building
blocks such as neutral organic molecules, and organic or inorganic ions. Typical
design strategies use hydrogen bonds and coordination bonds, which define sub-
structural units that are called respectively, supramolecular synthons and
secondary building units. This subject cuts across the traditional divisions of
organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry, making for a very eclectic blend of
ideas, techniques, and strategies. The field has developed to a stage that
cross-fertilization between topics is expected to promote significant
advancements in a general quest to afford functional materials. The topics cover
both fundamentals and applications of Crystal Engineering that have relevance to
important areas such as organic synthesis, pharmaceutics, and energy storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;Crystal Engineering is one of the
more contemporary areas of chemical research today and is central to many
fundamental problems that are currently facing society. It is expected that
developments in this rapidly developing field will meet societal demands that
cannot be addressed by more conventional approaches to synthetic chemistry and
materials science. Examples of areas where Crystal Engineering can address
current societal challenges include the rational design and construction of
materials for use in storing hydrogen for vehicles and efforts to control drug
polymorphism. This GRC will seek to aggressively recruit graduate students,
postdocs, and junior level professionals to attend the GRC and enable them to
not only learn from the talks and discussions, but allow them to make important
contacts for their future development; NSF funding assists in this endeavor. The
GRC Chair and Vice-Chair will actively recruit underrepresented groups, at least
one small step toward the goal of diversity in the Crystal Engineering community
reflective of the general population. New collaborations can be formed and new
ideas generated that would not otherwise occur if not for these important
conferences.