* 1402901
* Advancing the Measurement of Lipid Transbilayer Exchange
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* John Conboy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 155,000.00

A membrane, only two molecules thick, surrounds all cells and is responsible for
controlling the passage of materials in and out of the cell in a selective
manner. Our current understanding of the structure and dynamics of cellular
membranes emerged in the early 1970?s. However, there is still much we do not
know about this seemingly simple "shell" which makes life as we know it
possible. A central issue in biology is the movement of molecules across the
cellular membrane. This "translocation" is important in the infection of living
cells by viruses, the functioning of antibiotics, antiseptics and drugs, and the
regulation and growth of cells. There have been a number of studies attempting
to find out just how this happens. There are many theories, but no conclusions.
Using methods developed in the investigator's laboratory, a novel analytical
approach was invented to selectively probe lipid translocation and membrane
composition in a lipid bilayer (model cell membrane). The goal of the proposed
research is to use this new tool to address some of the central issues
concerning molecular motion in membranes. Facilitating an interest in chemistry,
biology, physics and mathematics is also an integral part of the proposed
studies, with efforts underway to create an innovative science and math
education facility at the University of Utah, which will reach out to high
school students, college freshmen and the general public, to expand their
awareness and knowledge of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
John Conboy from the University of Utah to unravel the complex interplay between
the movement of lipid species across the cellular membrane and the establishment
of lipid compositional asymmetry. A full understanding of the mechanism by which
membrane asymmetry is achieved and maintained in cellular systems has not been
realized to date; primarily due to the difficulty of studying membrane
biophysical phenomena in a non-destructive or non-perturbing fashion. It has
been suggested that lipid membrane asymmetry is maintained by unidirectional
lipid transporters, in conjunction with a high energetic barrier to
translocation which limits the rate at which lipids might spontaneously
translocate across the membrane. However, such a putative flippase has yet to be
identified, and a growing number of publications demonstrate cases of rapid
spontaneous translocation of phospholipids. The connection between lipid
compositional asymmetry and flip-flop in planar supported lipid bilayers will be
explored using a novel application of sum-frequency vibrational spectroscopy
(SFVS) developed by the PI to selectively probe the asymmetry in a planar-
supported lipid bilayer (PSLB). This new surface analytical method allows for
the direct detection of lipid flip-flop without the need for a fluorescent or
spin-labeled lipid probe, which can alter the measured translocation rates. The
goal of this research is to use this surface analytical tool to address some of
the central issues concerning the transbilayer movement and establishment of
lipid asymmetry in bilayer systems. In addition, the coupling of lipid flip-flop
energetics to the establishment of lipid asymmetry will also be explored. These
studies are aimed at providing physical insight into the mechanism of lipid
compositional asymmetry.