* 1402149
* SusChEM: Redox Non-Innocence in N- and C-donor Chelate Complexes of 1st Row Transition Elements: Radical Character in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Peter Wolczanski, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

This project, funded by the NSF Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of
Chemistry, supports the research of Professor Peter T. Wolczanski of Cornell
University to explore the design and synthesis of first row transition metal
complexes containing ligands that expand the chemistry of the metal, primarily
through oxidation and reduction processes. The coordinating ligands feature
nitrogen (N)- and carbon (C)-donors with multiredox capability, that is they are
"redox non-innocent" (RNI) by virtue of giving or taking electrons from the
metal, thereby increasing the metal's reactivity. The Wolczanski group employs
many first row transition metals such as iron and chromium, making complexes
that are uniquely reactive and more environmentally-friendly and sustainable
than current precious metal complexes. Professor Wolczanski and his group are
active in the local community, actively planning and participating in multi-week
after-school experiments for the Chemistry Club at Caroline Elementary School in
Ithaca, New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on
experimental studies that seek to: expand the scope of first row transition
metal complexes that express redox non-innocence, increase the field strengths
about first row transition metals via chelation and metal-carbon bonds, prepare
new species capable of unique carbon-carbon bond-forming processes, and generate
metal-carbon clusters based on dicarbides. Redox non-innocent (RNI) ligands
"electronically buffer" transition metal centers and expand their ability to
conduct redox events inherent to bond-making and bond-breaking reactions. This
research project focuses on the application of N-donor chelates to the chemistry
of first row transition metal complexes, with an emphasis on stabilizing metal-
nitrogen and -carbon multiple bonds while rendering them reactive. Operational,
functionality tolerant, first row olefin metathesis catalysts are a critical
target. The preparation of nitrogen and carbon-based chelates possessing the
strong fields are necessary to transform first row transition metal complexes
into those capable of second or third row reactivity. Studies also focus on C-C
bond-making, featuring metal-stabilized carbanions that possess radical
character. Radical hydrocarbon bond activations have led to ligand design
features for hydrogen-atom abstraction and C-C couplings; these bond-making
processes are scrutinized with regard to scope and the potential for catalysis.
Graduate and undergraduate researchers are actively involved in both the
experimental and theoretical aspects of the project. The students receive
training in several characterizational techniques including Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance and Mossbauer spectroscopies as well as magnetometry and
electronic structure calculations.