* 1402594
* NeTS: JUNO: Collaborative Research: Location-Based Forwarding and ID-Based Routing (LORIF) for the Future Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 03/31/2018
* USD 245,999.00

Today's Internet connects more and more devices. It has been predicted that by
2020, 50 billion "smart" embedded devices will be connected to the Internet. As
the address space is nearly exhausted, the increasing users, applications,
services, and devices pose a great demand on the Internet. At the same time,
Internet users expect to have any information/service available at their
fingertips. This exacerbates the need for a highly available and scalable
Internet.

The project aims to meet the scalability and reliability demands of diverse
applications, services and trillions of devices. The proposed architecture,
referred to as LOcation-based Routing and ID-based Forwarding or LORIF, supports
data forwarding based on the ID of a destination host, while maintaining routes
based on the topological locations of the end host. Each host may have multiple
locations representing its topological identity. Through a novel service for
mapping host ID to network location(s), LORIF enables the control plane to
scaleably exploit path diversity, while at the same time, facilitating data
plane to improvements in end-to-end reliability.

LORIF brings significant benefits to users and the society by enhancing the
scalability and reliability of our communication infrastructure. This project
brings together an international team of researchers from diverse and
complimentary backgrounds. Such a collaboration enables the feasibility of
deploying the testbed across the continents, and enhances the odds of adoption
in the future. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students in
network architecture design and testbed development.