* 1402539
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Andreas Chavez, Chavez                  Andreas        S
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Andreas Chavez supports a research and training plan
on the mechanisms by which changes at the level of the gene govern adaptation
and speciation in a mammalian population. The host institution for this
fellowship is the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ) at the University of
California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael Nachman.

A great challenge in evolutionary biology is to understand the genetic bases of
traits involved in adaptation and reproductive isolation to a broader variety of
organisms. This challenge is being met for non-model organisms with new genome
sequencing resources. Hybrid zones are useful systems to apply new molecular
tools for studies of adaptation and speciation because admixture-mapping methods
can be utilized for uncovering the genetic architecture of phenotypic traits, as
well as disclose the number, effect size, and genomic distribution of loci that
contribute to reproductive isolation. This research expands previous hybrid zone
studies on a pair of sister tree squirrels (Tamiasciurus) that exhibit
divergence in ecologically important traits along an environmental gradient.
Training goals include learning new genomic sequencing techniques and emerging
admixture mapping methods that can be applied to non-model organisms. The Fellow
is broadening participation and research opportunities at the MVZ for
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds in biology. These
research opportunities are arranged with the help of the Biology Scholars
Program (BSP) in the biology department. Linking the MVZ and BSP is effective
for improving diversity in the ecology and evolutionary disciplines because the
MVZ has a long tradition of providing undergraduate research opportunities and
the BSP has a long track record of assisting undergraduate students from
backgrounds that are historically under-represented in biology.