* 1402558
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Sharri Zamore, Zamore                  Sharri
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2018
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Sharri Zamore supports research to understand neural
control of aerodynamic stability in flying snakes. The host institution is
Virginia Tech, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jake Socha. In addition to a
new understanding of a unique form of animal flight, this research promises to
contribute to other fields beyond biology, such as bio-inspired robotics. The
fellowship includes a teaching plan for creating a new course in neural control
and dynamics and focuses on outreach, particularly via social media. This
research offers an opportunity for working with students of all ages and
backgrounds and has great potential far-reaching impact through new developments
of educational material. Research training objectives include mastering
techniques of computational modeling, development and implementation of wireless
sensors, and reconstruction and analysis of 3-D
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flying snakes (Chrysopelea sp.¬) are capable
of gliding despite having a cylindrical shape and no specialized appendages
(such as flaps or wings), and therefore offer a unique window into understanding
the mechanics of gliding flight. During glides, these snakes undulate in a
complex three-dimensional pattern, which suggests that gliding stability may
require integration of sensory input (such as vision and balance) and muscular
output for control. This research examines responses to unexpected disturbances
in vision and displacement using air gusts. How these disturbances affect glide
performance enables the prediction of how stability of a gliding cylindrical
body can be achieved. This research provides the first insights into the
sensorimotor control mechanisms that enable stable gliding by flying snakes.