* 1402916
* Numerical Simulations of Compact Neutron Star Binary Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Matthew Duez, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Collisions of neutron stars and black holes are very rare events, but the
enormous energies they release in gravitational waves, infrared radiation,
X-rays, and gamma-rays make them potentially detectable even when very far away.
Their gravitational wave and electromagnetic signals contain information about
the properties and unknown physics of the colliding objects, but to extract this
information, astronomers need theoretical models to which they can compare. For
this project, computer simulations will be carried out of systems with a black
hole and neutron star orbiting each other and eventually merging. Simulations
will also explore the debris commonly produced by black hole-neutron star and
neutron star-neutron star mergers: radioactive gas ejected into the surrounding
space and hot, magnetized nuclear matter swirling around a black hole. Carrying
out these simulations will involve training both graduate and undergraduate
students on techniques of computer modeling in relativistic astrophysics. The
resulting gravitational wave and nuclear debris data will be made available to
all astronomers working to detect and characterize these events.

This research fills some of the most interesting remaining gaps in the modeling
of inspiral, disk, and outflow phases of black hole-neutron star binary mergers
using simulations with the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC), a high-accuracy
numerical relativity code that now includes magnetohydrodynamics, nuclear
microphysics, and neutrino cooling. Simulations of long inspirals are used to
test and improve algorithms for detecting and identifying the gravitational wave
signals from such sources. Improvements to SpEC's treatment of flows near black
hole horizons enable higher-accuracy accretion disk simulations, and these are
used to study the disk dynamics, gamma ray burst, energy extraction, and late-
time (tenths of a second) behavior. The project studies outflows for a wide
range of binary parameters. The evolution of ejecta far from the post-merger
black hole is tracked with smoothed-particle hydrodynamics and nuclear reaction
network codes using SpEC data as input, enabling predictions of fallback,
kilonova brightness, and nucleosynthesis.