* 1402593
* Theory of Light Hydrogenlike Bound States: Multiloop Corrections in Muonic and Electronic Atoms and Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Eides, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

An area of fundamental research is the study of the energy levels of hydrogen-
like atoms and exotic atoms (atoms where one particle such as an electron is
replaced by another such as a muon). Experiments have become more and more
accurate, testing the theory at a stronger and stronger level. This supplies a
test of our understanding of the physics of these systems. This project will
calculate energy levels for systems where there have been discrepancies between
theory and experiment. The theoretical results obtained in this research will
find applications in the analysis of the forthcoming experimental results on
muonic and electronic atoms and ions. This analysis will result in more precise
values of the fundamental physical constants, especially the proton radius, as
well as radii of the deuteron and alpha particles. These values will find
applications in metrology and nuclear physics. New theoretical expressions will
be used in the new CODATA analysis of the fundamental physical constants. In its
turn CODATA compilations of the fundamental constants are used in every science
classroom, and in numerous fields of science and engineering, from fundamental
research to consumer electronics. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in this research will acquire research, computer, problem solving,
and presentation skills. Research activity of a graduate student is expected to
lead to a PhD thesis. This project will promote international collaboration, as
collaboration with foreign scientists is planned. The results of the proposed
research will be published in refereed journals, will be presented at domestic
and international conferences and workshops, and will be used in teaching
graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High precision quantum electrodynamics of
hydrogenlike bound states is an active field of theoretical research, motivated
both by spectacular experimental progress and the intellectual challenge.
Despite significant progress in the theory of light, hydrogenlike bound states,
there are a number of challenging problems in this field that are addressed in
this project. Search for a theoretical explanation of the discrepancy between
the value of the proton charge radius obtained from the experiment with muonic
hydrogen and the proton charge radius derived from hydrogen spectroscopy and
electron-proton scattering is one of the main objectives. Irrespective of the
way the proton charge radius controversy will be resolved, an extensive program
of research on energy splittings in light muonic atoms and ions (muonic
hydrogen, muonic deuterium, and muonic helium ions) is in order to match current
and forthcoming experimental results. Methods of nonrelativistic and
relativistic quantum electrodynamics will be applied to loosely bound two-
particle systems in the proposed research. Theoretical results of the proposed
research together with the theoretical results of other authors and with the
results of the past and ongoing experiments would allow the determination of
more precise values for many fundamental physical constants: the proton charge
radius, the Rydberg constant, electron-muon and electron-proton mass ratios,
etc.