* 1402128
* I-Corps:  A Prototype Design and Market Evaluation of Miniaturized Medical Oxygen Concentrator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Mayuresh Kothare, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

A light-weight, portable miniaturized oxygen concentrator that can produce >90+
%O2 has been designed by the research team. This technology is one of the first
to demonstrate air separation using a light-weight compact bench-scale unite
capable of continuously producing 1-3 SLPM of >90+% O2. The design of single
column rapid pressure swing adsorption process integrated with a product storage
tank requires minimum instrumentation and the adsorbent inventory is less than
one third that of commercially available medical oxygen concentrators (MOC) in
the market. In this project, a prototype unit based on the patented novel design
concept will be built using miniaturized valves, flow and pressure sensors. A
micro-processor based control algorithm will be developed for the operation of
the cyclic adsorption process. Furthermore, the weight of the unit will be
optimized using aluminum or plastic based material for the design and
construction of the adsorption column.

Miniaturization of a MOC design is a highly sought-after goal. A more compact
MOC design will benefit millions of people who suffer from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disorder (COPD) and require home oxygen therapy. A portable MOC unit
will provide greater mobility to these patients for exercise and improved
cardiovascular health. A new 'Snap On' design of a miniaturized MOC system which
can be used in conjunction with an existing compressed air source as in a
hospital room or an industrial site can further extend the application of this
product by eliminating the need of a dedicated air compressor. Other potential
applications of this technology may be on-board oxygen supply in airlines and
cruise ships, military camps, etc.