* 1402753
* Ultraviolet Photodissociation Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Brodbelt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2022
* USD 910,733.00

Professor Jennifer S. Brodbelt of the University of Texas at Austin is supported
by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop analytical methodologies based on mass spectrometry for the analysis of
intact proteins. These experiments provide information on the locations of
multiple posttranslational modifications, which makes it possible to study the
influence of those groups on protein function and hence allow better
understanding of the structure and properties of biological systems. The
proposed research promises to overcome some of the technical hurdles associated
with the activation and dissociation of intact proteins to generate meaningful
fragment ion maps that can be used for protein identification. If successful,
the proposed work will positively contribute to the Human Proteome Project, an
on-going effort to catalog all human proteins. It will also facilitate the use
of top-down protein mass spectrometry for solving problems in the areas of
biotherapeutics, structural biology, and mechanistic biochemistry. In this
context, the project will provide new avenues for the identification of proteins
and hence advance our understanding of life processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, studies are being conducted to develop ultraviolet
photodissociation (UVPD) as a versatile strategy for the analysis of proteins by
mass spectrometry, and to explore the mechanistic, structural, and experimental
features that play a role in the ultraviolet photodissociation process. The
project has five separate but related specific aims: (1) to explore the
parameters for effective UVPD of intact proteins; (2) to develop a hybrid
electron transfer dissociation- ultraviolet photodissociation (ETD/UVPD) methods
for mass spectrometric fragmentation of intact proteins; (3) to modify the
charge state of proteins for more effective ultraviolet photodissociation; (4)
to modulate the selectivity of UVPD by the attachment of specific chromophores
to the proteins; and (5) to develop UVPD methodologies for structural biology
applications with a focus on determining the structures of intact proteins and
the binding interactions of native protein
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of this project, students will
be trained in advanced mass spectrometry, laser optics, derivatization
reactions, protein processing, and bioinformatics, and summer boot camps will be
set up to increase awareness of the potential applications of advanced mass
spectrometry for solving biological problems.