* 1402707
* Volumetrically resolved single-shot single-access-point imaging of translucent objects
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Volker Sick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2018
* USD 333,112.00

1402707&lt;br/&gt;Sick, Volker&lt;br/&gt;Title: Volumetrically resolved single-
shot single-access-point imaging of translucent
objects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program uses light-field camera technology to
develop a new diagnostic tool that measures instantaneous three-dimensional (3D)
structures of translucent objects such as illuminated sprays or flame fronts in
combustion systems. This information will enable breakthrough discoveries in
combustion research by enhancing the development of predictive capability for
practical engine design. Combining the expertise of faculty from mechanical and
electrical engineering enables this project. The research work is integrated
into a range of innovative learning experiences that contribute broadly to
recruiting and educating the scientific and engineering work force. Efforts
include demonstrated strategies for diversity and inclusion and entrepreneurial
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, measurements of the
instantaneous 3D structure of combustion processes are only possible with very
high experimental effort and for conditions that are optimized for optical
access. Plenoptic or light-field imaging creates new opportunities in this
context. A single optical port is sufficient to capture images that can be
processed to form a 3D reconstruction of the observed scene. This capability is
critical for improved understanding of how 3D structure affects anything from
mixing of fuel and air to combustion initiation and flame propagation. This in
turn is critical to develop improved combustion processes for cleaner and more
efficient energy production. 3D reconstruction methods for plenoptic images of
scenes with solid boundaries at surfaces have been developed and are available.
The efforts here will focus on image formation methods for translucent objects,
such as illuminated fuel sprays or the flame front structure of a turbulent
flame. Luminosity-enhancing additives such as alkali compounds can help to
increase the signal intensity. 3D imaging concepts envisioned here have high
potential for commercial viability and applications outside of combustion
research with a broader scientific and economic impact. This can be promoted via
MConneX, a new web-based platform at the University of Michigan to share new
research and education efforts with students, faculty, and alums.