* 1402271
* Representation Theory, Geometry, and Cohomology in Tensor Triangulated Categories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Daniel Nakano, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 158,301.00

Algebraic structures like groups, Lie algebras, and Lie superalgebras have
internal symmetries that have been used in many different physical applications
in biology, chemistry, and physics. Representation theory, a method to codify
information about groups and algebras through matrix realizations, has played a
fundamental role in mathematics over the past one hundred years. Modern trends
in representation theory have involved using tools from topology (i.e.,
cohomology) and algebraic geometry to package the representations of an
algebraic object via the tensor product structure to connect the representation
theory to ambient geometric structures. This project will use these deep
interactions between the representations, the geometry, and the cohomology as a
powerful device to prove new results about these algebraic structures and to
answer important questions pertaining to geometric and homological invariants
(like the complexity and atypicality) for these representations. The PI will
organize conferences in algebra with an emphasis toward the development of
junior mathematicians, and he will disseminate working knowledge of modern
methods in representation theory through lectures at seminars, workshops, and
summer schools.

This project explores central problems of interest in the representation theory
of reductive algebraic groups, Lie algebras, and Lie superalgebras. This study
includes discovering new conjectures about the characters of simple modules for
reductive algebraic groups in positive characteristic, and classical Lie
superalgebras in characteristic zero. The determination of formulas for
extensions between irreducible representations for finite Chevalley groups and
loop algebras will also be explored. In this investigation, the PI will make use
of tensor triangulated geometry and other geometric constructions in
triangulated categories to compute cohomological invariants (e.g. cohomology
groups, module varieties) of representations for the aforementioned algebraic
objects.