* 1402133
* Collaborative Research: Indian Summer Monsoon Variability Reconstructed from  Tibetan Lake Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 87,831.00

The Indian Summer Monsoon directly impacts over one billion people, but very
little is known about how variable it can be -- whether large increases or
decreases in the amount of rainfall from year to year are normal or not. This
research will investigate the variability of the monsoon by sampling bottom
sediments from four lakes high in the southeastern Tibetan Plateau, which are
believed to hold a record stretching back well over 6000 years into the past.
Understanding the range of variability will help to improve climate models that
are used to simulate the region's response to a range of abrupt and long term
changes in temperature, wind circulation patterns, and moisture sources. In
addition, understanding the past climate conditions of the region will allow a
better understanding of the regional plant and animal populations and
interactions, as well as changes in the human cultures of the area. This work
will strengthen international scientific relationships between U.S. and Chinese
scientific institutions, scientists, and students. Support will be provided for
two earlier career scientists, a Ph.D. student and undergraduate students. The
research team will collaborate with the Center for Earth and Environmental
Sciences in Indiana to develop a new outreach module for 4th to 9th graders that
will raise the awareness of issues surrounding water resources locally in
Indianapolis, IN, and the United States as well as in the monsoon
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate Indian summer
monsoon variability during the Holocene with decadally resolved sediment records
from four alpine lakes on the southeastern Tibetan Plateau. The proposed
research builds on previous NSF-supported work in the Nyainqentanglha Mountains,
which are a major center of action in the summer monsoon system and a primary
gateway for moisture entering the Tibetan Plateau. Results from previous work
demonstrate that lakes in the region contain Holocene-length sediment archives
which can be dated with radiometric techniques. These lakes also have decadal
sedimentation rates and contain a diverse range of climate proxies that capture
both local and synoptic monsoon variability. The team will reconstruct local
monsoon variability with physical sedimentology and geochemistry, and synoptic
variability with hydrogen isotope measurements on terrestrial leaf waxes. The
results will be synthesized with paleoclimate records from the Tibetan Plateau
and surrounding region, as well as with records from key regions in the global
climate system, like the tropical Pacific and the North Atlantic, to address
three central questions: (i) How did Indian Summer Monsoon rainfall vary on
decadal timescales during the Holocene? (ii) Is there evidence for an Indian
Summer Monsoon response to changing global climate boundary conditions during
the middle Holocene at ~5300 years before present? (iii) Did the Medieval
Climate Anomaly and Little Ice Age discernibly influence Indian Summer Monsoon
precipitation?