* 1402206
* Understanding galaxy growth and history through innovative instruments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Erika Hamden, Hamden                  Erika          T
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Ms. Erika T. Hamden is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the California
Institute of Technology. Our current understanding the formation of galaxies has
thus far relied on our ability to directly detect light from the stars of those
galaxies. But directly observing galaxies isn't enough to tell us exactly how a
particular galaxy has formed or why one galaxy differs from another. According
to high-resolution computer simulations, there should be large reservoirs of gas
and dust outside of galaxies, providing new inflowing material and feeding star
formation. This inflowing material is combined with hot gas blown off by
explosive events in the galaxy itself, such as exploding stars. This gas,
surrounding and feeding the galaxy, is known as the Circumgalactic Medium (CGM),
and is extremely dim. The CGM has only been observed indirectly, by looking at
what the gas does to light from a more distant object, which cannot create a
full picture of the gas. The PI will observe this gas directly for the first
time by taking advantage of new instruments. Direct detection of the CGM gas
will help determine how the types of galaxies observed today were formed. The PI
will also work within the community of public schools around Caltech to create a
program that teaches public school science teachers about astronomy and
telescope use and that gives them the tools to start astronomy classes and clubs
at their schools. These classes will then work on a small project building their
own instrumentation that can be used to take data. This project will directly
detect the CGM for the first time using newly built and proposed IFUs to observe
x, y, velocity, temperature, and metallicity information. The observing program
will incorporate existing absorption line studies to select galaxies with known
MgII absorption. The outer regions and halos of these galaxies should have
bright metal emission lines in the Keck Cosmic Web Imager (KCWI) redshift range.
Hamden will also use KCWI, and the Cosmic Web Imager (CWI) on Palomar, to detect
redshifted emission lines from galaxies observed by the Faint Intergalactic
Redshifted Balloon (FIREBall, a forthcoming UV multi-object spectrograph,
attempting to detect the CGM at UV wavelengths). Maps of UV emission from
FIREBall can be paired with maps of other metal lines from KCWI and CWI to
provide temperature diagnostics, density measurements, and velocity information
for a galaxy halo. Accurate sky background subtraction is the key to observing
the CGM in emission and determining the conditions and history of galaxy growth.