* 1402706
* Microgel Tethering for Integrated Microarray-Based RNA Amplification and Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 320,262.00

Proposal Number: 1402706&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Libera, Matthew R.&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Microgel Tethering for Integrated Microarray-Based RNA Amplification and
Detection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance:&lt;br/&gt;When a patient enters a
hospital with symptoms suggesting some form of infection, determining whether an
infection is present can take as long as 24 hours, and identifying the specific
infectious species can take 72 hours or more. During that period, patients can
suffer severely, because the lack of a clear and rapid diagnosis means that a
patient may not receive the most appropriate treatment, such as the
administration of the correct antibiotic, for hours or even days. While new
technologies based on molecular diagnostics are beginning to mitigate this
problem by rapidly identifying the DNA of infecting species, these new
approaches are unable to keep up with the throughput required by major hospitals
where dozens of such tests must be run every day. This research project is thus
studying a new technology that has the potential to not only make a rapid
diagnosis but also make many such diagnoses for many different patients. This
technology uses hydrogels - similar to the materials in soft contact lenses and
in disposal diapers - that are microscopic in size, so only a very small amount
of target DNA is required for each test. The engineering and science questions
that must be addressed center, first, on how to make these microscopic hydrogels
and, second, how to modify them, so the chemical reactions needed for DNA
detection can proceed accurately and quickly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Project Description: Molecular diagnostic (MDx) technologies can detect
infection and determine the infecting species to the level of an individual
strain in times as short as one hour. However, the fundamental complexity of
current MDx assays has hindered their widespread use in clinical settings. Many
hospitals thus use MDx methods selectively and still rely heavily on the very
slow, classical, method of sampling, culturing and phenotyping. A fundamental
change to the current paradigm of MDx test development will require a new and
different platform technology. We hypothesize that surface-patterned microgels
can integrate detection, isothermal amplification, and extensive multiplexing in
a single microfluidic chamber and thus, ultimately, simplify the overall
molecular-diagnostic process. Specifically, this research project: (i) exploits
an innovative, real-time, self-reporting, microarray-based detection method
based on molecular beacon (MB) hybridization probes tethered to highly hydrated
electron-beam-patterned poly(ethylene glycol) [PEG] microgels; (ii) is
establishing a new microarray-based, isothermal, RNA amplification approach that
places the amplification primers in immediate proximity to the MB detection
probes and thus enables highly multiplexed assays; and (iii) takes advantage of
the inherent microscaling properties of e-beam patterning and microfluidic
assembly to control sample volume sizes and ultimately promote target-primer
hybridization. Importantly, this project explores the new concept of solid-phase
Nucleic Acid Sequence-Based Amplification (SP-NASBA) where the primers sets,
like the molecular beacon probes, are tethered to surface-patterned microgels.
Immobilizing the primers is a significant departure from current practice.
Success will require a careful understanding of the nature and spatial
distribution of chemically functional sites on the surface of an individual
microgel as well as the partitioning of those sites to tether various
amplification primers and molecular beacon detection probes.