* 1402640
* Fundamental Studies of Accelerated Low Temperature Combustion Kinetics by Nonequilibrium Plasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Walter Lempert, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

1402640 Lempert

Plasmas are often used to facilitate burning of fuels, especially those either
difficult to ignite or to sustain burning, as they might be burning at low
temperatures. This proposal focuses on obtaining data that would help to
understand how plasmas facilitate fuel burning under these unfavorable
conditions. A collaborative arrangement will be established between the co-PIs
and the Dublin, OH city school system. This outreach program will include live
in-classroom demonstrations, virtual classroom visits, and participation in the
Dublin Professional Internship Program. The program will also advance "discovery
and understanding" in several ways. In addition to the participation of graduate
students, the program will include active participation of undergraduates. The
program will also significantly impact the scientific infrastructure in the U.S
(and the world). In particular, the low temperature data sets generated from
this program will be made available to researchers world-wide for model
development and validation. The co-PIs and students are regular contributors to
scientific meetings in the U.S. and abroad, and maintain a comprehensive web
site.

The proposed program focuses on experimental and modeling studies of the
acceleration of low temperature combustion kinetics by non-equilibrium plasmas.
The goal is to generate extensive sets of benchmark low temperature (~400 -
850K) data that will provide new physical insight into the most important
plasma-enhanced fuel oxidation processes in H2/air and a variety of
hydrocarbon/air mixtures, in particular the role of non-equilibrium vibrational
and metastable electronic state species and large non-equilibrium pools of key
radical species such as O, H, and OH. The methodology will utilize an extensive
suite of laser diagnostics to perform measurements of the temporal evolution of
electron density and temperature, heavy species rotational/translational
temperature, N2 and H2 vibrational distribution function, and selected species
concentrations after application of a single nano-sec duration discharge pulse.
Experiments will be performed in a complimentary pair of nano-second plasma
discharge cells, both of which will produce diffuse plasmas with excellent
optical access.