* 1402743
* Infrared Perfect Absorbers and Thermal Emitters with Tunable and Ultrabroad Bandwidth Based on Metamaterial Cavities
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Jie Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 304,912.00

CBET-1402743&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable energy dramatically
reduces the consumption of conventional fossil energy and plays an important
role in the reduction of greenhouse gases. In particular, thermophotovoltaic
(TPV) energy conversion systems can convert thermal energy into electricity and
these systems can be installed conveniently in many industrial environments to
collect waste heat from engines, motors, or other high temperature sources of
heat. A major challenge in increasing the conversion efficiency of TPV systems
is to realize infrared absorbers with near-unity absorptivity and thermal
emitters with high emissivity in the designed frequency range. Optical
metamaterials are artificially structured materials to realize extraordinary
properties and these materials can be used to realize high-performance infrared
absorbers and thermal emitters. In this proposal, a new type of three-
dimensional metamaterial infrared perfect absorbers and thermal emitters with
advanced properties are designed and demonstrated to address the major challenge
of TPV systems. This research will also benefit other applications in solar
energy harvesting, thermal detection, and infrared sensing. The proposed
research will be enhanced by outreach activities for high school students
through summer research academy program and minority introduction to engineering
program. The project also includes educational activities for training and
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students especially underrepresented
minorities and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy conversion and transport with
electromagnetic waves is an exciting research area for renewable energy
generation, including photovoltaic (PV) and thermophotovoltaic (TPV) energy
conversion. In order to greatly enhance the conversion efficiency of TPV
systems, broadband infrared perfect absorbers and selective tunable-band thermal
emitters need to be designed to fit the required absorption or emission spectrum
characteristics of TPV components. One new technology for developing TPVs is
optical metamaterials. Although planar metamaterials have been studied to design
infrared perfect absorbers, they still suffer disadvantages of narrow bandwidth,
polarization dependence and limited incident angle, which limit the TPV device
performance significantly. The goal of this proposal is to study and demonstrate
a new type of three-dimensional metamaterial infrared perfect absorbers and
thermal emitters based on metamaterial cavities, with the advantages of tunable
and ultrabroad bandwidth, polarization independence, and wide incident angle, in
order to address the research challenges in perfect absorbers. The optical
properties of metamaterial cavities will be investigated in detail with
theoretical analysis and numerical simulations. The light absorption induced
heat generation and temperature variation inside the metamaterial absorbers will
also be emphasized. The optimized metamaterial cavities will be fabricated and
infrared perfect absorbers and thermal emitters with advanced properties will be
demonstrated.