* 1402199
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Victoria Garcia, Garcia                  Victoria
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 207,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and require a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science and engineering. The
fellowships advance NSF efforts to diversify the STEM workforce now and in the
future. This fellowship to Victoria Garcia supports research on how cooperative
behavior affects aging in birds and how wild populations experience aging. The
fellowship provides training in advanced quantitative methods, population
genetics, and evolutionary biology. The host institutions are Old Dominion
University, Cornell University, and Archbold Biological Station in Central
Florida. The sponsoring scientists are Dr. Eric Walters, Dr. John Fitzpatrick,
Dr. Walter Koenig, and Dr. Reed Bowman. The plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science includes teaching and mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students at ODU, where almost half the students are
from backgrounds underrepresented in science. Additionally, the Fellow is
developing an outreach activity module related to her research that will be
available to local high schools, many of which have predominantly
underrepresented student populations.

Senescence, a decline in physiological functioning with age, can lead to reduced
survival and reproduction. The existence of senescence has now been documented
in wild populations, but few studies have delved into the causes, consequences,
and evolutionary theory of senescence, as this study does. Sociality is thought
to be a major driver in determining patterns of aging because it is associated
with factors that directly affect senescence such as age at onset of
reproduction, mortality rates, density, and habitat saturation. This research
uses long-term data to examine previously untested aspects of aging including
how sociality affects both actuarial (survival) and reproductive senescence in 3
species of cooperative breeders (Red-cockaded Woodpeckers [Picoides borealis],
Acorn Woodpeckers [Melanerpes formicivorus], and Florida Scrub-Jays [Aphelocoma
coerulescens]).