* 1402285
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Eric Rittmeyer, Rittmeyer               Eric           N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,112.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2014, International. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host international laboratory for the Fellow. The title of the research plan for
this fellowship to Eric N. Rittmeyer is "Genomic Inference of Comparative
Biogeography across Multiple Barriers in Reptiles and Amphibians of the Sahul
Shelf." The host institution for this fellowship is the Australian National
University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Craig Moritz.

Isolation across barriers to dispersal is a powerful driver of evolution. Often,
the evolutionary history of multiple co-occurring species may be impacted by
multiple shared barriers and shared historic events (such as sea level change).
However, current analyses do not enable multiple barriers to be examined in
multiple species simultaneously, nor do they allow for the analysis of large-
scale, genomic datasets collected using new next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies. This project develops novel analytical methods for comparative
biogeography that enable researchers to examine shared evolutionary histories
and test for simultaneous divergence among multiple taxa and across multiple
barriers using NGS data. These methods are being tested using a genomic dataset
collected using NGS of ultraconserved elements for 14 species of herpetofauna
(reptiles and amphibians) co-distributed across the Sahul Shelf region of
Australia and New Guinea. This project also investigates how incorporating
multiple barriers into a single analysis impacts inferences, and how
differential ecology, such as species living in different habitats or with
different dispersal capabilities, impacts divergence across barriers to
dispersal. These data provide extensive insight into the evolutionary impacts of
the physical features of barriers, the ecological traits of taxa, and the
dynamic interactions of multiple barriers.

Training objectives involve developing the bioinformatic, programming, and
genomic skills necessary for modern research in evolutionary biology. Broader
impacts include the development of novel analyses made freely available as open-
source software, the collection of museum specimens and genetic samples that are
a valuable resource for future research on reptiles and amphibians, and
fostering international collaboration among researchers from Australia, Papua
New Guinea, and the United States. The Fellow is involved in outreach
activities, including the distribution of educational materials to local
villagers in Papua New Guinea. Combined, these efforts on a broad variety of
fronts promise a lasting, positive effect on collaborative relationships,
research in New Guinea, and public awareness of biodiversity and biological
research.