* 1402222
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Clay Wright, Wright                  Robert         C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with engineering and
statistics. The Fellows are expected to be leaders of the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Dr. Clay Wright supports research on
how certain signaling molecules in plants have evolved to perceive distinctive
developmental and environmental conditions and mediate dramatically different
responses. The host institution for this fellowship is The University of
Washington; sponsoring scientists are Drs. Jennifer Nemhauser and Eric Klavins .
The Fellow's training goals include learning techniques and approaches of
molecular evolution and plant biology, with emphasis on analytical and
quantitative aspects. His outreach activities include training and mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students and outreach to the public and educators
through established programs, such as the Pacific Science Center?s Science Caf√©s
and Expanding Your Horizons, and creating teaching
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The family of F-box-containing proteins has
expanded significantly relative to other gene families throughout the evolution
of modern plants. In plants, F-box proteins mediate numerous developmental
responses to constantly changing environmental stimuli. Thus the expansion of
the F-box family may reflect the ability of these proteins to rapidly evolve new
specificities, creating novel signaling modules, and allowing plants to adapt
when confronted with challenges such as drought, nutrient limitation, or new
predators. This is being tested through quantitative analysis of the molecular
evolution of F-box-containing plant hormone receptors. Very large sets of both
prospective ancestral plant hormone receptor variants and chimeric variants of
the two current plant hormone receptors are being created and functionally
characterized using protein engineering techniques. This characterization is
expected to provide insight into the development of diversity and specificity
within the F-box family. Variants of particular interest are being introduced
into plants to assess their effects on plant evolution. Additionally, the
protein engineering platform developed in this work is expected to lead to the
development of new F-box proteins. Such F-box proteins can be used as signaling
modules to enhance the production of economically valuable crops, fuels,
chemicals, biologicals, and pharmaceuticals. Applications of synthetic biology
in this manner have increased access to food and medicine, while reducing cost,
waste, and dependence on fossil fuels.