* 1402912
* EAGER:   Developing atom probe tomography (APT) for the characterization of carbonate minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Alberto Perez-Huerta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2015
* USD 73,870.00

This EAGER award supports a postdoctoral student to assist in the development of
methods to fabricate appropriately shaped, nanometer scale, tips of abiogenic
and biogenic carbonates using a focused ion beam (FIB) for subsequent
compositional analysis using atom probe tomography (APT). APT was developed for
the analysis of synthesized conducting materials for process control in the
semiconductor industry and sub-nanoscale/atomic scale spatially resolved
analysis of elemental distributions in other synthesized materials (e.g.,
ceramics). The PI, a mineralogist/geochemist who specializes in studies of
biogenic mineralization processes seeks to employ the extant FIB-SEM and APT
instruments housed in the Central Analytical Facility (CAF) at the University of
Alabama. APT technology uses pulsed laser evaporation of extremely delicate
nanoscale materials tips followed by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS)
to image individual atom distributions in sample tips. Application of APT to
studies of carbonates is in its infancy and presents major challenges to
successful analysis for potential application to understanding mineralization
and diagenetic processes at the atomic scale. Fabrication of tips from brittle
biogenic carbonates minerals requires extremely careful ion milling and tip
loads into the APT instrument and the PI has thus far only achieved a single
successful analysis of a biogenic carbonate tip with limited analytical
precision. A goal of this EAGER is to first try to improve methods to ion mill
tips of abiogenic carbonates for subsequent APT analysis and then to attempt to
extrapolate those processes to ion milling of natural biogenic carbonate
minerals. A second goal is develop optimal analysis protocols to determine if
the relative abundances of major, minor, and trace elements of carbonate
minerals can be successfully imaged at the atomic scale. The technique, should
it be successful, could prove transformative for studies of microbially mediated
carbonate mineralization processes and paleorecords research but it presents
considerable risk, hence the EAGER proposal
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonate rocks are present in large parts of
the sedimentary continental crust of the Earth and thus are of great
significance in geological studies. Furthermore, much of the current development
of geochemical techniques and applications is for studies in paleoclimate and
paleoenvironmental reconstructions in which the analysis of biogenic carbonate
minerals plays a crucial role. The potential use of atom probe could contribute
advanced knowledge of: 1) diffusion kinetics (volume, grain-boundary, trace
elements, etc.); 2) element partitioning; 3) mineral dissolution and
recrystallization; and 4) transformation of transient amorphous phases into
crystalline counterparts. Proposed new analytical developments could encourage
new approaches to geochemistry research and mineral analysis and promote
interdisciplinary research. Should the technique development prove successful,
the APT and FIB instruments in the Central Analytical Facility (CAF) of The
University of Alabama could be opened for outside community use. The proposal
will engage a postdoctoral scientist and results will be disseminated through
talks at topical workshops, scientific conferences and through scholarly
publication.