* 1402655
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Aerosol Droplets Migration in Fibrous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Hooman Vahedi Tafreshi, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 235,584.00

Vahedi Tafreshi, Hooman / Chase, George &lt;br/&gt;1402655 / 1402336
&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Commonwealth University / University of Akron
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient removal of finely dispersed droplets from gases
or immiscible fluids is crucially important in a vast variety of applications
such as diesel fuel purification to prevent corrosion and engine damage,
pollution control for environmental protection and our health and safety,
efficient water management in fuel cells, and even fog collection for water
harvesting, among many others. Understanding the dynamics, coalescence, and
migration of liquid droplets is the fundamental knowledge required for the
proper design of liquid-liquid and liquid-gas separation fibrous media. As the
physics of droplets coalescing on fibers of different wettability is highly
complicated, the existing droplet separation media are generally manufactured
through a series of inefficient and expensive trial-and-error processes. This
proposal is a combined experimental-computational study to develop a generalized
theory to describe the coalescence and movement of droplets on a fiber and
between fibers, and thereby provide a more accurate method of designing liquid-
liquid and liquid-gas separation media. The proposed research is a coupled
multiscale-simulation-multiscale-experiment approach that 1) circumvents the
need for excessive computational power, and 2) allows studying the physics of
the problem at a fundamental level while producing an applied theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research will lead to the
creation of enabling knowledge to design coalescing fibrous media based on
engineering science, rather than trial-and-error. Educated design of droplet
separation media can lead to significant savings in energy costs and the costs
associated with pollution control. This work involves multiple students from
K-12 through graduate. Students from underrepresented minorities will be
recruited to participate in the proposed research program. Videos and images of
droplet motions on fibers from experiments and models will be made available to
the public for educational use. Educational materials will also be developed and
incorporated into new graduate/undergraduate courses on multiphase transport in
porous materials.