* 1402890
* RUI: Proposal to Test Fundamental Principles of General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Quentin Bailey, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 127,130.00

Einstein's General Relativity is a pillar of modern physics, describing all
known gravitational phenomena. The work in this project will advance our
understanding of the foundations of General Relativity. Though it is our best
fundamental theory of gravity to date, General Relativity has yet to be
successfully combined with quantum theory and elementary particle theory into a
single unified theory of physics. Recent work has pointed to the possibility
that observable hints of such a unified theory could be manifested as minuscule
violations of the foundations of General Relativity theory, including local
Lorentz symmetry, which encapsulates the principles of Special Relativity. The
proposed work will make use of a general theoretical framework for describing
generic hypothetical Lorentz violation, called the Gravitational Standard-Model
Extension, which has been widely adopted in recent years. The principal
investigator will further develop this framework revealing new types of
observable signals for Lorentz violation in experiments and observations
including lunar laser ranging, gravimeter tests, and gravitational wave signals.

This work will positively impact researchers involved in precision tests of
physical laws by providing motivation and additional areas in which to search
for novel effects and new physics beyond General Relativity. The expected small
size of any hypothetical Lorentz-violating signal continues to motivate the
development of more precise measurement techniques by many experimental teams
contributing to current precision instrument standards and the general field of
metrology. The setting for this work is at a primarily undergraduate institution
and this award will increase the visibility of such institutions in cutting-edge
research. Accessible theoretical projects will be available to undergraduate
students in physics, including minorities and women. This will impact
undergraduate students who will be encouraged to pursue theoretical physics and
be more likely to attend graduate school in physics.