* 1402353
* Collaborative Research: A new paradigm for ovarian cancer imaging and therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Vikas Kundra, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 180,000.00

1403191/1402353&lt;br/&gt;Anvari, Bahman/Kundra, Vikas&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Collaborative research: a new paradigm for ovarian cancer imaging and
therapy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance:&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative
application submitted by Bahman Anvari, PhD in the Department of Bioengineering
at University of California, Riverside, and Vikas Kundra, MD, PhD in the
Departments of Radiology and Cancer Systems Imaging, Division of Diagnostic
Imaging at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. The investigators
propose the use of a new optical nano-probe, composed of biological and organic
materials, for imaging and laser-based treatment of ovarian tumors in a mouse
model. The knowledge gained through this study has broader significance and
importance towards the development of an integrated imaging and phototherapeutic
laparoscopic system that can potentially become part of routine standard of care
for early detection of ovarian cnacer, a significant publich health problem.
Such an integrated system may also be used intraoperatively to detect, and
remove ovarian tumors that are currently not identified pre-surgery or at
surgery. This capability is significant since the complete surgical removal of
all tumor nodules is crucial towards patient survival. The proposed research
also provides a platform for educational outreach. Such activities will include
participation of under-represented students at UCR, and provide a multi-
disciplinary training opportunity to acquire skills in biophotonics,
nanomaterials and nanoscience, and oncologic
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Explanation:&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goals of the investigators are to develop a new paradigm that would reduce the
burden of ovarian cancer by improved imaging and treatment methods in
conjunction with intraoperative or laparoscopy procedures. Current imaging
methods based on pre-operative computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
(MR), or by visual inspection during surgery, are frequently not capable of
detecting small ovarian tumor nodules (diameter &lt; 1 cm). Such nodules, if not
detected and removed, can result in recurrence and low patient survival. Current
treatment approach, based on cytoreductive surgery followed by standard
chemotherapeutic agents are not very effective, mostly because of the incomplete
resection of all tumors by the former, and lack of efficacy of the latter
method. &lt;br/&gt;As the first steps, the investigators are interested in
studying the utility of an optical nano-structured platform with molecular
targeting, near infrared (NIR) imaging, and phototherapeutic capabilities in
mice models implanted with ovarian tumor xenografts. This platform is comprised
of the NIR chromophore, indocyanine green (ICG), encapsulated by a shell derived
from the capsid proteins of the plant-infecting brome mosaic virus. The platform
is referred to as optical viral ghosts (OVGs). The outer surface of the shell
will be functionalized with a monoclonal antibody against the human epidermal
growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2), the molecular target of OVGs, whose over-
expression on ovarian cancer cells is associated with increased risk of cancer
progression and death. The specific aims of this proposal are to investigate:
(1) the effectiveness of OVGs functionalized with anti-HER-2 as a targeted
delivery platform to intraperitoneal ovarian tumors in mice; (2) the
effectiveness of image-guided photothermal destruction of xenografted tumors in
mice; (3) and proof-of-concept NIR fluorescence imaging of fallopian tube
carcinomas. The last specific aim is explored since some types of ovarian
cancers may arise from the fallopian tube epithelium; thus early stages of
ovarian cancer could potentially be identified, and treated.