* 1402744
* Conformational Equilibria of Biologically Relevant Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anthony Serianni, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

In the human body, approximately half of all proteins are decorated with sugars.
These hybrid structures are known as glycoproteins. Glycoproteins can be found
inside cells, attached to their external surfaces (cell membranes) or in the
extracellular space. There is increasing appreciation that the sugar component
of these glycoproteins plays a crucial role in human health and disease, for
example, in bacterial and viral infection, cancer, immunity, and diabetes.
Efforts to understand these cellular processes depend upon knowledge of the
chemical structures of the sugars on the protein, that is, what sugars are
present, how they behave in three dimensions, and how their shapes change over
time. This project will develop new analytical tools to investigate and assign
sugar structure in solution. Students will be cross-trained in both experimental
and theoretical methods ranging from chemical synthesis of sugars to advanced
computational methods used to predict their molecular structures. The work aims
to provide new crosstalk between experiment and theory, with the intent of
refining both into more powerful tools to understand glycoprotein
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled
Sciences and Engineering Program is funding Drs. Anthony Serianni and Ian
Carmichael of the University of Notre Dame, and Dr. Robert Woods of the
University of Georgia, to develop new nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy and computational tools to predict the three-dimensional structures
and dynamics of the high-mannose and complex-type N-glycans of human
glycoproteins. This research group will use redundant NMR J-couplings to
experimentally determine conformational populations about the rotatable bonds
comprising the O-glycosidic linkages in these N-glycans. To achieve this goal,
computational methods (density functional theory) will be used to derive new
equations that relate the magnitudes of specific J-couplings to specific torsion
angles in the linkages. Armed with new experimental data on conformational
populations, comparisons will be made between the experimental findings and
theoretical conformational populations obtained from solvated molecular dynamics
simulations, in an effort to validate the MD predictions or justify
modifications in the equations underlying the MD method. The long-term goal is
to determine the detailed structural properties of biologically important
complex oligosaccharides, either free in solution or bound to proteins or
lipids. This knowledge will prove valuable in understanding how N-glycans exert
their myriad biological functions.