* 1402604
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of the metabolome across the Drosophila phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniel Promislow, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,828.00

Why do some species live longer than others? Scientists have identified
molecular pathways that influence the lifespan of model organisms in the
laboratory. However, little is known about the underlying mechanisms that
account for the enormous variation that we see among species, from mayflies that
live for a day, to clams that can live for centuries. This project will use
metabolomics to investigate mechanisms that influence lifespan. Metabolomics
involves measuring and analyzing the thousands of small molecules (metabolites)
circulating within an organism. Enzymatic proteins help regulate metabolite
levels, and although protein evolution is well studied, little is known about
the evolution of metabolite levels. This project will measure metabolite levels
at various ages during the lifespan in ten species of fruit flies (Drosophila
spp.) to determine if selection affects the rate at which metabolomic profiles
diverge over evolutionary time and if the evolution of fitness traits is tied to
evolutionary change in specific biochemical pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will be one of the first to use metabolomics to answer evolutionary based
scientific questions, and the presentation of the results will enable more
scientists to understand the evolution of metabolomics. This project involves
the combination of different scientific fields (evolutionary biology, molecular
biology, and statistics). As such, undergraduate researchers involved in this
project will have the opportunity to learn to combine multiple research
approaches, including organismal, molecular, and quantitative, to carry out
high-level scientific inquiry.