* 1402620
* Stability Phenomena in Number Theory, Algebraic Geometry, and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Jordan Ellenberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2017
* USD 278,000.00

Number theory is one of the oldest and purest areas of mathematics, unchanged in
many ways since the time of Euclid, but in recent years it has incorporated
ideas and techniques from a wide range of other mathematical areas. This
research project stands at the interface between classical questions about whole
numbers and ideas from other subjects. In one main project, the PI and his
collaborators show how results in algebraic topology, the study of high-
dimensional shapes and the relations between them, translate into statements
about the arithmetic of various number systems. In another, he and another group
develop a new form of representation theory (the study of symmetries of linear
spaces), which sheds light on phenomena of stabilization in number theory,
topology, and algebra. To a first approximation, the work answers the question:
when can an infinite object be described by a finite amount of data? The PI will
also continue his work in mathematical outreach, including a general-audience
book to be released in 2014. This project investigates the Cohen-Lenstra
conjectures concerning the variation of the p-part of the class group of number
fields, and, more generally, distributional questions about the discriminants of
G-extensions for G an arbitrary finite group. The methods used are novel -- the
PI and collaborators show that the Cohen-Lenstra conjectures follow from
assertions about the cohomology of certain moduli spaces of branched covers of
the complex projective line, known as Hurwitz spaces. These spaces can be
defined purely topologically, and in fact the thrust of the work has been to
show that new theorems in algebraic topology imply many popular conjectures
about arithmetic statistics over function fields. What's more, the topological
results serve as a kind of machine for generating conjectures, or at least
heuristics, about questions concerning the distribution of G-extensions over Q
which have not yet been investigated. For instance, the results suggest that if
N is a random squarefree integer chosen uniformly from a large range, and X is
the number of totally real quintic extensions with discriminant N, then X has
the Poisson distribution with mean 1/120. A new aspect of the project is the
theory of FI-modules, developed by the PI in collaboration with Tom Church and
Benson Farb. This theory represents a new approach to homological stability,
whose natural domain of application is not sequences of unadorned vector spaces
but rather sequences of vector spaces whose nth term is a representation of the
symmetric group on n letters. It turns out that there is a natural abelian
category, called the category of FI-modules, which captures a broad spectrum of
phenomena ranging from cohomology of moduli spaces to the coinvariant algebras
arising in algebraic combinatorics to the statistics of squarefree polynomials
and tori in Lie groups over finite fields. In this research project, besides
continuing investigation of the inherent structure of the category of FI-
modules, it is planned to bring this work into contact with other work with
Venkatesh and Westerland. A typical question to be investigated is: are there
infinitely many cubic extensions of a rational function field over a finite
field (or, better: what is the expected number of cubic extensions,
asymptotically) whose discriminant is prime (i.e. an irreducible polynomial over
the finite field)? The corresponding question over Q is a well-known open
problem. The project will also address a suite of other problems; geometric
analogues of and approaches to the Kakeya problem in harmonic analysis, random
matrices and the proportion of ordinary curves over finite fields, and, on the
applied side, some questions about the application of geometry to problems in
data science.