* 1402783
* Analysis of Convection in the Presence of Apparent Slip
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Marc Hodes, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 255,630.00

CBET-1402782 Hodes, Tufts University

Engineered structured surfaces have emerged during the past decade and possess
properties similar to those of naturally occurring structured surfaces such as
the lotus leaf. For example, they provide lubrication such that droplets roll
off of them rather than adhere to them and are thus "self-cleaning".
Applications include drag reduction and manipulation of droplets on lab-on-a-
chip devices for chemical and biological assays. The proposed research would lay
the theoretical foundation to exploit the lubricating properties of structured
surfaces to enable liquid metal cooling of future generations of microelectronic
devices. Indeed, the challenge with liquid metal cooling is reducing the
resistance to the flow of liquid metal through a semiconducting material and
this can be accomplished by utilizing structured surfaces. The end result is
that projected heat loads on microelectronic circuits used for computing and
radio frequency monolithic microwave integrated circuits (RF MMICs) used for
radar and communications may be accommodated. The PI will collaborate with a
teacher at Nashoba Regional High School and a scientist of ARL Designs to
develop and pilot a hands-on module for high school students to learn about
structured surfaces.

In the case of an adiabatic system, laminar flows of liquid over structured
surfaces are fairly well understood as per a body of literature amassed during
the past decade. However, there is a dearth of studies on diabatic, laminar
flows over structured surfaces, i.e., those where there is heat transfer to or
from the liquid. Significantly, all previous studies on diabatic flows neglect 3
substantial effects, i.e., thermocapillary stress and evaporation and
condensation along menisci on account of heat transfer, and curvature of
menisci. The research will use conformal mapping and convolution theory to
develop analytical expressions for the apparent hydrodynamic slip length and
apparent thermal slip length necessary to describe the local interaction of the
flow with the structures of the parallel ridge, transverse ridge and pillar
geometries in the presence of each effect. Then, solution of the (mean)
streamwise-momentum and thermal energy equations will be used to compute the two
key engineering parameters of interest, friction factor and Nusselt number. To
the extent possible, the research will capture all 3 coupled effects
analytically. If necessary, numerical methods will be utilized to capture all 3
coupled effects simultaneously. Lastly, the proposed work will consider
turbulent diabatic flows. Turbulent flows are of interest because the length
scale of the apparent slip lengths is typically on par with that of the viscous
sublayer such that apparent slip effects are not limited to microchannels.