* 1402059
* Transforming fundamental biological questions about cell membranes into quantitative experiments using model and cell systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Sarah Keller, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,262,023.00

Mammals, including humans, are built out of cells. Mammalian cells are bounded
by an outer membrane composed of lipids, cholesterol, and proteins. These three
types of molecules are distributed nonuniformly across the cell's outer
membrane, and this heterogeneity is reported to influence disease processes.
However, scientists currently have little understanding of how this
heterogeneity arises in cell membranes. This issue and a host of other
fundamental questions about cell membranes are impractical to address in intact
cells. As a result, this project will utilize simpler, tractable membrane
systems. In the first case, membranes will be composed of only lipids and
cholesterol. In the second case, membranes will be derived from mammalian cell
outer membranes. In both cases, the membranes will be nonuniform. In this
project, the researchers will conduct a series of experiments to understand the
conditions under which heterogeneity arises within lipid membranes. The
long-­term goal of the project is to discover fundamental physical phenomena of
lipid membranes that will subsequently prove applicable and relevant to
biological cell membranes and to biotechnological applications. The researchers
will convey the excitement and relevance of their results nationwide through
press releases, public lectures, K-­12 outreach, and scientific journal
articles. The principal investigator will train graduate students and
undergraduates for careers in STEM fields and will mentor STEM faculty.

The behavior of membranes, even of relatively simple model membranes, is
remarkably rich.This project will investigate membranes that segregate into
domains enriched in specific lipid (and protein) types in both model lipid
bilayers and in membranes derived from cell systems. The objective of the
research is to understand what physical mechanisms render domains stable, what
physical parameters distinguish domains from other membrane regions, and which
structural features of lipids are required for domain formation. The research is
question-­driven rather than technique-­driven; an array of tools will be
deployed including imaging of membranes on solid supports by atomic force
microscopy and imaging of free-­floating vesicles by fluorescence microscopy.