* 1402723
* Workshop on Frontiers in Image and Video Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2014
* Larry Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 55,850.00

The bombing attacks at the Boston Marathon in April 2013 presented the law
enforcement community with significant challenges in terms of the volume and
variety of video and still images acquired in the course of the investigation.
Tens of thousands of individual media files in multiple formats were submitted
from a variety of sources. These sources included broadcast television feeds,
private Close-Circuit Television (CCTV) systems, mobile device photographs and
videos recovered from the scene, as well as photographs and videos submitted by
the public. Teams of analysts reviewed this evidence using mostly manual
processes to determine the sequence of events before and after the bombing,
ultimately leading to a quick resolution of the case. In the aftermath, it has
become evident that the proliferation of video and image recording devices in
fixed and mobile devices make it inevitable that a similar situation will occur
in future events. As a result, it is incumbent upon the law enforcement
community and the U.S. Government at large to further explore the use of
automated approaches, available today or in the coming years, to better organize
and analyze such large volumes of multimedia data. The findings of this workshop
will help define the future research agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem
of searching for actionable intelligence information from unconstrained images
and videos is an unsolved problem. Solving this involves addressing many sub-
problems such as video summarization, shot detection/scene change detection,
geo-tagging, robust face recognition, human action recognition, semantic
description, image recognition and designing human in the loop systems. In
addition, issues such as data collection and performance evaluation have to be
addressed. Given that several hundreds of videos and a large collection of still
images may be available for analysis, there is a great need to develop robust
computer vision techniques. While many existing computer vision algorithms
perform reasonable well in constrained acquisition conditions, their performance
when unconstrained images and videos are given, is less than satisfactory. This
workshop precisely addresses the challenges that arise in analyzing a large
collection of unstructured image/video collection. This workshop explores the
state of the art in algorithms being developed in academia that can support
forensic analysis and identification in large volumes of images and videos
(e.g., multimedia). The workshop informs long- and near-term research and
development efforts aimed at optimally addressing this situation in the future.
The workshop identifies those video and image analysis problems which are: (1)
Considered solved (i.e., ready to deploy in specific operational scenarios); (2)
Nearly solved (i.e., could lead to solutions with one to three years of
development); and (3) Over-the-Horizon problems (i.e., those challenges
requiring concerted effort over the next 3-5 years and beyond).