* 1402702
* Fundamental Investigations for Very High Heat-Flux  Innovative Operations of Milli-Meter Scale Flow Boilers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Amitabh Narain, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 305,781.00

CBET-1402702&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High heat flux removal is of critical
importance in a number of key applications such as electronic cooling or data
center cooling (where heat generated by electronic processors or components have
to be rapidly dissipated to keep them working reliably). One of the most
effective ways of removing heat is through a phase change process such as
boiling in cooling channels integrated on the back side of the heat-generating
device. In electronic applications, the heat is typically generated at the chip-
level, and due to the small sizes, significant functionality and boiling
efficiency problems arise due to the vapor blocking the channel, and
instabilities in the channel. The proposed research will focus on methods that
will overcome the efficiency issues by ensuring a thin continuously evaporating
film on the heated surface. Successful development of these methods will ensure
improved reliability of computer and electronic devices and enable denser
packaging and smaller footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the proposed study,
high heat-flux capabilities are expected under externally imposed pulsations in
the two phases (liquid and vapor). Thin and wavy boiling liquid films arise as a
result of the pulsations, and cover the entire heat-exchange surface.
Investigations will confirm if one can achieve high heat-flux values along the
length of the flow boiler by a suitable adjustment of the mean quasi-steady film
thickness profile (in the absence of pulsations) along with amplitude control of
superposed waves (by controlling the amplitude of imposed pulsations). This is
expected because the liquid film flow dynamics near the wave-troughs are
dominated by the contact-line flow physics which causes the wave-troughs to
"stick/dwell?" near the heat exchange surface. Therefore, under the proposed
pulsatile operations, at most locations, the mean liquid film thickness will be
significantly reduced and convection effects (in the liquid flow between the
heat-exchange surface and the liquid-vapor interface) will be concurrently
increased.