* 1402180
* Melt-Miscible Polyethylene Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Richard Register, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 850,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrocarbon polymers exhibiting a low
interaction energy density (X, proportional to the Flory-Huggins interaction
parameter) against polyethylene (PE) will be developed; combining these polymers
with PE in the form of block copolymer can lead to either higher-strength
semicrystalline plastics, or easily-processed melt-miscible thermoplastic
elastomers, depending on polymer composition and block architecture. Recently,
it has been shown that certain polymers prepared via ring-opening metathesis
polymerization (ROMP) of norbornene derivatives followed by catalytic
hydrogenation show a relatively low X against PE, though those particular ROMP
polymers have glass transition temperatures (Tg) slightly below room
temperature, hence providing no mechanical reinforcement. This project will
investigate other substituted norbornenes, including polymers with phenyl,
cyclohexyl, and norbornyl sidegroups, all of which show Tg well above room
temperature. Interaction strengths between these polymers, collectively denoted
as "PX", and between these polymers and linear PE (LPE, prepared by
hydrogenation of ROMP polycyclopentene), will be measured via the synthesis of
well-defined block copolymers, at targeted molecular weights, and measurements
of the melt phase behavior, including the thermotropic order-disorder transition
temperature, by small-angle x-ray scattering. Random copolymer blocks will be
employed to tune the solubility parameter of the norbornene-based PX block, to
promote miscibility with LPE. The measured interaction energy densities will be
interpreted within a solubility parameter framework if found to obey regular
mixing (generating a solubility parameter "ladder" where each "rung" is a novel
ROMP polymer), or within a ternary mixing framework if found to mix irregularly.
These frameworks will, in turn, permit the design of PE-containing materials --
through selection of block chemistries and lengths -- which will form
homogeneous, easily-processed melts. Two particular architectures will be
explored, as "test beds" for the property modifications which can be achieved
through the incorporation of high-Tg PX blocks: PX-LPE-PX triblocks with a
majority crystallizable midblock, and LPE-PX-rubber-PX-LPE pentablocks, with a
majority rubbery midblock. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyethylene (PE) is far and away the most
ubiquitous synthetic polymer -- 39 billion pounds produced in the US in 2012
(and increasing, with the availability of ethylene from shale gas) -- and is
familiar in daily life in applications ranging from milk jugs to weatherproofing
sheet to hip replacements. PE is also combined with other polymers, in the form
of a block copolymer -- where the two polymers are covalently bound -- in
numerous specialty applications, including thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs):
rubbers which can be melt-processed and recycled. In TPEs, melt-miscibility
between the blocks facilitates melt-processing, greatly diminishing the amount
of energy required. The present work seeks to develop a polymer which is both
melt-miscible with PE and which has a glass transition temperature (softening
point) above room temperature, to impart the strength characteristic of glassy
polymers to the final block copolymer. The proposed work will provide an
integrated research and educational experience for three to four graduate
students and three to six undergraduates. Students will become expert in the
synthesis of well-defined polymers, macromolecular characterization, structural
characterization by small-angle x-ray scattering, polymer mixing thermodynamics,
and polymer mechanical properties and structure-property relationships. By
having students work across all phases of the project, from synthesis to test
application, they gain a "big picture" outlook which will serve them well as a
future foundation. The PI and students will engage the general public through
science outreach, on the Princeton University campus and nearby schools, most
immediately through the development of a large-auditorium "Polymer Show" to
debut in 2014. A specific aim is to promote interest in, and appreciation for,
polymeric materials science and technology among middle school students,
including those in the Trenton public school system.