* 1402029
* RUI: Exploiting biophysical techniques to understand and manipulate the mechanism and activity of electrode-bound cytochrome P450
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andrew Udit, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division of the
National Science Foundation is awarding Dr. Andrew K. Udit of Occidental College
funds to study the mechanism and activity of electrode-bound cytochrome P450.
The cytochromes P450 are ubiquitous enzymes that can catalyze diverse chemical
reactions. Reproducing the P450 activity in vitro depends on having an efficient
way to deliver electrons to the enzyme. The proposed experiments will use
biophysical techniques to study electron transfer and the reactivity of P450
immobilized on a variety of electrode surfaces. The results of this research
will be useful to develop a fully competent, catalytic P450 electrode, which in
turn has potential industrial applications. The research will be conducted by
undergraduate and high school students and the results of the research will be
used to generate course materials for undergraduate laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;While P450-electrode electronic coupling can be achieved often with
rapid electron transfer, catalysis akin to the native system is not easily
realized; this is especially true for bacterial variants, whose stability,
substrate plasticity, and rapid rates make them ideal candidates for in vitro
applications. Dr. Udit will use biophysical methods including isothermal
calorimetry, bio-layer interferometry, and electrochemistry to study the
mechanism and activity of the P450 enzyme on a variety of electrode surfaces
(e.g., trapped in films on- or covalently-attached to- the electrode surface)
and solvent environments. The long term aim of the research is to improve the
activity of electrode-coupled P450, which is of considerable practical interest
for applications in areas such as biosensing and biocatalysis.