* 1402019
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Daniel Baldassarre, Baldassarre             Daniel         T
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with mathematics and
physical sciences. The Fellows are expected to lead the nation's scientific
workforce of the future. This fellowship to Daniel Baldassarre supports
molecular, ecological, and behavioral investigations of the vampire finch.
Animals exhibit a wide array of behaviors that have been shaped by natural
selection, and some of the most amazing ones involve extracting resources from
the environment. One of the most bizarre foraging adaptations is found in a
member of the Darwin's finch family, the vampire finch. As its name suggests,
this bird feeds on the blood of larger animals, typically seabirds. These birds
occur on two only tiny, remote islands in the Galápagos archipelago and many
aspects of this behavior remain a mystery. The host institution for this
fellowship is the University of Miami, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. J.
Albert Uy and Valerie Hower. Outreach to young students and citizen scientists
through the Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden and the Cornell Lab of
Ornithology, using the engaging and charismatic vampire finches, promotes public
understanding of evolution.

The research and training plan involves computationally intensive transcriptomic
and proteomic analyses with in-depth fieldwork in the Galápagos Islands to
investigate the evolution of blood-feeding by the vampire finch, a small
tropical bird. The research examines the environmental conditions that may have
favored the evolution of this behavior to determine if, for example, individuals
feed on blood only when other resources are scarce. Genes expressed in the bird
and the proteins produced in its digestive system are being analyzed to discover
if this species has evolved physiological adaptations similar to those that
allow animals like mosquitoes and ticks to feed on blood. This research is an
example of how a multi-disciplinary approach with computational, labatory, and
field techniques can shed light on how natural selection shapes the evolution of
behaviors in the wild.