* 1402917
* SUSCHEM: IUPAC: New Approaches Toward Sustainable Catalysis in the Synthesis of Bioactive Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 12/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jeffrey S. Johnson of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill examines novel and selective methods for carbon-carbon and carbon-
heteroatom bond constructions with a focus on stereoselective variants that can
be achieved with earth-abundant catalysts or with organic small molecule
catalysts. New strategies and catalysts for the redox functionalization of
carbon frameworks that take advantage of reactions that only use dioxygen (O2)
for oxidation or dihydrogen (H2) for reduction are also under investigation.
Again, a fundamental consideration in these studies is the identification of
useful, highly active catalysts that are abundant, nontoxic and readily
available and thus, this project focuses on sustainable chemistries. The
efficient preparation of small molecule building blocks directly impinges on
diverse and crucial areas such as human health (through the preparation of small
molecule therapeutics) and technology (via the creation of novel materials). The
advances made by this research play a fundamental role in providing sustainable
access to these valuable building blocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
performed in collaboration with Professor Shuli You of Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry in China and Professor Luiz Dias of the Instituto de Quimica -
UNICAMP in Brazil. Together, these groups combine their separate areas of
expertise to convert readily-available feedstocks into value-added complex
products useful to the chemical industry. Other broader impacts of this work
include the training of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students and an
international exchange of ideas and expertise.