* 1402242
* Point-of-Care Detection of Luteinizing Hormone: A Step Toward Lifetime  Reproductive Healthcare Monitoring for Women
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Richard Crooks, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 330,000.00

Proposal Number: 1402242&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Richard M.
Crooks&lt;br/&gt;Title: Point-of-Care Detection of Luteinizing Hormone: A Step
Toward Lifetime Reproductive Healthcare Monitoring for
Women&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layperson Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal of this project is development of a low-cost sensor system that women can
use at home on a regular basis to self-monitor weekly or monthly variations of a
panel of reproductive hormones in urine. This project will initially target
detection of luteinizing hormone (LH), but multiplexed monitoring of multiple
hormones is envisioned in future years. The sensing concept will eventually
linked to advanced telecommunications technology. The impact of this home-
monitoring concept reaches toward the ability to provide life-long monitoring of
female reproductive health. The broader impacts move the concept of diagnostics
from the detection of an event to the monitoring of biological systems, enabling
that transition through inexpensive sensing devices and (ultimately) convergence
with existing telecommunications. The broader impacts of this concept also
address the value of the medical and scientific information that could be
generated for epidemiological purposes. These statistics could be used for
national policy and for improving the scientific understanding of the etiology
of women?s reproductive pathologies and maladies. The epidemiological statistics
could also be of use to the individuals providing the primary data, where
successful interventions and therapies tied to an understanding of baseline
levels of particular hormones are fed back to the participating population via
their own smart phones. Additionally, changes in baseline hormone levels could
represent early indicators of disease states, and appropriate mining of this
enormous database could result in early intervention, thus reducing healthcare
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
approach to paper-based sensor fabrication is proposed. It will lead to
increased functionality without sacrificing simplicity or affordability. The
intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the advancement of a sensor design
that is not only robust, but also utilizes a quantitative electrochemical
detection scheme that is specifically designed to operate on inexpensive paper
substrates. Moreover, this platform will achieve a high signal amplification
factor without the need for fragile, slow, and media-sensitive enzymes. Maximum
possible signal amplification will be achieved by the use of a magnetic field to
localize silver nanoparticles bound to magnetic beads at the detection
electrode. The electrochemical detection scheme will be optimized to operate in
raw human urine. Further intellectual merit derives from the use and study of
micron- and nanometer-scale objects in paper fluidic devices. To date, the non-
specific adsorption and size exclusion properties of objects in this size range
have prevented their widespread use in this context, as they are unable to
physically move within a cellulose matrix. The proposed use of hollow channels
provides a means to bypass these issues and introduce tried and true
biotechnology tools to the world of paper-based sensing (without increasing
complexity), potentially opening up a broad range of opportunities in biological
analyte detection. By integrating simple slip layers into a multi-level design,
another major roadblock in paper-based sensing technology " namely, timing of
reactions " will also be overcome. These advances will be combined with a
robust, sensitive signal detection and amplification platform and a highly
manufacturable production design that consists of stencil-printed carbon
electrodes and wax-printed paper folded into the final device configuration.