* 1402422
* SusChem: IUPAC: The development of multi-functional catalysts to replace Pt for fuel oxidation reactions in low temperature fuel cells
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Rongrong Chen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 01/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Rongrong Chen of Indianapolis University examines the
development of multi-functional catalysts to replace platinum (Pt) in low
temperature fuel oxidation reactions. Among the various alternative systems for
energy production, fuel cells are particularly attractive because they allow
clean and efficient conversion of chemical energy into electricity. Currently,
the most active catalysts for the oxidation of fuels such as hydrogen, methanol
and ethanol in fuel cells are Pt and Pt-based materials, which are too expensive
for affordable clean energy production. This research project focuses on
catalysts based on cheaper materials for fuel oxidation reactions in fuel cells.
By combining electrochemical measurements, in-situ spectroscopic
characterization, density functional theory simulations and fuel cell testing,
the collaborative team studies reaction mechanisms of hydrogen, methanol and
ethanol oxidation reactions (HORs, MORs and EORs, respectively) on various
catalysts in both acid and alkaline media. New multi-functional catalysts based
on low cost materials (such as palladium, nickel and other more earth abundant
elements) with comparable reactivities to platinum-based catalysts are designed
and characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is performed in
collaboration with Professor Hebe de las Mercedes in Brazil and Professor Shi-
Gang Sun in China. Together, these groups combine their separate areas of
expertise to examine less expensive and more sustainable fuel cell catalysts.
Other broader impacts of this work include the training of postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students and an international exchange of ideas and expertise.