* 1402480
* Understanding How Stars Form in the Building Blocks of Galaxies - Gas Dynamics in Dwarf Galaxies and Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Jill Naiman, Naiman                  Jill           P
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Ms. Jill Palmer Naiman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Center for
Astrophysics at Harvard University. Her research will focus predominately on how
stars form in small galaxies and star clusters. As stars are the fundamental
units of luminous matter in the universe, being responsible, directly or
indirectly, for most of what we observe, it is of central importance in
astrophysics to understand how stars form. Furthermore, galaxy formation is
hierarchical - small things like dwarf galaxies merge to become bigger things,
and eventually, objects like our galaxy. Ms. Naiman's research will use three
dimensional simulations of gas to model how stars will form in small
astrophysical systems in order to determine both how these objects became what
we observe today, and how their star formation histories could have affected the
amount of stars which formed in our larger Milky Way galaxy. In addition to her
research efforts Ms. Naiman will grow several outreach activities in which she
currently participates. She will continue teaching STEM classes to inmates
through the Prison Education Project, bring together groups of scientists and
artists to visualize complex astrophysical simulations for the education and
enjoyment of the public, and will continue teaching and mentoring students.

Ms. Naiman will carry out a theoretical investigation, chiefly involving
numerical simulations, aimed at understanding the mass supply conditions
required for triggering star formation, with an emphasis on processes occurring
at large scales in both galaxies and star clusters. Using a three-dimensional
view and a complete description of the microphysics including hydrodynamics,
stellar and radiative feedback and external gravitational perturbations Ms.
Naiman will test our understanding of star formation in globular clusters. This
knowledge will also be applied to issues related to gas retention and star
formation in galactic dwarf galaxies. The effects of gas retention in nuclear
star clusters on the feeding rates of central, massive black holes will also be
studied. In addition to her research efforts the author will continue several
outreach activities through the opportunities and programs available in the
Boston area and the Harvard campus. Three education and public outreach
activities will be carried out, which build on existing proven activities.
First, an educational program will aim to intermingle the training of
computational scientists and students in the visual arts and digital media using
state-of-art astrophysical simulations as common ground. As an instructor in the
Prison Education Project, Ms. Naiman will also teach courses incorporating
astronomy concepts into math education through inquiry based methods to Boston
inmates. Finally, Ms. Naiman will continue her role as a research mentor to
underrepresented undergraduates.