* 1402843
* Dynamic Control of Glycan Biosynthesis with Synthetic RNA Circuitry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Number: CBET - 1402843 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Julius Lucks
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Cornell University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dynamic
Control of Glycan Biosynthesis with Synthetic RNA Circuitry
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of the many proteins that exist inside our bodies, most
are decorated with complex sugars called glycans through a process called
glycosylation. Glycosylation is often necessary for these proteins to function
correctly. For therapeutic use in humans, glycoproteins must have human-like
glycans. Thus production is often limited to mammalian cell culture, which is
time-consuming, expensive, and susceptible to viral contamination. A strain of
Escherichia coli capable of producing human-like glycoproteins could overcome
some of these hurdles. This project seeks to take bacterial production of
glycosylated proteins to the next level by using state-of-the art techniques in
RNA engineering to dynamically optimize the output of the glycosylation
pathway.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will use the
principles of RNA engineering to create genetic networks that dynamically tune
the expression of glycosylation enzymes as they are needed in order to increase
product output and purity. The proposed studies and research training activities
are expected to have a broad impact on society, ranging from the science of
glycobiology and the engineering science of RNA gene regulation, to the
development of human glycotherapeutics. This project will also cultivate the
next generation of highly trained graduate students who will be introduced to
the broad, interdisciplinary nature of biotechnology research. Moreover, this
program will actively and aggressively broaden participation in science and
engineering. This will be accomplished by providing interdisciplinary research
opportunities for undergraduate students, developing experiential glycoscience
learning modules for undergraduate and high school students, and creating a
quantitative graduate-level course for biomolecular engineering and synthetic
biology. Finally, the development of bacterial glycosylation and RNA engineering
for biotechnological applications will be brought to a larger research community
through partnership with local biotechnology companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research project is to
genetically engineer and optimize bacterial cells for the routine production of
authentic human N-linked glycoproteins. To date, the investigators have
recreated the earliest steps of this complicated process in Escherichia coli.
The objective of this particular application is to maximize the productivity of
this pathway by engineering synthetic RNA-based genetic circuitry that will
dynamically control the expression of glycosylation enzymes using two distinct
strategies. The first will eliminate competitive side reactions by creating
distinct stages of glycan construction followed by glycan targeting, which we
anticipate will dramatically increase the purity of the glycoproteins produced.
In parallel, pathway productivity will be optimized by expressing pathway
enzymes 'just-in-time' in the order they are needed as is done in several
essential metabolic pathways used by cells. Since glycosylation consists of
sequential enzyme steps that take place in different parts of the cell,
controlling the dynamics of enzyme expression so that they are most active when
needed is expected to significantly boost pathway production. Successful
completion of these studies will lead to the development of a novel bacterial
glycoprotein expression platform with the potential to overcome many of the
limitations of existing eukaryotic platforms. Moreover, the proposed studies and
research training activities will impact: (i) biotechnological synthesis of
novel glycoconjugates and potential immunostimulating agents for research,
industrial and therapeutic applications; (ii) the development of new, broadly
applicable strategies that can be used to optimize a wide array of metabolic
processes; and (iii) the development of new tools and design principles for
engineering genetic circuitry to control cellular behavior with far-reaching
potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
project, this award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.