* 1402193
* New Views of Warm Molecular Gas in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Julia Kamenetzky, Kamenetzky              Julia
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2016
* USD 176,331.00

Dr. Julia Kamenetzky is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Arizona. She will study the molecular gas throughout galaxies that is the raw
material for star formation; this gas is cold enough that atoms can bind
together into molecules. This study will occur with a combination of high-
resolution maps of molecular gas from the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA)
to see exquisite detail in a few galaxies, and low-resolution observations of
many galaxies to search for patterns in a large sample. By comparing the
conditions of the gas in different types of galaxies, she will add to our
understanding of which physical processes are most important for increasing and
decreasing star formation. The birth and death of stars significantly impact the
energetic and chemical composition of galaxies; the goal of this project is to
study the raw material of star formation, molecular gas, using new technology
that has only now become available to astronomers. Additionally, Dr. Kamenetzky
will develop and distribute new research-based, student-focused radio astronomy
curriculum with the Center for Astronomy Education (CAE).

New data from Herschel indicates that higher-energy CO rotational lines (e.g. CO
J=6-5) are emitted from warm molecular gas that is distinct from the well-
studied cooler molecular gas traced by e.g. CO J=1-0. Dr. Kamenetzky proposes to
measure the yet-unknown morphology and kinematics of this warm CO gas in high
resolution with ALMA to understand its relation to well-studied galaxy
components and reveal its excitation mechanisms. Additionally, new single-dish
observations of low-J CO lines will be obtained using the Arizona Radio
Observatory, to be combined with high-J lines from Herschel SPIRE, in order to
simultaneously model the cool/warm components of gas in a large reference sample
of up to 300 galaxies. Similar methods will be applied to new ALMA 3D Doppler
tomography maps of recently discovered molecular CO and SiO in the remnant of
Supernova 1987A. New radio astronomy curriculum will be widely distributed via
the Center for Astronomy Education (CAE), a recognized provider of research-
based educational materials and workshops.