* 1402122
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Zeolite-Composite Adsorbents with Fine-Tuned Pore Sizes for Molecular Sieving Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* XINHUA Liang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 06/30/2017
* USD 227,501.00

PI: Yu, Miao / Liang, Xinhua&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1402772 /
1402122&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Advanced Zeolite-Composite
Adsorbents with Fine-Tuned Pore Sizes for Molecular Sieving
Separations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mixture separation constitutes a
large and costly component of industrial processes. Various separation
technologies, such as distillation, extraction, adsorption, and membrane
separation, have been developed to separate mixtures utilizing different
properties of components in the mixture. Among these technologies, separation
processes based on adsorption, such as pressure swing adsorption (PSA) and
temperature swing adsorption (TSA), have been widely used in industry.
Development of more energy-efficient adsorptive gas separation processes
strongly depends on the development of improved porous adsorbents, and porous
adsorbents with favorable adsorption isotherms and selectivity for the
separation of interest are always the focus of adsorption-based separation
processes. Zeolites are one of the most promising adsorbents that may realize
true molecular-sieving separation under harsh separation conditions, attributing
to their uniform, molecular-sized pores and high chemical, thermal and
mechanical stabilities. Despite of a large selection pool of zeolites/molecular
sieves and available techniques to adjust their pore sizes, not all desired pore
sizes can be obtained for target separations, especially for separation of
molecules with very close sizes, such as N2 (kinetic diameter: 0.364 nm)/CH4
(0.38 nm), O2 (0.346 nm)/N2, and paraffin/olefin. Therefore, it is highly
desirable to develop new strategies to further fine-tune the pore sizes of
zeolite-based materials and fill the pore size gaps between different zeolites.
The goal of this proposed research is to fine-tune the pore entrance of zeolites
by depositing ultrathin microporous coatings to achieve effective separation for
industrially important mixtures that traditional zeolites have difficulty to
separate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrathin microporous coatings will be deposited
using molecular layer deposition (MLD) on the zeolites to fill the pore-size
gaps between different zeolites an obtain enhanced fundamental understanding of
deposition mechanisms and coating interactions with zeolite substrates.
Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research are: (1) To develop a
reliable and reproducible MLD process to deposit ultrathin organic/inorganic
hybrid films (with precisely controlled properties) on zeolite substrates and
obtain a fundamental understanding on the factors that affect the quality of MLD
coatings; (2) To elucidate and understand the decomposition of hybrid MLD
coating and pore-generation mechanisms under different conditions; (3) To
characterize effective pore sizes of zeolite-composite adsorbents and establish
the fundamental coating property-pore entrance size relationship; and (4) To
rationally design zeolite composite adsorbents with desired pore sizes and
investigate separation performance for target mixtures. This completely new
concept may lead to effective adsorptive separation of difficult-to-separate
mixtures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research is expected to have great
scientific as well as technological impact on the synthesis of nanostructured
zeolite-composite adsorbents with fine-tuned pore sizes for mixture separations
and potentially for selective catalysis. If successful, the project will greatly
benefit adsorption-based separation processes. It will represent a significant
advance in the rational design of zeolite-based adsorbents. The proposed
research has significant practical implications on industrially important gas
mixture separations. It is anticipated that this study could serve as a model
for the rational design of advanced sorbents for adsorption-based separation
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have specific defined plans to engage a
broad range of students in learning about nanomaterials and molecular sieves.
Specific opportunities for minorities will be funded through targeted
scholarships and projects during the summer. Both PIs are active in outreach
programs for K-12 students in mainly underrepresented populations in the areas
of both universities.