* 1402913
* Collaborative Research: Simplifying metabolic pathways by wiring redox proteins together
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Scott Banta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI's: Koder, Ronald / Banta, Scott A.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 1403748 /
1402913&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: CUNY City College / Columbia
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Simplifying
metabolic pathways by wiring redox proteins together&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Energy transfer between enzymatic proteins is often accomplished
using small molecule cofactors, such as NAD(H) and NADP(H). This system is
advantageous in biological systems; however, in technology applications the use
of these cofactors is undesirable for several reasons including their high cost
and low stability. Advances in protein design and protein engineering have
enabled tremendous advances in synthetic biology where new proteins with novel,
unnatural functions can be created and characterized. In this project a new
protein will be made by coupling two cofactor-dependent enzymes together. In
order to eliminate the need for the cofactor, the enzymes will be connected with
a designed 'staple' peptide system that contains redox center that enable
electron transfer between the enzymes. This will 'wire' the proteins together so
that neither one requires the unstable cofactor molecules for activity.
Combined, this new enzyme complex will have an activity that is not found in
nature. And this will chart a path forward for wiring other redox proteins
together towards a goal of eliminating cofactor requirements in future synthetic
biology projects. The team consists of PIs from City College of New York and
Columbia University. There will be several outreach activities associated with
this project including interactions with local high school teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this collaborative project is
to use protein engineering to wire two unrelated redox proteins together
creating a novel cofactor-less enzymatic reaction. The investigators will
attempt to demonstrate the first example of the wiring of two redox proteins
together to form a ping pong redox enzyme with an activity not found in nature.
They will start with two known redox enzymes: formate dehydrogenase and lactate
dehydrogenase. These enzymes will be connected by a novel 'collagen staple'
system that will enable specific self-assembly and the introduction of redox
centers for direct electron transfer between the two enzyme active sites. The
final enzyme will have a completely novel function: pyruvate reduction to
lactate with the concomitant oxidation of formate to carbon dioxide. The new
kinetic mechanism and activity of the resultant biocatalyst will be extensively
characterized. This approach can then be extended to combine additional enzymes,
creating new cofactor-less biocatalysts for industrially important oxidation and
reduction reactions. This approach will allow to combine redox enzymes with
sequential kinetic mechanisms into a single ping pong enzyme with a synthetic
redox center. The research is integrated with educational activities which
introduces undergraduates, graduate students and New York City Public High
School teachers to the interdisciplinary science of biophysics. These efforts
will encourage young students to pursue careers in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division
is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biology.