* 1402063
* Living Reverse Osmosis Membranes: Engineered Membrane Biofilms that Control Their Own Thickness, Prevent Biofouling and Degrade Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Wood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 422,073.00

1402063 Kumar Living Reverse Osmosis Membranes: Engineered Membrane Biofilms
that Control Their Own Thickness, Prevent Biofouling and Degrade Contaminants

Reverse Osmosis (RO) membranes are being used to purify alternative sources of
water such as recycled wastewater, brackish water and seawater. This technology
is ideal as it can remove almost all substances dissolved in water including
salt, microbial contaminants and organic contaminants. However, a major
challenge to employing RO membranes is the increase in energy that accompanies
fouling of these membranes. Fouling is the accumulation of unwanted material on
solid surfaces to the detriment of function. The fouling material can consist of
either living organisms (biological or biofouling) or a non-living substance
(inorganic or organic). In particular, biological fouling caused by deposition
and then growth of microbes in colonies known as biofilms, is a major challenge.
Biofilms are difficult to prevent due to sensitivity of RO membranes to chemical
disinfectants and once formed are extremely difficult to eradicate by current
chemical cleaning methods. In this project the persistence of biofilms will be
used to turn the biofouling problem on its head by engineering biofilms that 1)
control their own thickness and 2) release molecules (signals) that prevent
colonization of this engineered biofilm by other microorganisms. This biofilm
will also be engineered to contribute to the removal of the contaminants that
can pass through the RO membrane.

The ability to make bacteria dissolve deleterious biofilms by activating a
series of genetic pathways (i.e., to secrete enzymes to remove the polymers that
cement the bacteria in place and to make the bacteria swim away) has to date not
been proposed for RO biofouling control. Therefore, a novel feature of this
proposal is the use of metabolic engineering to create the first living membrane
comprising RO membranes and a thin beneficial biofilm that will both prevent
biofouling as well as remove toxic wastes in water recovery systems. To control
the extent of the beneficial biofilm, the PIs will capitalize on the fact that
E. coli possesses a novel diguanylate cyclase (c-di-GMP)-binding protein, BdcA.
The PIs have engineered BdcA to cause biofilm dispersal. By controlling BdcA
production, the extent of biofilm formation by the beneficial biofilm can be
limited. The PIs also propose to demonstrate that it is possible to incorporate
contaminant degrading enzymes in these beneficial biofilm bacteria to enhance
removal of recalcitrant compounds.

By controlling biofilms on RO membranes, chemicals required for disinfection and
cleaning will be eliminated and the overall power consumption of this critical
water treatment technology will be minimized. This work is also important in
terms of gaining insights on how to control biofilm formation for engineering
applications, and it may provide insights for controlling biofilm formation to
treat chronic diseases. For this work, at least two undergraduates/year will be
trained with efforts made to recruit underrepresented groups. Research results
will be disseminated to a diverse audience using YouTube as professionally-
filmed, instructive videos. Finally, the ongoing water science and education
camp for middle schoolers, a part of the popular Science U program at Penn State
University, will be expanded from a three day program to a week and a new
graduate course on membranes will be developed.