* 1402004
* Environmentally Responsive Supramolecular Constructs and Models for Chemical Communication
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jonathan Sessler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, Jonathan L. Sessler of The University of Texas is carrying out research
aimed at creating new systems that can communicate chemically. Living systems
are unique in their ability to communicate by purely chemical means and a wide
array of new technologies could become possible if we were able to mimic this
behavior. Chemical communication in living systems can occur over short
distances, which is what happens when brain cells communicate by the release and
capture of neurotransmitter molecules. Or, the communication can take place over
large distances, such as when insects, or even some mammals, communicate by
releasing pheromones. Although these processes are well known in the world of
biology, it has not yet been possible to reproduce this type of communication in
an artificial system. In this work, the investigators are doing just that, using
sophisticated laboratory methods they have developed to accomplish molecular
design and construction in a controlled fashion. This work will likely impact
the development of possible new information systems. New approaches to
artificial intelligence and wireless communication may become possible as a
result of this fundamental research. The work is having a further broad impact
through the training of the next generation of scientists in cutting-edge
laboratory techniques that will prepare the students involved in this research
for work in a wide variety of technologically challenging
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the use of electron rich and
electron poor receptors whose features can be modulated via changes in pH, redox
potential, and substrate binding. Particular emphasis is being placed on
tetrathiafulvalene calixpyrrole receptors and various electron deficient
substrates, including fullerene derivatives. Conformational switching, as
engendered by anion binding to a calixpyrrole, for instance, is used to induce
changes in equilibrium. These perturbations, in turn, serve to release small
chemical species that can act as triggers for the modulation of other receptor
systems, such as those built from oligopyrroles. A range of techniques,
including standard spectroscopies, photochemistry, color-based reactions, and
solid state crystallography is being used to characterize the systems involved
in this project and the changes in their features due to induced perturbations
in equilibrium behavior.