* 1402432
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding a landmark social insect radiation: comparative analysis, phylogenomics, and morphology of dorylomorph ants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,932.00

Army ants, some of the most striking organisms, are found in warm temperate and
tropical regions of the world. They are the most important invertebrate
predators of the tropics, making them key species in rainforest ecosystems. This
research will reconstruct the evolutionary history of army ants and their close
relatives. The family tree of these ants, their geographic origins and the
timeline of the evolution of traits that account for their ecological dominance
will be investigated. An evolutionary tree will be constructed from the ants DNA
using latest advances in molecular biology and bioinformatics. This tree will
then serve as a framework for testing hypotheses on the evolution of army ant
characteristics. This study will also provide a new framework for identification
of army ants and closely related species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will not only bring insights into the history of an ecologically
important group of insects but also help to understand how the latest advances
in molecular biology, statistics and computer science can improve our knowledge
of evolutionary processes. New resources allowing easier and more accurate
identification of these ants will aid other biologists and conservation
specialists in decision making and planning further research on the group. A
class on techniques in computational biology will be taught, promoting skills in
efficient analysis of the ever-increasing volume of biological data.