* 1402852
* Robust and generic mechanisms in smooth dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Anne Wilkinson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The PI is a leading expert in the field of partially hyperbolic dynamics;
dynamics is the study of systems, physical or mathematical, that evolve over
time according to a deterministic set of rules. Hyperbolic dynamical systems are
those which display chaotic, unpredictable features at every point; they are
both naturally occurring and well-studied. There are other dynamical systems
called KAM systems (named after Kolomogorov, Arnold, and Moser), which have
stable regions of regular motion. Partially hyperbolic systems provide a more
general class of dynamical systems than either, and include systems that combine
hyperbolicity in some directions with KAM behavior in other directions.
Partially hyperbolic systems occur widely in dynamical systems arising in
physics; for example planetary motion usually contains partially hyperbolic
subdynamics, and the effective construction of particle accelerators (used in
biological imaging, as well as theoretical physics) requires a detailed
understanding of both KAM and partially hyperbolic dynamics. The PI has a well-
developed research plan of over 15 years studying partially hyperbolic systems
and is poised to raise the theory of these systems to a new level of generality
and applicability. The impacts of this research will be seen in future
applications to systems in biology, physics and engineering. The PI is currently
collaborating with the particle accelerator group at Fermilab to explore some of
these potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this grant is guided by the far-reaching goal of developing a
general theory of partially hyperbolic systems along the lines of the hyperbolic
theory developed in the past 40 years. In particular the PI proposes to study:
ergodic properties of conservative partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms;
physical measures for (dissipative) partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms;
rigidity phenomena connected to partially hyperbolic group actions; and
ergodicty of singular partially hyperbolic systems. These research goals will be
carried out through a variety of modalities, including published papers in peer-
reviewed journals, supervising Ph.D. students, and public speaking, both at
research conferences and to the general public.