* 1402949
* First Principles Studies of Novel Approach for Achieving Ultrahigh Thermal Conductivity in Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* David Broido, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 291,031.00

CBET-1402949&lt;br/&gt;Broido&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As microelectronic devices
continue to shrink, heat dissipation is becoming an increasingly critical
technology challenge. High thermal conductivity materials are urgently needed to
address this challenge. The carbon-based crystals, diamond, graphite, graphene
and carbon nanotubes have long been known to have by far the highest thermal
conductivities, &amp;#954;, of any material. Diamond, in particular, is widely
used for passive cooling of electronics, but its synthetic fabrication suffers
from slow growth rates, high cost, and low quality. In spite of well-defined
criteria to guide the search for new high &amp;#954; materials, little progress
has been made over the years. Using an accurate, first principles, theoretical
approach, we have recently found that an unexpected material, boron arsenide
should have exceptionally high thermal conductivity, comparable to that of
diamond. This surprising finding stems from fundamental material properties,
some of which are not typically connected to prescriptions for high &amp;#954;
in materials. The objectives of this project will be to study in detail the
thermal transport properties of boron arsenide, and to identify new high
&amp;#954; materials using the materials search paradigm identified for boron
arsenide. This project will therefore help address the heat dissipation
challenge and benefit society by aiding in the development of new high
&amp;#954; materials. This will facilitate technological breakthroughs that may
lead to the next generation of passive cooling devices for electronics, such as
heat spreaders and heat sinks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will
implement a state-of-the-art, first principles thermal transport approach to
provide fundamental understanding of our recent finding of exceptionally high
&amp;#954; in boron arsenide and the proposed new paradigm for achieving high
thermal conductivity in materials. A central feature of this approach is that it
has no adjustable parameters. Furthermore, it has already demonstrated excellent
agreement with measured thermal conductivities for a wide range of materials,
validating its predictive capability. Efficient computational algorithms
incorporating the novel material properties found in boron arsenide will be used
to implement a broad search for a new class of novel high &amp;#954; materials.
This will facilitate the discovery of as yet unidentified high &amp;#954;
materials. Deeper understanding of the role of defects and insight into how to
tune the desirable material properties to enhance &amp;#954; will also be
investigated. This project with provide important new insights into the nature
of thermal conductivity in materials, give guidance to measurement efforts, and
facilitate the design and of high &amp;#954; materials for thermal management
applications.