* 1402515
* EAGER: Place Attachment and Collective Action:  The Changing Landscape of Urban Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Michael Hodge, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 163,407.00

SES-1402515&lt;br/&gt;Todd Shaw&lt;br/&gt;Barbara Combs&lt;br/&gt;Kirk
Foster&lt;br/&gt;Michael Hodge&lt;br/&gt;Desiree
Pedescleaux&lt;br/&gt;University of South Carolina at
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for an Early
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) for a one year pilot study that
tests a new model for understanding how group or neighborhood identify impacts
civic engagement and collective action by residents. The researchers propose a
model that argues that geographic dispersion (an ongoing feature of minority
neighborhoods) impacts the length of residence and how rooted residents are in
their particular neighborhood. These factors are positively related to the level
of the concept of linked fate (we are all in this together whether or not we are
residents of the same neighborhood), attachment to the neighborhood and whether
residents assume their neighborhoods' identify. These dynamics then contribute
to trust and the level of cooperation among residents that in turn determines
participation in collective action on behalf of the neighborhood. To test these
basic assumptions, the research team will conduct a pilot study of two primarily
African American historic neighborhoods in Atlanta, Georgia--the Old Fourth Ward
and the West End -- that have undergone gentrification, with significantly
diverse outcomes. The Old Fourth Ward over the last three decades has been
transformed from a historically middle class black community to a neighborhood
that is now 30 percent white, with a significant rise in median income. On the
other hand, the West End, a black working class/lower income community,
witnessed a 39 percent decrease in white residents, now has a population that is
only 2 percent white, and experienced a modest decline in median income. These
two communities offer the opportunity to study African American's perceptions of
the changes that have occurred in two of their communities (that reflect trends
in other such communities in the South) and responses (civic collective action)
to these changes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has significant broader impacts.
Specifically, it (1) is an interdisciplinary collaboration between two
Research-I, majority-white universities and two historically black liberals arts
colleges; (2) mentors and substantively involves the participation of graduate
and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups; (3) provides student
and faculty researchers and the broader public with a robust dataset that has
potential multi-disciplinary interest; (4) creates an opportunity to disseminate
research findings directly relevant to the life of two vibrant urban
neighborhoods; and (5) makes a unique theoretical and methodological
contributions to the literature on the changing social and civic spaces of urban
communities. While policymakers have long argued that devoting public and
private resources to building local capacity can tackle urban poverty and spur
economic redevelopment, e.g., Community Action Programs, Enterprise Zones, and
Empowerment Zones. The study?s results can help us better understand the role
that heterogeneous relationships among neighborhood residents play in successful
communities? problem-solving.