* 1402078
* Collaborative Research:  Ontogenic change in Cnidarian-algal symbioses: A genomic and ecologic perspective
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Monica Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2014
* USD 120,322.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The symbiosis between corals
(Cnidaria:Hexacorallia:Scleractinia) and photosynthetic dinoflagellate symbionts
(Alveolata: Dinophycea: Symbiodinium) provides the foundation and structure of
the coral reef ecosystem, as well as significant contributions to global carbon
and biogeochemical cycles. Given the importance of this symbiosis to the coral-
algal holobiont and the reef ecosystem, understanding the mechanisms governing
the establishment and long term maintenance of this symbiosis is essential. The
overall aim of this project is to identify the mechanisms and selective
processes that lead to the final assemblage of symbionts harbored by adult
hosts. This question will be approached from two perspectives, ecologic and
genomic, with the specific aims of determining (1) if different Symbiodinium
strains differentially affect fitness of corals as the adult settles into a
mature symbiosis (2) if competition among symbionts or environmental conditions
contribute to the final host-symbiont pairing and (3) how host/symbiont
transcriptomes varying as the symbiont community within a host is winnowed to
the final assemblage found in the adult host. Traits that directly affect coral
fitness (i.e. growth, survivorship, energy production) will be measured under
different environmental conditions over the ontogeny of coral recruits that are
experimentally infected with different types of Symbiodinium. Concurrently, high
throughput gene expression profiling will be used to follow changes in gene
expression between host and symbiont. Together, these data will be used to
validate or falsify the hypotheses that the final symbiont assemblage found in
the adult host is determined by (a) host selection (b) competition among
symbionts and/or (c) environmental condition.

This study pools the expertise of two labs that have focused on these aspects of
the symbiosis. The Coffroth lab pioneered the studies on early ontogeny of the
symbiosis and symbiont diversity and will continue to take the lead in the
ecological studies. The Medina lab is at the forefront in the development and
utilization of genomic technology to study transcriptomic changes during the
establishment and breakdown of the symbiosis. Furthermore, the Medina lab has
the coral microarrays to be used in this study and in 2009 will also have oligo
arrays for two Symbiodinium species based on 454 EST data. Although several
groups have initial studies of the host transcriptome, none have combined an
approach that examines the host and the symbiont in a single experiment. This
will be a powerful approach as it will allow the investigators to track
complementary changes in gene expression between host and symbiont and relate
those to turnover in the symbiont community as the final symbiont complement is
established.

The data resulting form the study will bridge an important gap in our
understanding of the establishment and maintenance of coral-Symbiodinium
symbiosis. Understanding the mechanism(s) regulating the establishment of the
symbiosis will broaden our knowledge and help to predict the response of this
symbiosis to future climate conditions. As in the past, the genomic tools
(arrays, ESTs) will be made readily available to researchers via array
distribution at cost, microarray analysis training, or sequence data, providing
valuable resources to continue exploring these systems.

In conjunction the Aquarium of Niagara, Coffroth will develop educational and
outreach programs to train and disseminate information on coral reefs to local
area teachers and the general public. The Medina lab will continue to produce
science and environment podcasts in multiple languages (English, Spanish and
Hmong) with undergraduate students at UC Merced and will continue to collaborate
with the California Academy of Sciences (CAS) in their coral reef outreach
efforts. Additionally, this work will result in the training and mentoring of a
postdoctoral fellow, at least one graduate student and at least 2
undergraduates. Through this project these students will have the opportunity to
participate in research in both a lab and field setting, learning a range of
ecological, molecular and algal culturing techniques. The extensive culture
collection housed at the University at Buffalo is an important resource that is
available to researchers worldwide which the proposed funding will help to
maintain. Our EST annotations are publicly available through our EST database
(http://sequoia.ucmerced.edu/SymBioSys/).