* 1402738
* Half-Metallic Semiconducting Magnets with Gapless Dispersion and Antiferromagnetism
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 364,000.00

Developing new electronic devices that incorporate the electron's magnetic
properties is at the forefront of device engineering and nanotechnology. Spin-
based electronics or "spintronics" is currently having a great impact on
electronic devices for information technology. A key discovery was made in 1988
in a new synthetic material, where a small magnetic field could produce a large
change in resistance, an effect called Giant Magnetoresistance. This tiny hybrid
structure allowed for much smaller magnetic data storage devices (hard disk
drives). In 1995 another magnetoresistive device was discovered, that was again
a synthetic hybrid structure, but this device relied on quantum mechanical
tunneling. Such exotic tunneling can be imagined as a particle colliding with a
wall and suddenly reappearing on the other side. This spin-based phenomenon is
currently used in memory devices installed in all computers and is also being
incorporated in magnetic random access memories (MRAM). One of the outstanding
issues today in this field is to build new devices that can produce current-
carrying electrons that have a predetermined North-South magnetic orientation.
This research award is focused on developing synthetic multilayer semiconductor
structures for controlling the electron's magnetic orientation by applying a
simple input voltage. Furthering the science and engineering of these spin-based
devices is expected to advance future applications that are low-power, high-
speed, high-density, and eventually cost effective for information processing.
The proposed approach is expected to open doors to new materials and devices
having useful properties never before contemplated. Broad impact of this
research is assured by educating and training young people in the areas of
electronic, magnetic and optical nanostructures that are crucial for developing
future applications in information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
class of materials has recently been predicted that merge the properties of
half-metallic magnets and semiconductors. Theoretical band structure
calculations show that these inverse Heusler materials have a Fermi energy lying
in a gap for one direction of electron spin, but for the other direction of
electron spin the valence and conduction band edges meet at the Fermi energy.
One of the great advantages of these spin gapless semiconductors (SGS) for
devices relies on the property where a simple gate voltage can tune the spin
properties. Furthermore, these inverse Heusler materials encompass half-metallic
antiferromagnets (HMAF) that are spin-polarized but nonmagnetic. New
functionalities of SGS and HMAF materials would take advantage of several novel
and valuable properties, even at room temperature. These valuable assets
include: half-metallic high spin polarization (~100 %); generation of spin-
polarized holes as well as spin-polarized electrons; voltage-tunable spin
polarization; and spin-polarized HMAF without fringing magnetic fields. Thus
far, several dozen inverse Heusler materials have been predicted to have SGS
properties. These include magnetic Mn2CoAl and antiferromagnetic Mn3Al. Up to
now, only a few materials have been synthesized: such as bulk Mn2CoAl and
Fe2CoSi; and the first major step to synthesize and investigate thin films
(epitaxial Mn2CoAl on GaAs). The research focuses on the synthesis of thin film
devices incorporating these X2YZ four-sublattice materials using MBE and
sputtering. Multilayer devices will be fabricated with voltage gates in order to
vary the Fermi energy with respect to the spin-polarized conduction and valence
bands. Tunnel junctions will be fabricated for investigating the spin degrees of
freedom. Collaborators include researchers from several universities, and
national synchrotron and neutron laboratories. This grant is funded jointly by
the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division
of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and by the Electronic and
Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).