* 1402844
* JST-NSF Workshop on Cooperative Distributed Energy Management Systems. To be Held in Honolulu, HI, January 11-12,2014.
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Anthony Kuh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2014
* USD 89,511.00

This workshop brings together leading international researchers from Japan,
United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom to discuss the stable and secure
supply of energy as we head towards a low carbon society that is essential for
sustainable development. The objective of the workshop is to discuss our
collective research approaches and then develop collaborative efforts to
formulate cooperative distributed energy management systems. The workshop will
be held at the Hilton Waikiki Beach Hotel in Honolulu, HI on January 11-12,
2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
pressing need around the world to change paradigms of how we both generate and
use energy as we move to a more sustainable society considering solutions that
require engineering, computational, environmental, policy, economic, and social
science research and education. This proposal along with the support of the
Japan Science and Technology (JST) Agency brings together a group of
international researchers and educators in energy and sustainability to discuss
these issues. The workshop will study a cooperative distributed energy
management system that makes optimal control of energy generation and demand
response.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is unique as it will bring in distinguished US
researchers to participate with Japanese researchers invited by JST along with
researchers from Germany and the United Kingdom to discuss and form
collaborations on cooperative distributive energy management systems. Topics of
discussion include: renewable energy generation including solar and wind along
with distributed generation and integration of renewable energy sources;
communications, control, and computational aspects of the smart grid; storage
options; demand response including load controls, demand side management, price
controls, and consumer participation; and smart grid and smart community
demonstration projects.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will bring in researchers from different countries to give different
perspectives on developing a cooperative distributed energy management system.
This will lead to multinational collaborative research and education efforts.
This can lead to novel approaches to tackle energy and sustainability problems
and also innovation and commercialization opportunities.