* 1402739
* kT-scale Protein & Carbohydrate Interactions on Synthetic Materials & Cell Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 308,000.00

PI: Bevan, Michael A. Proposal Number: 1402739 Institution: Johns Hopkins
University Title: kT-scale Protein & Carbohydrate Interactions on Synthetic
Materials & Cell Surfaces

Many important cellular interactions involve "weak" interactions, which are
difficult to characterize by current techniques. The PI proposes to move into
new territory, in terms of directly characterizing these weak intermolecular
interactions of biomolecules, by using a technique, Diffusing Colloidal Probe
Microscopy (DCPM), developed by the PI's group. The proposal will examine two
systems of biological importance, which were also chosen for their significance
to biomedical problems: stem-cell based tissue engineering and cancer
metastasis. Success in the development of the technique for studying weak
biological interactions will have an impact on the understanding of such
interactions in cell-cell adhesion, cell migration, tissue morphogenesis,
metastasis, immunology, and other cellular processes.

Weak biomolecular interactions, on the order of kT, play an important role in
cell-cell adhesion, cell migration, tissue morphogenesis, metastasis,
immunology, and other cellular processes. While there are standard mechanical
methods for measuring strong interactions (>pN forces), weak interactions are
generally measured_ indirectly_ by spectroscopic means. The PI proposes to move
into new territory, by directly characterizing these interactions using DCPM,
which offers spatial and temporal resolution, statistical significance, and
directness not accessible using scanning probes or spectroscopic methods. In
essence, DCPM passively monitors Brownian excursions of "diffusing probes" and
exploits these natural gauges for time (a2/D), energy (kT), force (fN), and
length (nm) when interrogating the interaction of proteins and carbohydrates.
This is inherently a nanoscale technique because it harnesses Brownian motion as
a useful tool to directly measure kT interactions between proteins rather than
avoiding stochastic thermal motion as an undesirable complication of nanoscale
systems. Two systems will be studied, CD44-HA interactions and heterophilic
cadherin interactions (in the presence of calcium ions) on supported bilayers.
The development of DCPM for studying weak biological interactions will have an
impact on the understanding of such interactions in cell-cell adhesion, cell
migration, tissue morphogenesis, metastasis, immunology, and other cellular
processes.