* 1402931
* Collaborative Research: Timescales for Large-Scale Tropospheric Transport - Inversions of Trace-Gas Measurements and Connections with Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 312,712.00

The distribution of ozone, water vapor, carbon dioxide and aerosols in the lower
atmosphere are strongly influenced by transport. Quantifying this transport is
central to understanding and predicting air quality, climate change, and
stratospheric ozone depletion. This collaborative project will use a combination
of trace gas measurements and model simulations. The effort will also promote
training and learning of graduate students a a postdoctoral fellow. Material
from this research. Materials from the research will be included in a core
course for the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) Integration of Graduate Education
and Research Training (IGERT) program on Water, Climate and Health, as well as
teacher training courses at JHU and Columbia University. The results of the
research will be widely disseminated at international science meetings,
publishing in peer-reviewed journals, and posts of non-technical reports on
websites.

A particularly important quantity is the transit-time distribution (TTD) for
transport from Northern Hemisphere populated regions, where there are large
emissions of pollutants and their precursors. Maximum entropy inversions will
used together with surface and aircraft trace gas measurements to constrain the
TTDs. These data-constrained TTDs will be combined with chemical transport model
simulations and meteorological analyses to examine seasonal and interannual
variations, and connections with atmospheric dynamics. Chemistry climate model
integrations will be used to explore how the transport changes with climate.

Specifically, this project will provide the following: (1) data-constrained
estimates of the TTDs since air was last in contact with Northern Hemisphere
continental regions, including seasonal and interannual variations; (2)
knowledge of the key dynamical controls on tropospheric transport timescales;
and (3) an understanding of how tropospheric transport may change in response to
climate. In combination these will allow a fundamental disentangling of the
roles of chemistry and transport in shaping the composition of the troposphere,
with important implications for understanding of air quality, climate change,
and stratospheric ozone.