* 1402120
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Joshua Schraiber, Schraiber               Joshua         G
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2016
* USD 138,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in emerging areas where biology
intersects with other scientific disciplines, in this case with statistics. The
Fellows are expected to lead the nation?s scientific workforce of the future.
This fellowship to Joshua G. Schraiber investigates how genomes have evolved
over time to explain the organisms we see today, using the extensive genome data
available on yeast as a model system. The host institution for this fellowship
is the University of Washington, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Joshua
Akey and Jonathan Wakefield. Educational outreach to students from Seattle
Central Community College (SCCC) will help ensure they have the skills for a
successful transfer to a 4-year university to prepare them for fulfilling
careers. Involving them is done partly by guest lectures about computational
biology and programming at SCCC. All the software and data generated by this
research are released free and in open source, so other scientists have access
and can use them in their research.

The research concerns the evolutionary importance of variation in gene
expression, chromatin accessibility, and non-coding DNA in budding yeast and the
possible mechanisms. Comparing genetic sequences within and between species
provides a window into how organisms adapt to their environments over
evolutionary time. These comparisons have suggested that adaptation is primarily
driven by protein-coding genes, because such genes are often much more similar
between species than are other parts of the genome. However, recent discoveries
in molecular biology suggest an important role for non-coding regions of the
genome in shaping organism form and function. To understand how non-coding DNA
is important during evolution, yeast is used as a model system. Numerous genetic
tools are available for yeast, which makes it excellent for testing hypotheses
about the evolution of molecular biological features. After developing
theoretical models that make predictions about the kinds of patterns that should
be seen in non-coding DNA if these molecular biological effects are important
during evolution, genome and molecular biology data are generated from multiple
individuals taken from three yeast species. Using these data, hypotheses about
how evolution has shaped yeast at multiple levels can be tested.