* 1402166
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Void Symmetries  to Control the Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Athanassios Panagiotopoulos, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 230,000.00

PI: Kumar, Sanat / Panagiotopoulos, Athanassios &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1403049 / 1402166 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Columbia University / Princeton
University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Void Symmetries
to Control the Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assembly
of nanoparticles (NPs) into colloidal crystals is a promising way to obtain
ordered nanocomposite materials with unique properties determined by the choice
of the constituent NPs. If successful, this novel approach will have a
significant impact on the ability of experimentalists to rationally design
ordered colloidal crystals for a wide range of optical and catalytic
applications, such as photonic crystals, optical switches and filters, and
catalytic devices. The PIs have shown a novel way to selectively stabilize one
crystal structure over another possible one by the use of polymers that can
intercalate between the NPS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have made an
interesting discovery that, even when the energy, pressure, and packing fraction
for two crystal isomorphs, e.g., HCP and FCC, are the same, the distribution of
voids within the crystals are different. By filling the voids with polymers of
different length, they were able to show that one can selectively stabilize HCP
over FCC crystals. Based on these findings, they propose to make use of this
novel insight about void symmetries and size-distributions to select a desired
polymorph from a suite of competing crystal structure. In this proposal, they
will use molecular dynamics (using Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)-based
molecular dynamics simulations) and Monte-Carlo methods to study the colloidal
crystals in colloid/polymer blends, . They will explore several structures of
spherically symmetric and patchy particles with polymers of varying conformation
and flexibility in order to understand how to maximize the polymers' entropy in
voids of different geometries, and how the introduction of enthalpic
interactions may act in counterbalance to the polymer entropy.