* 1402142
* Collaborative Research: Self-Sustaining Thermochemical Pumping and Power Generation At Mesoscales
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 179,785.00

CBET-1403405/1402142&lt;br/&gt;Ahn (Syracuse)/Ronney
(USC)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portable electronic devices (PEDs) such as
cell phones and laptop computers have ever-growing needs for electrical power,
yet the batteries they use provide only 1 to 2% energy per pound as hydrocarbon
fuels. Because hydrocarbon fuels pack high energy densities, they are the fuel
of choice for power generation at large scales. However, this is not done at
small scales since engineers have been unable to scale internal combustion or
steam engines down to the sizes required to generate electricity for PEDs. Tiny
fuel cells (which convert fuel directly into electricity) have been used to
power PEDs, but have only succeeded by using fuels such as hydrogen or methanol
which have safety issues and/or very low energy per pound when the weight of the
storage tank is included. The present work proposes to use propane and butane,
the same easily-stored, high energy density fuels used in disposable lighters,
for generating power for PEDs and provides a very simple, versatile system for
supplying air to the device. The results of this work could have a significant
impact on PEDs with electrical energy storage densities exceeding batteries by a
factor of 10. Moreover, disposal of empty fuel cartridges in landfills is
preferable to disposal of used batteries containing toxic metals. This work will
involve undergraduate and graduate engineering students and also educate K-12
students through programs at Syracuse and
USC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portable electronic devices have ever-
growing needs for electrical power, yet batteries provide only 1 to 2% of the
energy density of hydrocarbon fuels. Scale-down of internal combustion engines
and electrical generators to MEMS scales has been unsuccessful due to issues
with heat losses, friction and the difficulty of manufacturing parts at small
scales with sufficient precision. The PIs propose to generate electrical power
from hydrocarbon fuels at small scales using (1) thermal transpiration in
nanoporous materials for fuel and air pumping; (2) combustion on Pt- and Au-
catalysts with room-temperature ignition; and (3) single-chamber solid oxide
fuel cells requiring no seals or separation between fuel and oxidant for power
generation within the thermal transpiration pump. Reactors of arbitrary shape
will be constructed using parts built using a unique 3-dimensional printing
technology for porous sintered stainless steel. The activity of supported Au
nanoparticles for low-temperature ignition of hydrocarbon oxidation will be
measured using in-situ FTIR/Gas Chromatography analysis. To determine what
property has the most impact on low-temperature oxidation, their surface
structure modifications will be assessed via Scanning Electron Microscopy and
their chemical modifications via X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. The effects
of ion substitution on the properties of double-perovskite structures will be
investigated and the catalytic behavior of several precious-metal, oxide-
supported electrocatalysts will also be examined. A high purity source of
gadolinia-doped-ceria is expected to increase the electrolyte conductivity, yet
retain the processability for thin-film electrolyte fuel cell fabrication. The
envisioned system is self-contained, has pumping and power generation integrated
into one device, has no moving parts and operates only on thermal and
electrochemical energy supplied by hydrocarbon fuels (i.e., it has no parasitic
electrical energy losses). This research could also enable spin-off applications
to other systems requiring gas pressurization or vacuum pumping, e.g. micro gas
chromatographs or toxic chemical agent sensors.