* 1402600
* Beyond Conventional Methods: Chemical Routes to Dope Topological Insulator Nanostructures and Two-Dimensional Materials Magnetically
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Judy Cha, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 395,393.00

**Non-Technical Description**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed
Matter Physics Program of the Division of Materials Research supports Yale
University with a project to develop novel chemical doping methods for
topological insulator nanostructures to alleviate current materials challenges
facing the field. Topological insulators possess exotic conducting surface
states that can be used as information carriers that do not generate wasted
heat. Thus topological insulators can replace current copper interconnects,
resulting in great reduction of energy consumption for the society. This
research will bring the realization of topological insulators as alternative
interconnects one step closer to reality. Additionally, the methods can be
successfully applied to two-dimensional, layered semiconductors to create dilute
magnetic semiconductors for much broader impact for the society. Dilute magnetic
semiconductors are widely studied for spintronics applications. The work
contributes to the training of skilled technical workforce and contains elements
for new course development on nanomaterials. In addition, the project promotes
the participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**Technical
Description**&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research to Yale University supports a
project to develop novel chemical methods to dope topological insulator
nanomaterials with magnetic impurities, and to open a band gap in the
topological surface states. Two chemical methods are investigated. The first
method employs intercalation of magnetic atoms, ions, and molecules at the Van
der Waals gap of layered topological insulators. The second method employs
surface modification of topological insulator nanostructures with molecular
spins. These methods exhibit significant advantages over conventional doping
methods: 1) higher concentration of magnetic dopants, 2) no clustering of
magnetic dopants, 3) spatial ordering of magnetic dopants into anti-
ferromagnetism or ferromagnetism, and 4) broad applicability to other two-
dimensional layered materials. Nanodevices will be fabricated to measure
magnetotransport at low temperature to characterize the doping. The successful
outcome of this research will lead to a materials platform in which fundamental
condensed matter physics phenomena can be explored to advance knowledge in band
gap in topological surface states, in topological magneto-electric effect, and
quantum anomalous Hall effect. It is anticipated that the methodology developed
in this project can be general. The research involves training undergraduate
students to conduct research independently, developing new components for a
nanotechnology course, and dissemination of knowledge through publications and
conference presentations and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.