* 1402635
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Fate and Transport of Antibiotics and Antibiotic Resistance Genes During Historic Colorado Flood
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Diana Aga, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 11/30/2015
* USD 17,808.00

1402635&lt;br/&gt;Aga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently it has come to the attention
of the scientific community and to the public that pharmaceutical compounds are
being found in many natural waters, for example, streams, rivers, lakes and
sometimes groundwater. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the
World Health Organization, and numerous other global and national agencies have
recognized that one potential implication of these findings is that bacterial
normally found in natural water may develop resistance to the antibiotics. This
may be one of the most critical challenges of this century. Studies have shown
that antibiotic resistant bacteria can be selected, maintained, and transported
within various environmental compartments, by environmental compartments we mean
streams and rivers. This project seeks to explore the impact of the recent
flooding in Colorado on what is referred to as mobilization of pharmaceuticals
(the partitioning of pharmaceutical compounds from sediments to the flowing
water) and to investigate whether or not there is an increase in antibiotic
resistance in these organisms associated with these waters. With a database of
10 years in the South Platte River the research team is well positioned to
conduct additional sampling. This project will be supporting graduate and
undergraduate students from three participating universities and will be used
for the students as part of undergraduate independent research or graduate
student thesis and dissertations.