* 1402595
* Reactive Supersonic Diesel Jets under Extreme High Injection Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 01/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal: 1402595 PI: Fang, Tiegang Title: Reactive Supersonic Diesel Jets under
Extreme High Injection Pressure

High-speed (supersonic) liquid jets have wide applications in engineering for
propulsion and power generation, such as diesel engines. Under supersonic
conditions, shock waves can form around liquid jets or atomized sprays, leading
to significant enhancement in fuel mixing and combustion. The North Carolina
State University research team proposes to study a supersonic diesel jet under
extreme high injection pressures of up to 1,000 MPa. The goals over the
eighteen-month project period are to exploit the induced shock waves during
liquid penetration and to demonstrate their effects on enhanced spray
atomization and combustion. This project also provides an excellent opportunity
for integrating research and education. The graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this project will acquire experimental and analytical skills related
to ignition and fuel atomization at extreme pressures. The experience provided
by this project will enrich three courses that the PI teaches in the current
mechanical engineering curriculum. The knowledge gathered in this project will
be disseminated to the public via workshops, national and international
conferences presentations, and archival journal publications. In addition, the
gathered knowledge will be relayed to designers and developers of highly
efficient and clean next-generation internal combustion engines.

This is a novel area that has not been studied despite potential application in
diesel engines. Results from this project will advance and provide a new
knowledge base pertaining to the applications of extreme high injection
pressures in the fuel delivery systems. Successful application of this
phenomenon in compression-ignition engines will lead to breakthroughs in engine
design, allowing significant reductions in fuel consumption and pollutant
emissions. Another profound impact that is beyond the fuel injection system is
that this project is expected to advance understanding of fluid-solid
interaction as applied in novel high-pressure dual hydroforming technique. This
technique is used for making complex tubular parts for automotive and aerospace
applications. Specific tasks include investigating the liquid penetration,
breakup, and interaction with the induced shock waves and to investigate the
influence of shock waves on fuel spray atomization and combustion. Successful
application of this phenomenon in compression-ignition engines will lead to
breakthroughs in engine design, allowing significant reductions in fuel
consumption, thereby diminishing our dependence on foreign oil and reducing
pollutant emissions.