* 1402497
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Michael Logan, Logan                   Michael        L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2016
* USD 141,000.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology provide opportunities for young
scientists to conduct research abroad, to establish productive international
collaborations, and to take advantage of unique research and training
opportunities. These outcomes are mutually beneficial to the United States and
to the foreign hosts. This fellowship to Michael L. Logan supports research and
training that combines physiological ecology and evolutionary biology to explore
biological consequences of climate gradients in a population of lizards in the
Cape region of South Africa. The host institution for this fellowship is
Stellenbosch University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Susana Clusella-
Trullas. Over the course of this study, a blog entitled Evolution in Action:
South Africa serves as a discussion forum through which members of the general
public are invited to accompany the Fellow into the field so that they may take
part in the process of data collection. The fellowship provides training in the
development of new assays and novel data analysis techniques and is being funded
by the Office of International and Integrative Activities and the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.

Developing models that accurately forecast the responses of animal and plant
populations to rapid environmental changes has proven useful to direct further
research, establish new knowledge about biological responses, and for guiding
public policy. Recent research results predict that certain taxonomic groups,
such as lizards, are especially susceptible to changes in climate. But
predictive models often assume that the characteristics of species that
determine how they will respond to climate change, e.g., the temperatures at
which they perform best, are fixed. In other words, it is assumed that they
cannot evolve in response to a changing climate. Yet strong evidence suggests
that many species have the capacity to evolve rapidly, and they might therefore
be able partially to mitigate the negative effects of a changing environment
through evolutionary adaptation. Experimentally manipulating whole populations
to test how climate change may serve as an agent of natural selection is
difficult, but natural geographic variation in climate can be used as a proxy
for these effects. In this research, natural selection is being measured in
several populations of Cordylid lizards occurring across environments that
differ dramatically with respect to climate. These estimates of selection are
then being used to predict the rate of evolutionary change that might occur in
response to a warmer climate. By understanding the role of evolution in the
response of species to climate change, a critical component of realism can be
added to predictive models.