* 1402990
* Spin Injection and Manipulation in Graphene-based Spintronics Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Eduardo Mucciolo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 415,710.00

This project aims at developing an integrated experimental and educational
framework for understanding of dynamical spin pumping, spin injection, and
generation of pure spin currents in graphene-based spintronics devices. A series
of experimental and theoretical research activities have been strategized in
collaboration with the Graphene Research Centre at the National University of
Singapore. The goal of the proposed research is to develop nanoscale devices for
information processing where a complete control of the magnetic state is
possible without relying on charge currents. Within emerging spintronics
technologies, the generation and control of pure spin currents is becoming of
paramount relevance. The unique property of graphene offers the advantage of
pure spin current devices as preeminent candidate for the next generation of
information processing and storage hardware. The proposed research will be
integrated with a series of educational and training activities, including
training of graduate students at the interface of fundamental and applied
physics, and gain experience from international collaboration. The PIs are
committed to involving underrepresented groups in the research activities at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a series of experimental and
theoretical research activities for the understanding of injection and control
of pure spin currents in graphene-based spintronic devices that uses dynamical
spin pumping and the spin-Hall effect (SHE). The goal is to develop nanoscale
devices for information processing where a complete control of the magnetic
state is possible without the direct intervention of net charge currents. The
proposed devices will make use of the unique properties of graphene to allow
generation and manipulation of pure spin currents for controlling the magnetic
state of the device that not possible with spin transfer torque devices based on
non-gateable elements. The specific objectives of the project are to: a)
understand dynamical spin pumping from a ferromagnet (FM) into single-layer and
multi-layer graphene (Gr) under different structural conditions exfoliated,
chemical vapor deposition grown, and hydrogenated graphene) and for different
interfacial configurations (FM/Gr and FM/MgO/Gr); b) understand the SHE in
single-layer and multi-layer graphene under different structural conditions and
study its behavior as a function of the gate voltage; and, c) develop graphene-
based gateable pure spin current valves that uses both dynamical spin pumping
and SHE to allow for an efficient control of magnetic state of the devices and
explore their potential applications for next generationlow-power high-speed
MRAM, information processing and storage devices.