* 1402164
* Arnol'd diffusion, Growth of Sobolev norms, Spectral rigidity for convex billiards
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Vadim Kaloshin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 239,999.00

In many areas of mathematics and physics it is important to analyze the
dynamical behavior of systems that conserve some important physical quantities
such as energy, mass, or volume. These are called conservative systems, and one
natural type of conservative system is a Hamiltonian system of finite or
infinite dimension (named after W. Hamilton, who studied them in the 19th
century). Hamiltonian systems are derived from classical mechanics and remain
fundamental objects of study. It is critically important to understand the
formation of instabilities of solutions for these systems. One of the goals of
this proposal is to study dynamics of nearly integrable Hamiltonian systems,
systems whose solutions can be approximated by explicit formulas, as well as
their instabilities. This study will provide significant modern advances in
understanding the classical problems, with many current applications, especially
to astrophysics. The PI expects to make progress in this direction in part by
extending previous successful work by him to higher dimensional systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will be focused around proving
strong forms of Arnol'd diffusion for a variety of Hamiltonian systems and
studying spectral rigidity for convex billiards (elastic collisions). The major
topics of the proposal are: Arnol'd diffusion for convex Hamiltonian systems,
existence of an almost dense orbit on an energy surface for nearly integrable
Hamiltonian systems. The latter is a weak form of quasi-ergodic hypothesis.
Another direction of our research is to prove stochastic and diffusive behavior
for nearly integrable systems, where randomness is with respect to initial
conditions. We also plan to study growth of Sobolev norms for Hamiltonian PDEs
and extend our previous results on this topic.