* 1402863
* Noncommutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Jian Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 06/30/2018
* USD 313,728.00

An algebra is a fundamental mathematical concept that encodes information about
objects in mathematics and other disciplines. Understanding the structure of
algebras is an important task on its own as well as for other fields in
mathematics. Invariants of an algebra are supposed to capture distinguished
features of its representing objects, and identities or equations between the
invariants reveal the insights behind these objects. This proposal focuses on
the research of noncommutative algebras that arise from several subjects such as
noncommutative projective geometry, noncommutative invariant theory, and the
study of infinite dimensional Hopf algebras. The PI will investigate several
long-term projects; one of his ultimate goals is to discover powerful invariants
that characterize noncommutative algebras. The PI will involve graduate students
in this research.

This research project concerns three topics in noncommutative algebra: higher
dimensional Artin-Schelter regular algebras, noncommutative invariant theory and
noncommutative McKay correspondence, and the Zariski cancellation problem for
noncommutative algebras, all of which are intimately connected with each other.
The PI continues to develop the foundations for new research directions, to
search for distinct invariants of noncommutative algebras and identities between
the invariants, and to work on important open questions in the field. The work
involves two exciting ideas, discriminant of noncommutative algebras and
homological identities, which have many surprising applications. Invariants such
as the discriminant and those involved in homological identities touch the core
of the structure of noncommutative algebras. This project investigates a large
number of interesting questions that will stimulate research in noncommutative
algebra and related areas. Results of the project have promise for significant
impact in the subject and beyond.