* 1402053
* NeTS: JUNO: Service Offering Model and Versatile Network Resource Grooming for Optical Packet and Circuit Integrated Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Rudra Dutta, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2018
* USD 291,956.00

The explosive growth in bandwidth represented by advances in optical
communication and networking technologies has underpinned the increasing reach
and reliability of the Internet in the last two decades. However, the potential
impact of increasingly sophisticated recent advances in optical technology, such
as rapid switching and elastic wavelengths, have not yet been realized. The main
cause of this is that such technology, while possible to integrate into the data
plane of planetary networking, is difficult to accommodate in the current
planning, management, and control strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, we will work hand-in-hand with collaborating researchers from NICT,
Japan, who are working to realize a novel technology of hybrid optical
packet/circuit switching. Such a technology could be immensely useful to large
transport network operators, but there are no existing algorithms that can
easily determine how a provider can provision their resources between the
circuit and packet possibilities on an ongoing dynamic
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We take a novel approach to this problem, utilizing
the concept of a "choice marketplace" that embodies sophisticated rendezvous
semantics between customer and provider, and allows them to cooperatively guide
network resource provisioning to dynamically fulfill network objectives such as
maximizing performance received by network traffic. Our approach provides social
benefit by balancing of various objectives, such as network utilization,
latency, and the increasingly important metric of energy expenditure in the
network. Our work will provide an early prototype of how customers can shop for
network transport services in a competitive marketplace, allowing provider
ecosystems to emerge for mutual advantage. The project will integrate research
and prototyping activities into education, and utilize the US-Japan
collaboration to provide broadening of students' educational horizons.