* 1402102
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology for FY 2014
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Matthew VanDam, VanDam                  Matthew        H
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2016
* USD 185,376.00

NSF Postdoctoral Fellowships in Biology combine research and training components
to prepare young scientists for careers in biology and provide them an
opportunity to establish international collaborations and take advantage of
research facilities and opportunities abroad. Forging strong international
collaborations is mutually beneficial to the U.S. and the foreign hosts. This
fellowship to Matthew H. Van Dam concerns research on the environmental factors
that influence the seeming over-abundance of Australasian weevils. The host
institutions are the Zoological State Collection, Munich (ZSM) and the State
Museum of Natural History Karlsruhe (SMNK), and the sponsoring scientists are
Michael Balke and Alexander Riedel. Field work and outreach are also being
conducted with the UK Darwin Initiative to train the next generation of
conservation biologists in Papua New Guinea for advising decision makers on land
use management in PNG. This fellowship is supported by both the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Office of International and Integrative Activities
at NSF. The research addresses a fundamental question of how the evolution of
hyper-diverse groups proceeds by targeting an extreme example of ecological
super-saturation in the weevil genus Trigonopterus. It seeks to explain the
elevated species richness in this group as an exemplar of what is seen in the
taxa of the Australasian region as a whole. In addition, it tests a long held
hypothesis explaining the high levels of endemism seen in tropical regions
versus temperate ones. This has implications not only in Janzen's 1967
hypothesis about why barriers to dispersal are greater in tropical mountains
versus temperate mountains, but also for seeing how labile physiological traits
adapt to changing climate in predictive models.

Training goals include acquiring bioinformatic tools to analyze genomic data and
answer questions on the evolution of hyper-diverse groups using weevil as the
model. Educational activities include training undergraduate students, including
those from under-represented groups, in weevil taxonomy and molecular
systematics. These skills have direct application to agriculture, as many
weevils are agricultural pests. Having an understanding of the fauna of this
region will aid in the identification of new or newly invasive agricultural
pests, e.g. the red palm weevil Rhynchophorus ferrugineus from Southeast Asia.