* 1402964
* Studies of Higgs Boson Properties and Search for New Physics with ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Rostislav Konoplich, Manhattan College
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2019
* USD 226,446.00

Overview: A goal of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (the LHC) at CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson, recently
discovered there in 2012, and to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model
of Elementary Particle Physics. These goals are relevant to the understanding of
the Universe at its most fundamental level just in the fleeting fraction of a
second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. To
meet the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new detectors and
accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and analytical
methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader impact for the
training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement of
technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The emphasis here is on the involvement of
undergraduate students directly into the research program. The student will work
directly on physics analysis and visit the CERN laboratory. One of the
highlights will be the development by the students of an undergraduate research
journal at Manhattan College, a potentially exciting means to develop interest
and enthusiasm among the students for scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years represent a transition of the LHC
physics program from a collision energy of 8 TeV data-taking and operation, to
extended operations and data taking at nearly double the energy, 13-14 TeV. Over
a thousand scientists from the United States are involved with this scientific
program on several major experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The research to be conducted under this award to Prof Konoplich and his group at
Manhattan College is aimed to address deep questions about the nature of the
Universe from data collected with the ATLAS experiment, one of the major
multipurpose detectors at the LHC. Scientific questions addressed include: is
the newly discovered Higgs particle simply the Higgs of the Standard Model or is
it part of a larger theoretical picture that includes new particles that could
be discovered at the new higher LHC collision energy? What are the detailed
properties of this particle? Why is the observed mass of the Higgs boson so low,
found to be 126 billion electron volts, or roughly 135 times the mass of the
proton? In fact this low mass value is one of the most profound conundrums in
all of science and is currently driving much of the scientific discourse in the
field of particle physics. These questions are critical to our understanding of
the full context of the Standard Model of particle physics and to new physics
that lies beyond the Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically,
Konoplich and his group will be collaborating with colleagues at New York
University and others in developing and refining the trigger for the ATLAS
experiment, and notably the missing energy trigger, which is important for
allowing the experiment to be sensitive to new physics. Such a development will
be tactically important as the energy and the luminosity (the instantaneous
collision rate) of the LHC are increased to meet the demands of the ATLAS
program of discovery physics.