* 1402962
* Thermally-induced Rayleigh-taylor like instabilities for nanoscale synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Ramki Kalyanaraman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2019
* USD 282,276.00

CBET-1402962 Kalyanaraman

One way the United States can continue to be the global leader in technology
innovation with a sound economic plan for the future is if it can employ large
fractions of the population in high-tech manufacturing jobs. One potentially
untapped, but high growth, area, is the manufacturing of sophisticated
nanomaterials for use in solar cells, computer data storage devices, and sensors
for disease detection. It is widely acknowledged that nature has found many ways
to make useful and complex materials in economical fashion. One of the
principles often found in nature is that of self-organization or self-assembly,
in which competing forces lead to the emergence of a useful structure. For
example, the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) effect is at the heart of the formation of a
uniform collection of water droplets on the underside of a ceiling. In this
case, it is the result of gravity disturbing the water film-air interface that
leads to droplet formation. Besides being evident in liquids, the RT effect can
also be found in the behavior of astronomical structures such as black holes and
supernova, and in geophysical phenomenon. If the RT effect can be applied to the
nanoscale, a cost-effective way to make nanomaterials could result. However,
since gravity rarely influences the nanoscale, other ways need to be found to
create the RT effect. The research proposed here will explore the hypothesis
that rapid heating of a material in liquid ambient can produce RT effects in the
nanoscale. The experimental component will involve creating such a scenario by
using laser pulses to heat the material of interest. A variety of microscopy and
computer modeling techniques will be employed to study the resulting
nanomaterials. During the course of this research, training of minority and
underrepresented students from K-12, undergraduate, and graduate programs will
be achieved. They will be trained in basic and applied principles of science and
engineering, with the goal of making them future leaders of the society in STEM
disciplines and/or in technologically relevant industries.

The research proposed here is an understanding of the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT)
instability in the nanoscale. Recent experimental findings show that the RT
instability can be observed in thin films melted by laser pulses in a fluid
ambient. The preliminary hypothesis underlying the discovery is that the large
thermal gradient that develop at the film/vapor interface due to the rapid
heating under nanosecond laser pulses lead to large pressure gradients, which
are ultimately responsible for the observed behavior. Early results of thermal
modeling support this hypothesis. However, the role of fluid properties, laser
parameters and other thin film hydrodynamic instabilities is presently lacking
in order to unequivocally establish an understanding of this phenomenon.
Motivated by this, several model systems based on a combination of fluid
(glycerol, water, toluene), film (Au, Ag, Si, TiO2), and substrate (Glass, Si,
Sapphire) properties have been identified. The following tasks will be
performed. (1) Theoretical modeling of thermal transport to understand ns pulsed
laser heating of various fluid/film/substrate systems. (2) Laser melting
experiments of various combinations of fluid, film and substrate. (3)
Characterization of pattern morphology, nanoparticle structure, and chemical
composition by various nanoscale tools. This includes scanning and transmission
electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, electron
energy loss spectroscopy, and optical spectroscopy. (4) Modeling of the
experimental results in the context of fluid dynamics theories to explain the
observations.