* 1403488
* Imaging with Quantum Illumination Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Paul Lett, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Classical imaging is limited in sensitivity and resolution by the statistical
noise properties of the light used to create the images. In everyday life a
classical description of light usually suffices; however this leads to
limitations on both the sensitivity of detecting objects as well as the
resolution with which one can detect them that are not fundamental. Using a
quantum mechanical description of the light, "non-classical" light fields can be
envisioned that will lead to better detection sensitivity and imaging resolution
than with classical light. Using non-linear optical properties of certain
materials, non-classical light fields can be created and these fields can be
investigated to see how much better they are than the classical limits. Such
"quantum illumination" has been shown to be capable of improved detection
sensitivity, but has not been demonstrated in an imaging situation before, where
very different detector and light-source technologies are required. These
techniques are especially useful at very low light levels, and thus are
interesting in the field of imaging of live biological tissues where one would
like to avoid damage to the tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been
demonstrated that four-wave mixing in atomic vapors can generate light with
interesting quantum properties, and do so under conditions where non-trivial
imaging is possible. This project takes advantage of the development of this
light source to investigate three distinct ideas: the "SU(1,1)" interferometer
which potentially exceeds the sensitivity of conventional interferometers, the
copier-phase sensitive amplifier (a low-noise optical amplifier for images), and
quantum illumination for remote sensing. The extent to which the advantages of
quantum illumination and coherent detection can be achieved in practice will be
investigated. The work involves the investigation of newly introduced quantum
techniques in the context of interferometric sensing and imaging, and it allows
the further development of quantum-noise-limited imaging and detection. Quantum
entanglement of the light beams could allow improvements in imaging, and have an
impact on the study of quantum information processing techniques. These
techniques are especially useful at very low light levels, and thus are
interesting in the field of imaging of live biological tissues in order to avoid
damage to the tissue.