* 1403335
* Constraint Release Dynamics in Entangled Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixtures of a monodisperse linear
polymer with a monodisperse "star"-branched polymer represent the simplest
polymers that expose the greatest deficiencies in current understanding of
"constraint release" -- the effect that motion of one polymer chain has on its
entanglements with other chains. This problem will be attacked by (1) obtaining
a series of carefully synthesized star 1,4-polybutadiene polymers, which are
then thoroughly characterized by the most advanced method available, namely
temperature gradient interaction chromatraphy, or TGIC, (2) formulating and
measuring the rheology of a set of some 40 mixtures of "star"-branched and
linear polymers covering a range of constraint-release conditions, (3) applying
the most advanced "tube" theories to predict the rheology of these mixtures and
other such mixtures already available in the literature, and (4) collaborating
through an international network, thereby accessing new polymer materials,
dielectric relaxation data on cis-polyisoprene star/linear mixtures, and
accessing results from "slip-link" and molecular dynamics polymer simulations
for the prediction of the rheology and dielectric relaxation of these
star/linear blends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are among the most widely used synthetic
materials; over 300 million tons are produced annually, for use in automobiles,
medical supplies and equipment, wrappings for food preservation, and many other
applications. The manufacture of such polymers in the United States is now
increasingly attractive, due to cheap and abundant sources of natural gas, from
which the starting chemicals for common polymers, such as polyolefins, are
obtained. To economize on the quantity needed and to speed and cost-reduce the
shaping of polymers into products, the flow properties of polymers must be
optimized. This often involves the strategic addition of controlled amounts of
long-chain branching to the polymer molecules. However, design of branching
strategies depends on a thorough knowledge of polymer dynamics, which is
currently inhibited by lack of understanding of a phenomenon called "constraint
release" -- the effect that motion of one polymer chain has on its entanglements
with other chains. This proposal represents a direct attack on this unsolved
problem, using advanced tools of polymer synthesis and newly discovered methods
of characterization of branching at unprecedented levels of accuracy.
Understanding will be greatly enhanced by collaborating with an international
team, which includes the most knowledgeable scientists in the world on various
aspects of the problem, including synthesis (in Saudi Arabia, Korea, and the
U.S.), characterization (in Korea and Japan), and computational modeling (in the
U.S. and United Kingdom). The research will create the most complete body of
experimental work on "constraint release" in branched polymers, and the data and
theories will be made available to industrial researchers through publication,
web-based access, and direct interaction with industrial researchers. Ph.D.,
Undergraduate, and High School students will be trained in the course of the
research.