* 1403236
* Time-Domain Characterization of Macroscopic Quantum Systems via High Harmonic Generation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Mette Gaarde, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 11/30/2017
* USD 270,000.00

High harmonic generation (HHG) is a highly nonlinear process by which laser
light with a wavelength in the infrared regime can undergo frequency up-
conversion into the extreme ultraviolet (XUV) or even soft X-ray regime. HHG is
also at the heart of the production of attosecond pulses, which are the shortest
bursts of light ever produced, with durations that are more than a billion times
shorter than a microsecond. The natural application of attosecond pulses is in
the study of electron dynamics, which occurs on this time scale. Several decades
of work have been dedicated to the development and application of attosecond
light sources, and the proposed work addresses aspects of both development and
applications. One of the proposed projects involves the study of ultrafast
correlation between electrons during HHG in an atom. The correlation is expected
to impart a signature on the time structure of the emitted attosecond XUV
radiation. This project thus uses the process of HHG as a probe of the
underlying electron dynamics. In another project HHG and attosecond pulse
production in transparent solids, which have recently been experientally found
to produce relatively high order harmonics, will be investigated. Although the
process of HHG in dilute atomic gases is well understood, the efficiency of and
the mechanism by which HHG are produced in these transparent solids is largely
unknown. This project is thus a study in attosecond source development. All the
proposed projects will be undertaken through large-scale calculations within a
theoretical framework in which it is possible to describe the HHG process from
the ab-initio quantum level to the macroscopic production of a measurable
electric field. The proposed work will involve several new theoretical
developments as well as a number of applications of the existing theoretical
framework. The calculations envisioned are ambitious and will represent the
state-of-the-art for the theory and computation of ultrafast laser-matter
interactions. The majority of the proposed work is directly relevant to ongoing
collaborations with experimental groups at the forefront of ultrafast strong
field physics. The broader impacts of this project are diverse and involve the
development of both scientific and human resources: (i) The development and
application of ultrafast, coherent XUV sources further our fundamental
understanding of the dynamics of atomic, molecular, and biological processes at
the few-femtosecond and sub-femtosecond time scale, (ii) the proposed work helps
to maintain a presence of ultrafast AMO science in the US while the field is
generally dominated by groups in Europe, Asia, and Canada, and (iii) human
resources will be developed through involvement, training, and mentoring of
junior researchers such as undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs. The
PI, who is female, is also actively involved in mentoring women in physics, in
particular at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this
proposal centers on the study of ultrafast quantum dynamics through the strong-
field production of high order harmonics and attosecond pulses in different
macroscopic non-linear media. In particular, the work proposed is to study (i)
the time-domain effects of correlation in two-electron systems through the
characteristics of high order harmonics in the vicinity of auto-ionizing
resonances, and more generally the effects of resonances (in one- or two-
electron systems) on the microscopic and macroscopic properties of the harmonic
radiation, (ii) high harmonic generation (HHG) in periodic media (transparent
solids) which has recently been experimentally demonstrated, and (iii) HHG
driven by mid-infrared laser pulses, in terms of their potential as a source of
kiloelectron volt attosecond pulses. Some of these studies center on
characterizing the inherent dynamics of the strong-field interaction with the
quantum system, such as correlation, or the nature of the coherent process that
leads to harmonics in solids. Other studies aim to characterize or optimize the
properties of the VUV/XUV light itself. The proposed work will be accomplished
through the continued development and application of an ab-initio, non-adiabatic
theoretical model for ultrafast laser-matter interactions. This "numerical non-
linear medium" (NNLM) allows for the complete simulation of the most advanced
short pulse laser experiments from first principles. The NNLM is based on the
coupled solutions of the time-dependent Schroedinger equation and the Maxwell
wave equation with sub-cycle precision, and requires large scale computations.