* 1403757
* Studies on Polymeric Glasses, Melts, and Mixtures: Connecting Microscopic Character with Observable Behaviour
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Most of what we see in the world is made up of a
relatively small number of elements. The fact that they combine together to
create such a variety of matter with such an enormous range of behavior provides
evidence that the line between chemical constituency and observable physical
properties is neither short nor straight. The research targeted by this study
focuses largely on macromolecules and their mixtures. Macromolecules, or
polymers, are large molecules that result from the connection of small molecule
'repeat units'. One example is polyethylene, made from ethylene, which is used
to produce (among other things) plastic bags, films, and bottles. Polyethylene
contains only two elements, carbon and hydrogen; other polymers, having
different properties relative to polyethylene, can be made from the same two
elements. Even for this simple example, it is not straightforward to predict the
properties of all of these polymers from their chemical 'recipe',
alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the chemical nature of a substance,
the properties of a material can depend on how it is formulated. For example,
whether it is cast in a film, made into a membrane, or processed in bulk,
influences how the material responds to temperature, pressure, and the presence
of other constituents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research funded through this
proposal a combination of theory and computer simulation will be used to create
new connections between the microscopic nature and characterization of complex
materials and their bulk and film properties. Developed theoretical tools will
be capable to lead from the characterization of a pure component (using
experimental data) to analysis and prediction of how that substance will behave
under varying conditions, and mixed with different partners. Another aspect of
this research deals with how the behavior of a macromolecule changes when
dealing with a thin film or even a membrane, relative to a bulk sample. For
example, there is evidence that some polymers melt at significantly lower
temperatures when they are thin films than when in the bulk; intriguingly, this
effect can be nullified or even reversed when the film is loaded onto a solid
substrate, depending on the chemical nature of the polymer and the substrate.
The PI will explore how the physical format of the sample, and the choice of its
neighbors, affects some of its observable properties; such insight is key for
the myriad applications that involve thin film polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of human resources, the research will create continuing opportunities for
involvement by undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, with
particular efforts aimed towards undergraduate women. This work will foster new
opportunities for connecting with the scientific public, via talks, posters, and
publications, and for outreach to the general public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric components may be blended, layered, or
phase separated in a controlled fashion, in order to produce sophisticated new
materials. The properties of such systems depend both on the microscopic
chemical nature of the polymers chosen, as well as the form in which they are
used, for example, in the bulk, or as films, membranes, or composites. It is
therefore important to understand how both chemical constituency and formulation
contribute to macroscopic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide fundamental insight as to the molecular features that help drive a
variety of condensed matter transitions under a range of circumstances. The
tools combine analytic statistical mechanical theory with simulation methods.
The systems of interest comprise molecules ranging in size from small to
polymeric, states ranging from glassy to melt to (where applicable) vapor, The
setups range from single to multicomponent systems, from supported to layered
films, from solutions to blends. The properties encompass both equilibrium and
dynamic, the latter associated with the process of glassification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems of particular interest include glasses, and
polymer melts, solutions, and blends. In the case of thin films, supported,
freestanding films, and multi-layered films will all be investigated. The use of
multiple approaches will provide opportunity for cross checking the different
strategies, as well as comparing the results of each to experiment. The research
will create new insight regarding the properties of complex systems in different
environments, and will produce tools for making substantive predictions about
mixture behavior based on pure component properties, alone. In addition,
progress in the different areas described will create opportunities in areas
where they overlap. Examples include: understanding the changes in polymer
mixture behavior going from the bulk to a thin film, and studying the solubility
of supercritical carbon dioxide in ionic liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal
benefits aimed both at the larger scientific community and the more general
public will accrue from the work described here. New methods will expand the
range of soft matter communities able to apply the results of the work proposed.
This extended reach will be aided by computational tools written with casual,
scientific users in mind, posted on the group website. In terms of human
resources, the research will create continuing opportunities for involvement by
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, with particular
efforts aimed towards undergraduate women. This work will foster new
opportunities for connecting with the scientific public, via talks, posters, and
publications, and for outreach to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division