* 1403656
* Slowing, Cooling, and Spectroscopy with Stimulated Optical Forces
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Edward Eyler, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 365,694.00

Under normal conditions, molecules in the air move at speeds of nearly 500
meters per second, and if they were not constantly bumping into one another,
they would travel an inch in just 50 millionths of a second. This grant will
support research on new methods for using lasers to bring atoms or molecules to
a standstill within this same one-inch range, by producing decelerations a
million times the force of gravity. For the case of atoms, the objective is to
improve upon existing methods, by greatly increasing the force and the velocity
range over which the force is usable. For molecules, it has proven to be
extremely difficult to apply standard methods, owing to the relative complexity
of the internal quantum structure of molecules. Thus a particular emphasis will
be placed on effective schemes for decelerating and cooling molecules, using as
a test system the calcium monofluoride molecule, CaF. Optimal approaches will be
determined by a combination of numerical modeling and experimental tests using
laser beams that contain light at multiple colors simultaneously. The resulting
cold atoms and molecules will be investigated using lasers to probe their
internal energy structure. The apparatus will also be used to study the
interaction of molecules with each other under unusual conditions. There are
possible applications to chemical physics, cold plasma formation, electric field
calibration, and quantum computation. The project will help train and educate
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
addresses three main motivations: to develop and understand the physics of
stimulated optical forces, to achieve large improvements in direct laser slowing
and cooling of atomic and molecular beams, and to investigate excited-state
structure and dynamics in atomic He and molecular CaF. Helium and CaF are chosen
partially for their fundamental interest, and partially because they are
excellent candidates for manipulation by stimulated optical forces. The
stimulated bichromatic force (BCF) and the newly-proposed polychromatic force
(PCF) are rectified coherent optical forces from multi-frequency laser beams
that can be hundreds of times stronger than the conventional radiative force. As
part of the proposed research, a prototype chirped-BCF decelerator for He will
be completed, and a promising new four-color PCF version will be tested and
compared with calculations. A similar decelerator will be developed for the CaF
molecule, a species that has attracted considerable recent interest as a
candidate for direct laser slowing and cooling. For molecules, there is an
additional advantage to utilizing coherent optical forces beyond merely
increasing the force. Because hundreds of BCF momentum exchanges can occur for
each radiative decay event, the BCF can reduce the velocity by hundreds of times
more than incoherent radiative forces before the molecule decays into an
inaccessible "dark" state. Several spectroscopic experiments will be initiated
on the resulting cold atoms and molecules, including studies of cold gases of
highly-excited Rydberg states of CaF, and precise laser spectroscopy of both He
and CaF. The study of cold molecules in Rydberg states is a little-explored
topic likely to involve new physical phenomena. Precise spectroscopy of helium
will facilitate tests of basic theory and pave the way for future ultra-precise
measurements. Novel applications of metastable helium beams will also be
explored.