* 1403259
* Molecular and Hybrid Simulations of Nanobubble Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2019
* USD 345,931.00

PI: Shell, M. Scott Proposal Number: 1403259 Institution: University of
California-Santa Barbara Title: Molecular and Hybrid Simulations of Nanobubble
Stability

This proposal addresses one of the foremost challenges in interfacial science,
the critical issue of long-lived nanobubble stability on hydrophobic surfaces. A
successful attack on this problem will have a significant impact on a range of
emerging technologies that rely on the ability of stable nanobubbles to
dramatically modify the properties of solid surfaces, including anti-fouling and
surface cleaning techniques, transport in microfluidic devices, delivery of
medical therapeutics, chemical processes involving biological or gas-liquid
reactions, surface-induced crystallization, and catalysis. The PIs will also
build on their record of involving students at multiple levels, including those
from underrepresented groups (e.g., The Shell group has hosted two minority
students from HBCU schools as summer research interns through UCSB's GRIP and
SABRE programs), through different programs at UCSB (summer research
opportunities for undergraduates and high school students, giving talks in
events from minority associations and professional associations at UCSB). In
particular, the PIs and graduate students will be involved with the SIMS summer
program that involves top high school graduates.

The main thrust of this proposal is to critically address several hypotheses for
nanobubble stability, using state-of-the-art molecular and hybrid molecular
continuum simulation methods that provide a complement to current experiments.
The goal is to develop a thermodynamic picture of nanobubble stability because
there is some evidence that the nanobubble may actually be thermodynamically
stable. To that end, the PI will use molecular simulations to compute free
energies of nanobubble formation as a function of bubble size, shape,
composition, and solution conditions. The results will quantify the stabilities
of the bubbles, and clarify whether and when they are associated with global or
local (metastable) free energy minima. These free energies will also be compared
with the macroscopic expectation (e.g., based on bulk surface tensions and
solubilities) to assess the possible breakdown such arguments at the nanoscale.
To achieve these goals, the proposal provides clearly formulated hypotheses,
including both thermodynamic and dynamic transport mechanisms, that will be
addressed.