* 1403872
* Electricity Generation and Enhanced Heat Transfer via Pulsating Ferro-Nanofluid
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Keisha Walters, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 01/31/2017
* USD 349,994.00

CBET - 1403872 Thompson

New methods for harvesting waste energy can allow for reduced fossil fuel-
dependence, off-grid power generation and more efficient vehicles and buildings.
Traditional thermoelectric materials can be used for these applications;
however, their use is limited due to their relatively low thermal conductivities
and low melting temperatures. The proposed research project centers on a new
thermal-to-electrical energy harvesting/conversion method comprised of a
capillary-sized heat pipe filled with magnetic fluid that operates via
temperature difference. When the magnetic fluid inside the oscillating heat pipe
(OHP) is exposed to a solenoid, an electrical alternating-current is generated.
The high thermal conductivity and temperature stability of OHPs will allow for
their utilization in conditions and applications where traditional
thermoelectric materials are not viable. This new waste-heat recovery process
will provide a new method for energy recovery and thermal management in a wide
range of energy efficient applications.

The project's research objective is to better understand "thermofluidic
induction" a unique thermo-kinetic-electromagnetic energy conversion process
inherent to temperature-driven flow of magnetic nanofluid near a solenoid which
can result in heat transfer enhancement and electrical power generation. Well-
designed experiments on various OHP platforms will be conducted to determine the
influence of the design and operating parameters on the performance of these
OHPs in terms of heat flux and electrical power generation. Various nanofluids
will be synthesized and then characterized using a wide range of techniques,
including dynamic light scattering (DLS), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), in order to determine their physical and
thermal characteristics before and after OHP-operation. The effects of thermal
fatigue and nanoparticle settling will be studied. A transparent OHP will also
be constructed to better understand the extent to which the nanofluid and OHP
operating parameters affect energy harvesting, fluid mechanics and heat
transfer. Thermo-kinetic-electromagnetic modeling will be accomplished by
utilizing and modifying available multiphysics software on select OHP models.
The research objectives are to determine: (1) the extent to which the magnetic
field and heat transfer are coupled in thermally-driven, pulsating capillary
flow of ferro-nanofluid near a solenoid, (2) how to effectively transfer heat
and/or generate a magnetic field in an oscillating heat pipe by varying specific
design parameters, (3) the extent to which thermally-driven, pulsating capillary
flows of ferro-nanofluids can: (i) enhance heat transfer and/or (ii) affect
nanoparticle suspendability (agglomeration) and particle size/distribution (i.e.
thermal fatigue of nanofluids) and finally (4) a novel, multiphysics
analytical/numerical model that aids in predicting heat transfer and electrical
power generation inherent to thermofluidic induction.