* 1403973
* Quantum Vacuum and Atoms: Exploring QED and Atom-Surface Interactions with the Help of Advanced Numerical Methods
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Ulrich Jentschura, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 01/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The spectroscopic measurement of transition frequencies in simple atomic systems
has significantly contributed to the progress of physics within the last 100
years. The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom was developed on the basis of the
quantum-classical correspondence of planetary orbits under the influence of the
central electrostatic potential generated by the positively charged proton, with
the additional ingredient of the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition. The
theory has been refined over decades, with additional input from relativistic
physics and quantum field theory. By analyzing the spectrum ever more carefully,
one has been able to deduce from the experiments a few subtle properties of the
atoms, such as the charge radius of the massive central particle, i.e., the
proton. Recently, an experiment has been performed which questions the
understanding of the field-theoretical modifications of the Coulomb force law at
short distances: The so-called muonic hydrogen experiment at the Paul-Scherrer
Institute in Villigen, Switzerland, has been obtaining results for transitions
in the bound system of muon and proton, which are in disagreement with other
experiments and theoretical calculations performed by the physics community over
at least two decades. Within the NSF program, some of the last conceivable
explanations for the ensuing proton radius puzzle will be studied from the
theoretical side, with the aim of either excluding these explanations, or
finding confirmation for necessary modifications of our understanding of the
nuclear charge distribution within the proton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
PI's somewhat broad knowledge in field theory, the concepts and ideas originally
developed in the analysis of bound-state corrections will be applied to so-
called dynamical processes and atom-surface interactions. When an atom is in
contact with a dielectric surface, the vacuum modes of the electric field are
perturbed in the immediate vicinity of the surface. The quantum fluctuations
(the unavoidable 'quiver' due to the Heisenberg uncertainty relation) of the
vacuum modes (the 'preferred natural oscillation modes' of the electric field in
the vicinity of the metallic surface) change the interaction potential of the
atom near the surface, and the 'dragging' of the mirror charge inside the
dielectric material induces a friction force. This happens even if the atom is
not in physical contact with the surface, and the overlap of the quantum
mechanical wave function of the atom with the surface is negligible. These
effects are due to be studied within the NSF research program, and compared to
the results of ongoing experiments in various laboratories in the world.
Finally, all of these effects will be studied for few-electron atoms, for which
the energy eigenvalues of the basic quantum mechanical time evolution operator
(the 'Hamiltonian' which defines the energy levels) cannot be calculated in
analytic form. Ideas to improve approximation methods based on novel basis sets
('quantum mechanical trial wave functions') will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the research endeavors sketched above are suited
for the education of graduate students. Indeed, both the gain in the knowledge
on basic, but also applied physics as well the education in the use of advanced
numerical methods contributes to the success of a number of graduate students
supervised in the past (and, one may envisage, present and future). This
includes the numerical methods used in the study of bound systems as well as
other, more mathematically inclined concepts, based on the vacuum fluctuations
of the quantum fields, which often find surprising, practically useful
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three major areas of work in this
project. The first problem is the puzzle of the muonic hydrogen and proton
radius. The muonic hydrogen puzzle continues to intrigue physicists and
represents one of the most pressing questions to answer in regard to our
understanding of fundamental forces. Namely, measurements in muonic hydrogen
have led to a value of the proton charge radius which is in disagreement with
both scattering experiments as well as laser-spectroscopic measurements in
atomic hydrogen. This project involves the recalculation of one of the last
possible theoretical explanations for the disagreement which has not yet been
fully covered in the literature. The second problem involves higher order
corrections in many-body systems. Beyond the two-body problem, it is impossible
to analytically solve bound-state systems even in non-relativistic quantum
mechanics. Three aspects of higher-order corrections in helium-like systems
which are of prime importance for the description of experiments will be
studied. These include so-called relativistic Bethe logarithms in helium, as
well as higher-order effects in the bound 'muonic helium' system. The
calculations will be important in confronting the muonic hydrogen puzzle with
other muonic bound systems, and, potentially, in determining the electron-muon
mass ratio. Finally, Casimir effects, dynamic processes and atom-wall
interactions will be studied. The atom-wall interaction is a vacuum-mediated
interaction between an atom flying by a solid material ('wall') and depends on
the functional form of the dielectric response function of the medium. The
project includes an investigation, conceivably in collaboration with
experimentalists, of the temperature dependence of the atom-wall interaction,
which may have already been seen in an experiment, as well as details of the
atom-wall interaction potential for the helium-alpha-quartz and helium-gold
systems. Theoretical progress on the understanding of the quantum friction
force, due to the dragging of the mirror charge inside the wall, also forms part
of the current ject.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The cross-disciplinary proposal
combines atomic theory and quantum-field theory in the low-energy domain to
address fundamentally important questions and pressing current experimental-
theoretical discrepancies. Advanced numerical methods and the education of
graduate students and the development of postdoctoral research associates are
cornerstones of the investigations. Potential applications of some of the
developed numerical methods, beyond those devised for atomic-physics
calculations, are currently being envisaged.