* 1403542
* Developing New Theoretical Tools and Materials to Improve the Separation Performance of Inorganic Mesoporous Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 12/31/2017
* USD 327,038.00

1403542 Ford UMass Amherst

Mesoporous inorganic membranes, composed of materials such as silica and alumina
and having pore sizes on the order of 2 to 50 nanometers, have significant
potential for performing separations of mixtures of small molecules. Important
examples include the removal of carbon dioxide from flue gases and the recovery
of ethanol from fermentation broths. Chemists and materials scientists now have
an amazing amount of control over the geometry and surface chemistry of the
pores when synthesizing mesoporous inorganic membranes. However, actually
knowing what pore geometry and chemistry to choose for a given separation
remains an outstanding problem, partially due to the lack of appropriate models
that connect detailed material structure to membrane flow rates.

In this project, a new modeling approach is proposed to capture the complex
adsorption and flow mechanisms that take place inside the membrane pores during
separation operations. The modeling, based dynamic mean field theory (DMFT),
retains molecular-level detail while predicting membrane performance at the
laboratory or industrial scale. A combined program of theoretical development,
computer simulation, materials synthesis, and permeation measurement will
develop DMFT into a tool that chemists and materials scientists can use to guide
the manufacture of new membranes, and engineers can use to model the performance
of industrial membrane units. A novel class of mesoporous membrane materials
will also be developed as a key part of the project.

The PIs propose a collaborative theoretical/experimental research program that
will transform the modeling of separations with mesoporous inorganic membranes
through the further development and DMFT. DMFT has had an enormous impact on the
closely related application of adsorption in mesoporous materials. With some
further development to the dynamic aspects of the theory, DMFT msy also meet the
challenge of predicting permeation through mesoporous membranes. The research
team for this project spans molecular theory and modeling (Ford, Monson),
membrane science and technology (Ford) and the materials science and engineering
of mesoporous materials (Fan, Monson).

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in two main objectives. The first
is to extend and develop dynamic mean field theory (DMFT) for quantitatively
accurate prediction of permeation of small molecules in mesoporous membranes.
This is proposed to be accomplished by (i) establishing the method on lower-
dimensional, geometrically simple pore models; and (ii) modifying the dynamics
to quantitatively capture relevant transport mechanisms. The second major
objective is to apply DMFT to model specific mesoporous membrane permeation
experiments. This will be accomplished by (i) synthesizing a set of membranes
with controlled pore size and geometry; (ii) comparing DMFT predictions to
separation experiments on these membranes; and (iii) using DMFT to improve the
accuracy of pore sizes obtained by permporometry, which uses co-permeation of a
light gas and a condensable vapor to gain information about pore size.

If successful, the products of this research have the potential to advance the
membrane industry in the U.S., especially as it is applied to the traditional
and emerging fields of energy production. The proposed work may bridge the
statistical thermodynamics, adsorption, and membrane communities while providing
the membrane community with a new computational tool for predicting and
interpreting permeation through mesoporous membranes. The PIs propose to
integrate the research into the undergraduate and graduate curricula at UMass
Amherst, through a popular undergraduate nanomaterials elective taught by one of
the PIs (Fan) and a core graduate course in statistical thermodynamics taught by
one of the other PIs (Ford or Monson). Existing outreach and recruitment
programs at UMASS will also be leveraged.