* 1403657
* Probing interfacial phase-change transport events in flow boiling on micro- and nanotextured surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Saeed Moghaddam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 306,019.00

CBET-1403657

The ever-increasing generation of heat has become an impediment to advancements
and the efficient operation of many electronics and energy applications, such as
power and RF electronics, high-performance computers, solid-state lasers, and
concentrated solar cells. The liquid-cooling process has been considered a
remedy for the thermal management of these applications. The phase-change
liquid-cooling process in microchannels, in particular, has received significant
attention. A main focus of the scientific community for nearly two decades has
been to enhance the boiling heat-transfer coefficient in microchannel heat
sinks. However, a major obstacle has been the relatively limited understanding
of transport characteristics, which is caused by difficulties related to
diagnosing interfacial behavior in microchannels. Such knowledge is essential to
advancing the science and technology of compact and high performance two-phase
flow heat sinks. The objective of this study is to use a new measurement
approach to understand the physics of different microscale heat transfer
mechanisms involved in flow boiling in microchannels.

The objective of this research is to utilize a new measurement approach to
understand the physics of different microscale heat transfer mechanisms involved
in flow boiling in microchannels and to measure their relative contributions to
the overall surface heat transfer. Advancing both scientific understanding and
engineering practice in this field requires experimental capabilities for
characterization of the underlying interfacial processes. Furthermore,
transformative improvements in the control of phase change heat transfer may
come from the development of new mechanistic models, with inspiration and
validation from experimental techniques that can probe temperature and heat flux
with sufficient sensitivity over the relevant length and time scales. The
proposed approach involves a high-resolution measurement of the thermal field
(temperature and heat flux) at the fluid-solid interface in microchannels. The
unique aspect of the proposed measurement approach is the implementation of a
composite wall with embedded micro-sensors that allow the surface heat flux to
be determined. The thermal field measurements are synchronized with the high-
speed imaging of bubbles as well as the thickness of the liquid film formed
between the vapor and solid phases. The laser interferometry method is utilized
in measuring the liquid film thickness. Experimental studies will be conducted
to explain the mechanisms of heat transfer in flow boiling in microchannels,
evaluate the accuracy of prominent mechanistic two-phase microchannel models,
and understand the role of surface micro- and nanostructures on the interfacial
transport events and flow boiling characteristics.