* 1403262
* Towards enhanced control of the dissociation chemistry of peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Nicolas Polfer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2019
* USD 442,816.00

Professor Nicolas C. Polfer of the University of Florida is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to
study the chemistry that takes place when proteins are analyzed by mass
spectrometry. The project will expand the scope and improve the fidelity of mass
spectrometric characterization of the fragmentation patterns of peptide ions
generated from parent proteins. This, in turn, improves the reliability of the
high throughput identifications of proteins in complex biological samples.
Advances in life sciences depend on the integration of reliable protein
identification results with complimentary genomic and metabolomic information.
In this context, the project will provide new avenues for the identification of
proteins and hence advance our understanding of life processes. In addition, the
spectroscopic techniques developed in this work may also lead to applications in
other areas of chemistry, such as mechanistic organic chemistry.

The analytical mass spectrometric and spectroscopic methods the research team is
developing are focused on probing the chemistry that takes place when peptides
are fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) for the purpose of
peptide and protein sequencing by mass spectrometry. Analytical laser
spectroscopy techniques, in particular infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD)
and two-laser pump-probe schemes in a cryogenically-cooled 3-D ion trap, will be
employed to: 1) provide a deeper understanding of labile and radical
rearrangement chemistries that take place, 2) study the dynamics of these
rearrangement reactions, and 3) develop methodologies that enable more control
in the dissociation chemistry, for improved structural determination of peptides
and proteins. The proposed research is of significance to de novo protein
sequencing and for the location of posttranslational modifications on the
peptide sequence. In the course of this research, graduate students are being
trained in state-of-the-art mass spectrometric and spectroscopic techniques. The
technologies and the results of the proposed research will be communicated to
high school students through workshops aimed at high school science teachers.