* 1403002
* Redundant Multimode Chemo-optical Transducers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gerard Cote, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 340,805.00

CBET - 1403002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implantable sensors hold promise to improve
quality of life, but their application has been limited due to inadequate
accuracy. Sensor arrays (redundant sensors) offer potential to help manage
operational problems and provide intrinsic error-checking. This group proposes
to apply their experience in developing optical chemical sensors to pursue
"multimode" sensors that enable this by combining signal generation tools - two
different sensing elements, that use different interactions with the target
biochemical to convert concentration into an optical signal. In addition we will
develop strategies to have sensors responding to a molecular signal over a wide
range of concentrations. Proposed technologies will make implantable sensors for
reliable and will help develop tools for continuous monitoring of patients'
health status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Biosensing
technology has benefited tremendously from the rapid advancement in
nanotechnology, both in new nanocomposite materials as well as exploitation of
unique nanoscale phenomena. However, devices for long-term monitoring have not
been realized, primarily due to inadequate performance of current implantable
chemical sensor technology. The barriers to advancement in this field include
(1) Unreliable sensor response that varies with tissue environment and requires
frequent calibration; (2) Lack of redundancy and multimodal analyses to provide
intrinsic error-checking; and (3) Limited options for quantum advances using
current technology. Tiny implants to generate and amplify the small optical
signals hold promise for long-term success. However, each approach to convert
the concentration of an analyte into an optical signal (the "chemo-optical"
transducer element) has drawbacks that challenge its use. We propose that these
limitations may be addressed through a combination of modalities, enabling both
improved accuracy as well as error-checking capability. By using micro/nanoscale
sensing components, the creation of implants with redundant sensing regions is
also possible. Therefore, it is proposed to design sensors to simultaneously
produce fluorescence and surface-enhanced Raman (SERS) signals that vary
directly and inversely with analyte concentration, respectively. The responses
are complementary and provide a means of error-checking. Using glucose as a
model analyte, sensors with regions that rely on different transduction schemes
(affinity binding vs. enzymatic), yielding different sensitivities, will be
developed. All signals may be multiplexed to enable interrogation of the same
implant region; spatially discrete regions provide redundancy.