* 1403686
* Layer-by-layer polymer assemblies as size-selective gas separation membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Jaime Grunlan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

1403686&lt;br/&gt;Wilhite&lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research effort addresses the need for
low-cost membrane materials for gas purification by investigating polymer
coatings capable of combining high rates of gas separation with high purity. The
researchers propose growing polymer films one layer at a time by alternately
dipping the membrane substrate into a water bath containing positively- and
negatively-charged polymers. This results in the growth of a Layer-by-Layer
(LbL) thin film. Recently the PIs have confirmed that order-of-magnitude
improvements in hydrogen-carbon dioxide and hydrogen-nitrogen selectivity may be
achieved using LbL films assembled from polyacrylic acid (PAA) and branched
polyethylemine (PEI) solutions. The proposed work leverages these recent results
to identify breakthrough polymeric materials capable of size-selective gas
separations to meet multiple sustainable energy needs. The PIs propose to use
the LbL assembly technique to manipulate membrane structure, in turn tuning both
transport properties and membrane durability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased
transport properties and membrane durability will be achieved through a
combination of (i) fundamental materials analysis aimed at characterizing the
extent of polyanion and polycation bonding and relating it to mechanical and
nanostructural properties, and (ii) transient gas permeation measurements for
obtaining precise measurements of individual gas permeabilities through the LbL
membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research efforts are focused not only upon
proven hydrogen-carbon dioxide separation capability of LbL films, but also
applying fundamental concepts to tailored membranes for biofuel (ethanol)
dehydration and natural gas processing. Therefore, materials developed may have
significant and immediate impact upon the energy industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's team has ongoing engagement of underrepresented
groups at the graduate and undergraduate levels in socially relevant research
topics. Aspects of this work will also be incorporated into multiple ongoing
K-12 outreach programs present at Texas A&amp;M University. The PI team plan to
also develop online learning exercises utilizing the popular line of HexBug Nano
toys, which will be disseminated online. These outreach efforts will be
leveraged as a platform for developing teaching tools for illustrating diffusion
and related transport phenomena concepts to non-STEM audiences.