* 1403546
* Fundamental Investigations of Muscle Cell Interactions for Engineering 'Living Diodes'
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Bryan Huey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 03/31/2015
* USD 448,969.00

PI: Zorlutuna, Pinar &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403546&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: Fundamental Investigations of Muscle
Cell Interactions for Engineering 'Living
Diodes'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocomputing is an emerging field that aims to use
biological components for signal processing. Muscle cells, being both
electrically and mechanically responsive, are promising candidates for this new
approach to information processing. Achieving controlled and reliable
directional signal flow using muscle cell-based living electromechanical circuit
elements can transform how bioelectrical and biomechanical interfaces are
engineered, and impact both fundamental science and bioengineering applications.
The proposed research will lead to a better understanding of cell-cell and cell-
environment communication in muscle cell networks, impacting potential future
applications ranging from biorobotics and human-machine interfaces to
bioengineering approaches for understanding and treating muscular degenerative
disorders and cardiac arrhythmia. Such advancements will address socially
important problems, such as limb loss and heart diseases. Beyond professional
publications and a proposed co-organized conference symposium related to this
research, educational and outreach activities are planned for university, high
school, and middle school students and teachers. This award is being made
jointly by two Programs. (1) Biomedical Engineering, in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division (Engineering
Directorate); and (2) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to examine the
properties of a new type of diode, made from a novel combination of excitable
muscle cells and non-excitable fibroblast cells, and then study more complex
interactions between these cell types that are organized to function as logic
gates and eventually as electromechanical circuits. To achieve this goal, this
proposal tests the specific hypothesis that a non-uniform arrangement of these
two cell types can be engineered to allow signal propagation in the excitable to
non-excitable direction, but not the reverse. The first research objective is to
study diode-like behavior of micropatterned muscle cells using single-cell
mechanical and single-cell electrical stimulation with uniquely combined
microelectrode arrays, 3-dimensional fluorescence, and atomic force microscopy
for electrical, optical/chemical, and mechanical interrogation of individual
cells, or populations of cells, confined to defined geometries. The second
research objective is to study various micropatterned geometries and ratios of
excitable/non-excitable cell combinations to investigate the fundamental
properties of the signal propagation, with the explicit goal of ultimately
engineering logical gate analogues. The proposed research will pave the way for
opening up a new field in which muscle cell-based structures can be used as
circuit elements that subsequently serve as bioelectrical and biomechanical
interfaces, and as control units for artificial bio-systems with clear potential
opportunities for biocomputing applications and human/machine interfaces.