* 1403027
* Multidimensional Methods for Kinetics in Complex Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Mark Berg, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 10/31/2017
* USD 449,999.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Mark Berg of the University of South Carolina is
developing and applying new laser based methods for measuring very fast chemical
reactions in complex materials such as polymers and ionic liquids. Traditional
methods use a laser pulse to perturb a chemical system once and then follow the
reaction over a single time period. The new methods developed in this project
will use multiple perturbations separated by carefully chosen time intervals.
This approach should allow for the observation of specific types of molecules or
reactions within a complex mixture, for example the collisions of light-excited
molecules in photoactive materials.

This project will expand the range of processes and time scales where these
methods can be applied and thereby allow their application to a wider range of
problems. Specific targets include: How does a homogeneous, small-molecule
solvent become heterogeneous as the molecule polymerizes? Do different molecule-
sized sites occur in an ionic liquid, and do these sites alter the progress of
reactions that use ionic liquids as the solvent? What is the range of travel for
an optical excitation in a conjugated polymer, and how do the resulting
collisions quench captured energy? Professor Berg is active in a university-wide
initiative to increase applications to graduate school by underrepresented
groups. He is also participating in an NSF-funded IGERT program aimed at
developing interdisciplinary training programs at the University of South
Carolina.