* 1403969
* Collaborative Research: High-speed Imaging Guided Large Eddy Simulation (LES) Model Development for Turbulent Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Terrence Meyer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 125,000.00

1403969/1403901 Meyer/Raman

Collaborative Research: High Speed Imaging Guided Large Eddy Simulation Model
Development for Turbulent Flames

The proposed research effort is to develop computer models for practical flames
that are usually embedded in turbulent flows such as those in aircraft engines
and power generation plants. The improved modeling tools developed here can be
extended for use in many other fields such as soot modeling, fire simulations,
geophysical fluid dynamics, and environmental sciences. The principal
investigators will furthermore continue their practice of mentoring a diverse
group of high-school and undergraduate researchers to attract and prepare them
for graduate careers in science and engineering.

A comprehensive understanding of flame stabilization is critical for clean and
efficient combustion in future power, propulsion, and transportation systems. In
this context, the large eddy simulation (LES) methodology provides a suitable
framework for modeling flame stabilization and related combustion dynamics.
However, current LES models are far from ideal and introduce simplifications
that potentially alter the temporal dynamics in the simulations. Here, the LES
modeling approach will be reformulated to introduce temporal statistics and a
non-equilibrium dissipation rate. Simultaneously, high-speed imaging data will
be combined with very large-scale direct numerical simulations (DNS) to validate
central assumptions in the statistical data and LES model. An industry partner
will collaborate with the research team to ensure the relevance of models and
experimental data. Educational and outreach components will aid the transfer of
new knowledge and technologies to the classroom and industry. The intellectual
merit of the proposed work lies in providing a comprehensive understanding of
flame stabilization beyond typical one-point, ensemble statistical averages and
will enable the development of a robust and predictive computational modeling.
It will take advantage of recent advances in high-speed laser-based imaging and
DNS to expand the range of applicability of the LES modeling approach. The CFD
models and experimental data developed here will be made accessible to the gas
turbine industry and the well-established international working group on
turbulent non-premixed flames (TNF).