* 1403423
* Engineering Smart Thermal Properties in Metal-Organic-Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Greaney, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2017
* USD 296,738.00

CBET 1403423 Greaney

This project will determine mechanisms of heat transport in metal-organic
framework materials and how the processes are tied to the materials molecular
architecture. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a recently discovered class of
materials that are the most porous materials known to humanity and as such they
are being aggressively developed for key energy applications involving gas
storage applications such as adsorption refrigeration and vehicular hydrogen
storage. Surprisingly the limiting factor for MOFs in these applications is not
the rate of gas permeation into the materials but the speed with which heat can
be removed. MOFs are poor thermal conductors with a thermal conductivity that is
similar to concrete. The knowledge gained in this project will enable the
systematic design of new MOFs for these important applications with greatly
improved thermal conductivity. The research will, for the first time, determine
how loading MOFs with gas affects their thermal conductivity. Beyond gas storage
applications, the open molecular structure of MOFs provides a number of exciting
avenues for engineering exotic thermal properties. In particular this work will
test mechanisms for externally tuning the thermal conductivity. The invention of
the transistor in 1947 gave us ability to externally tune electrical
conductivity and led to modern computing and today's information age. Finding
ways to externally tune thermal conductivity could bring about a similarly
dramatic change by allowing us to use heat in entirely new ways.

The project has two technical objectives: (1) Advance scientific and theoretical
understanding of heat transport in gas laden MOFs to enable the development of
new materials for key energy applications. (2) Apply computational methods to
test mechanisms for externally tuning the thermal conductivity of MOFs and
determine if changes in thermal properties of MOFs could be used for chemical
recognition. The research will use classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
to determine thermal transport mechanisms across the isoreticular family of
MOFs. The isoreticular series have systematically varying structures so that
taken together the battery of simulations will reveal relationships between
structure and thermal properties. Simulations will also determine the effects on
thermal properties from deformation and interpenetration of frameworks. The
research will develop a new approach for elucidating thermal transport processes
from equilibrium MD simulations by computing cross-correlations in the
instantaneous heat current. The mechanistic insights revealed by MD will be
codified in new theoretical descriptions of thermal properties that will be
applicable to other macromolecular materials.