* 1403463
* I-Corps:  Low-energy manufacturing-scalable complex oxide thin film technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Jonathan Spanier, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The team has developed a new thin-film deposition technology for high-
performance materials that is low energy, scalable, and potentially low cost.
They recently reported via publication the formation of complex oxide
perovskites in single crystalline hetero-epitaxial form and also specifically
BiFeO3 in phase-pure polycrystalline form on SiO2/Si. This is important because
the new technology enables production of a simple perovskite Pb-free single-
crystal functional complex oxide films with crystalline quality, nanoscale
control, and physical properties comparable to those obtained using much more
expensive tools and processes. This technology could also be highly enabling in
that it utilizes atomic layer deposition, thereby permitting conformal growth on
high surface area per unit volume structures, and therefore a three- dimensional
architecture may be realized. Replacement of Pb with Bi in these film structures
gives a ferroelectric polarization with a larger charge per unit area,
potentially enabling enhancements in device performance (e.g. non-volatile
memory, wireless communications, and capacitors for energy storage).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scaling and the roadmap is currently limited by MOCVD (and
ALD) using lead zirconate titanate (PZT) because of inhomogeneities in Zr and Ti
that result in nanoscale conformally-coated 3D structures that result in
unacceptable variations in properties/performance. Thus, a process that uses a
simple perovskite material would address this issue, particularly if it can
outperform PZT. The customer need also relates to a technology that can deliver
reduction in the use and waste disposal of Pb and Pb-based precursors, reduction
in manufacturing cost through innovations in thin film deposition and process
technology to reduce precursor waste, and an opportunity to increase the
performance of existing technologies through a replacement material that has
higher FE polarization (and therefore induced charge) and a process technology
that is truly compatible with finer 3D nanoscale architectures to support
scaling to future nodes.