* 1403356
* Enhanced thermal ablation of biomaterials  using HIFU energized magnetic nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Rupak Banerjee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,996.00

CBET 1403356&lt;br/&gt;Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the
proposed research on magnetic nanoparticle (mNP)-enhanced high intensity focused
ultrasound (HIFU) therapy will enable ablation of tumors and fibroids to be
accomplished at lower acoustic intensities. The lower energy levels increase the
controllability of the HIFU procedures and reduce the likelihood of adverse
events such as undesired tissue damage. The higher predictability of the HIFU
surgical outcomes also has the potential to expedite FDA review of the HIFU
systems, bringing new systems to market more quickly. The anticipated outcome of
this study is a non-invasive method for thermal ablation of tissue that is more
accurate and lower cost than the current state of the art.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to perform High
Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) thermal ablation at reduced power levels.
One of the challenges in HIFU tumor ablation is to apply a large amount of
energy so that cells at the target location are rapidly necrosed - without
applying so much intensity that uncontrolled cavitation or collateral damage to
healthy tissue occurs. Another challenge associated with heating tumors deep in
the body is providing sufficient heating to the target without overheating the
transducer surface and causing skin burns. These challenges can be mitigated if
methods are developed to raise the focal temperature to the high levels required
with a lower transducer power. The objective of this study is to achieve the
goal of effective ablation at reduced power levels using nanoparticle enhanced
heating. The central hypothesis of this study is that nanoparticle mediated HIFU
ablation will allow increased heat deposition in the target area, thus reducing
the need for higher levels of HIFU power. Guided by strong preliminary data,
this hypothesis will be tested by pursuing two specific aims: 1) To determine
the lesion volume along with energy deposition profile, using remote temperature
measurements within a magnetic-nanoparticles (mNPs) infused tissue-mimicking
material. The working hypothesis is that the ablation with mNPs (ferromagnetic
and, in particular, superparamagnetic particles) will avoid large-scale
cavitation while enhancing the thermal-dose and lesion volume, and these thermal
doses and lesion volumes can be determined noninvasively in tissue phantoms
using the combination of an inverse method and finite differencing scheme from a
set of uniquely configured remote thermocouples; and 2) To ascertain the lesion
volumes in mNP perfused ex-vivo tissues, using micro-computed tomography
(microCT) imaging and histo-pathology. The working hypothesis here is that the
mNP- enhanced microCT signal and histopathology data will permit us to compare
the thermal-dose, lesion volume and cavitation threshold with data obtained from
the thermocouple array method. This acoustic-thermal-nanomaterial research for
non-invasive estimation of lesion volume is innovative as it uses mNP induced
heating to reduce transducer power in the field of HIFU thermal ablation. The
significance of this research is that, with the ability to conduct lower-power
HIFU procedures with nanoparticle infusion, the desired lesion can be obtained
more rapidly and con-trollably, resulting in wider use of such procedure under
clinical setting with better patient outcomes. The expected outcome of this
study is a method that is biocompatible, absent of significant toxicity,
accurate with uniform heating, low-cost, and more easily applied than the
current state of the art.