* 1403261
* Strong-Gravity Binary Phenomenology and Gravitational-Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Scott Hughes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This award supports ongoing research on the dynamics of binary systems in
general relativity, and research on astronomy with gravitational wave
observations. This work will further our understanding of how black holes in
binary systems interact with one another, and how the signals that will soon be
measured with gravitational-wave detectors like LIGO are generated. As part of
this work, gravitational wave signals are converted to sound ("sonification") to
create powerful tools for illustrating the impact of gravitational waves for
astronomy. Media content will be produced to illustrate how black holes' shapes
are dynamically distorted by the tidal field of an orbiting body. This is done
not only as part of the dynamical studies but also for communicating the science
of gravitational-wave sources to the general public.

The specific projects pursued in this time frame are a mix of studies using
black hole perturbation theory, and studies in support of astronomy with the
LIGO gravitational wave detectors. Black hole perturbation theory will be
studied in collaboration with colleagues at the University of Maryland and
Germany to revise and extend the very successful "effective one body" (EOB)
approach to compact binary dynamics. Work in this program so far has done much
to clarify how interactions with a black hole's event horizon affect the
evolution of compact binary. Future work will begin to probe orbits with
substantial spin-orbit misalignment, laying the groundwork for using the EOB
framework on a larger family of astrophysically relevant orbits. Black hole
perturbation theory will also be used to understand as precisely as possible how
a black hole is distorted by an orbiting body, and how momentary resonances
between orbital frequencies can change the system's evolution. In the domain of
gravitational wave astronomy, neutron star fluid instabilities will be studied
to find out whether they can significantly affect the ability of LIGO and sister
instruments to detect binary inspiral. Even if the claimed effect turns out to
be incorrect, this will be a valuable exercise in assessing how robust are the
techniques that will be used for binary inspiral. Another project will
investigate how precisely the calibration of each LIGO instrument must be known
in order to accurately pin down the sky position of coalescing binaries.
Searching for counterparts to these events with telescopes has become an
extremely hot topic in recent years; making sure that LIGO can accurately tell
telescopes where to look is crucial for insuring that these searches are
fruitful.