* 1403989
* Scanning tunneling microscopy of temperature dependent molecular processes at the solution-solid interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

Professor Kerry W. Hipps of Washington State University is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to
conduct studies using scanning tunneling microscopy on several basic
temperature-dependent surface problems of fundamental and technical importance
at the solid-solution interface. A variable temperature scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) will be customized and used to conduct the proposed research.
Processes occurring at the solid solution interface can be dramatically affected
by temperature, and understanding these temperature induced processes at the
molecular level will facilitate advances in several science research fields
including surface chemistry, catalysis, adhesion, corrosion, photophysics, and
self-assembly in industrial and biological systems. The results from this
research may lead to inexpensive and efficient manufacturing methods in areas
such as opto-electronic devices, solar cells and sensors.

The objective of the proposed research is to customize a variable temperature
instrument to mitigate the problems associated with STM imaging at elevated
temperatures, such as thermal drift, temperature differences between different
parts of the instrument, and solvent evaporation and condensation on the STM
head and other parts of the instrument. The newly customized instrument will be
employed to study several basic temperature-dependent surface problems of
fundamental as well as practical importance. These include: 1) structures,
formation kinetics and thermodynamics of physical adsorbates at the solution
solid interface; 2) chemical reactions at the solid-solution interface; 3) phase
transformations in covalently attached monolayers; and mechanisms and kinetics
of chemical transformations of preformed organic adlayers. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in chemistry and instrument construction,
two areas for which cross-training is particularly valuable. The results of this
study will be incorporated in higher level courses in Chemistry and Materials
Science. During the course of conducting this research, the research team will
perform outreach activities through the WSU "Imagine Tomorrow" high school
energy program.