* 1403569
* US-France planning visit: Understanding the molecular regulation of photosynthetic-related processes in unicellular marine eukaryotes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Kimberlee Thamatrakoln, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 38,595.00

a non-technical description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research blends
concepts in physiology, genomics, biophysics, and biochemistry with marine
ecology and oceanography. Advances in diatom genomics and the development of
genome-enabled tools over the past 5 years, combined with classical
physiological and biophysical techniques provides, for the first time, the
ability to understand how diatoms sense and transduce light signals and convert
them into chemical energy for growth and productivity. This will provide the
fundamental information on diatom physiology that is required for understanding
the potential diatoms have in mitigating global climate change through carbon
sequestration. This project will provide hands-on training of Rutgers?
undergraduates from underserved and underrepresented communities who will
actively participate in the work. Proposed research will also catalyze a new
international collaboration between the U.S. and France and broaden the
participation of women by promoting and fostering the participation of two early
career, rising female researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical description
&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms, unicellular, eukaryotic photoautotrophs, are one of the most
ecologically successful and functionally diverse organisms in the ocean. As
photoautotrophs, light is a key environmental signal that is required as a
source of energy for photosynthesis and growth, but, in excess, can also be a
source of mutagenesis and cell death. Light capture must therefore be balanced
with the intracellular capacity for photochemical conversion of that light into
energy and/or the safe dissipation of excess photons. Diatoms possess a suite of
sophisticated mechanisms that allow them to maximize growth and photosynthesis
while minimizing damage and cell death. However, the molecular basis underlying
these mechanisms has remained largely uncharacterized. The goal of this project
is to answer fundamental questions regarding the molecular regulation of
photosynthetic processes in these ecologically important organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;Despite the ecological dominance of diatoms and their tight
connection to both carbon and silicon biogeochemistry, little is known about the
molecular mechanism regulating their photosynthetic capacity and growth. As
secondary endosymbionts of the red plastid-lineage, diatom chloroplasts and,
therefore photosynthetic processes, are fundamentally distinct from green
plastid-lineages (e.g. higher plants and chlorophytes). Therefore, direct
extrapolation on the regulation of photosynthetic processes from higher plants
and chlorophytes is not always applicable or relevant. This proposed multi-
pronged approach will bring together researchers with interdisciplinary
expertise and will merge physiology, biophysics, molecular biology, molecular
ecology, and oceanography. The specific goals of this project are to: 1)
Characterize the molecular mechanism of a recently identified plastid-localized
regulator of photosynthesis and 2) Identify novel molecular regulators of
photosynthesis by screening libraries of genetic mutants using physiological and
biophysical-based methods. The ecological importance of diatoms and their
potential to play a role in mitigating global climate change through carbon
sequestration calls for a detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms
used to modulate their photosynthetic processes. This research is expected to
provide significant information about the regulation of these processes and
improve our knowledge on the factors controlling the distribution and
productivity of marine diatoms in the modern ocean.