* 1403753
* Making the Difference: An Industrial Engineering Capstone Design Experience to Benefit Adults with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Maria Irizarry, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2017
* USD 84,090.00

Proposal: 1403753 PI: Mendez-Pinero, Mayra I. Title: Making the Difference: An
Industrial Engineering Capstone Design Experience to Benefit Adults with
Disabilities

Adults with disabilities have numerous special needs and engineers have the
potential to make great contributions and improve their quality of life. The
Department of Industrial Engineering at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez
(IE-UPRM) proposes to provide a team based design experience for senior
Industrial Engineering (IE) students focusing on outreach to aid adults with
disabilities and the visually impaired. To achieve the proposed objective, the
design projects will be developed at several nonprofit institutions that offer
services or provides employment for the groups of interest. Ten design projects
have been identified in collaboration with the institutions to design and
implement prototypes that will foster independence and self-care, improve the
safety and quality of life of individuals with disabilities, augment their
functional capabilities, develop and enhance therapeutic devices, and increase
productivity for the blind or visually impaired workers.

Technical Description Typical IE Capstone design projects are usually focused on
service or manufacturing industries. Rarely, students focus on projects proposed
herein. Students will have the opportunity to interact with health care
professionals and expand their understanding on the contribution IEs can have on
the quality of life of humanity. Students will also have the opportunity to
increase their knowledge in the legal and ethical issues related to the design
process. New knowledge developed through these experiences will have an impact
on other communities by dissemination of results through presentations,
conferences, etc. This will convey the message and it should have an impact on
the process used by engineering universities in their planning of the capstone
course project strategies. The research team teaches various courses requiring
applied design projects and possesses ample experience supervising and mentoring
undergraduate students while conducting projects in the island. As a result of
the internal logistics of the IE Capstone Course, the department contains the
infrastructure and collaboration network needed to support the proposed research
projects. A key component of this proposal is the incorporation of multiple
formative and summative assessment activities to evaluate the individual project
success, student gains in experience and knowledge, and success of the proposed
work.

With the Design Projects students will develop technical and professional skills
to be prepared for the practice of the profession; develop awareness and
consider ethical, legal, and societal issues relevant to a design project;
complement the educational process with real life problem solving experience and
integrate the principles, methods, and techniques of earlier course work into a
problem solving situation. Students will gain awareness, sensibility and
knowledge on the needs of adults with disabilities, broadening their IE
knowledge. With three projects to be run each year the impact will be magnified
as participating students will share their projects in the classroom with their
colleagues and the community. As a minority serving institution, the proposed
projects will broaden the participation of Hispanic undergraduate students in
research activities. In order to broaden dissemination to enhance scientific and
technological understanding, results from this research work will be
disseminated through presentations at national conferences as well as in the
departmental website, the Puerto Rico Assistive Technology Program, campus news
and local news forums. Additional websites to share the results are: the Office
of Disability Employment Policy, Disability.gov, and the National Institute on
Disability and Rehabilitation Research.