* 1403593
* EAGER: Development of Fluorescence-based Nanosensors for Dynamic Measurement of Active Cytokinins in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Joseph Kieber, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 03/31/2018
* USD 290,808.00

PI: G. Eric Schaller (Dartmouth College)

CoPIs: Joseph J. Kieber (University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill) and Sakiko
Okumoto (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University) Cytokinins are
plant hormones that regulate diverse growth and development processes, such as
cell division, metabolism, chloroplast development and maintenance, and
senescence, as well as responses to biotic and abiotic factors. In spite of
their critical role in plants, no method has yet been developed to accurately
determine the cellular and subcellular dynamics of cytokinin levels. This EAGER
project seeks to develop fluorescence-based nanosensors capable of measuring
cytokinin levels in a monocot (rice) and a dicot (Arabidopsis). FRET- and single
fluorescent protein-based nanosensors will be developed and tested using the
cytokinin-binding CHASE domain from the Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor AHK4 and
the corresponding domain of the rice OsHK4 receptor as ligand-binding domains.
The requirements for cytokinin binding by the CHASE domain using a radioactive
cytokinin-binding assay will be assessed to facilitate nanosensor design.
Nanosensors will initially be tested in vitro, making use of bacterially
expressed fusion proteins and subsequently be tested in planta, initially using
a transient protoplast transformation system and then by generation of stable
transgenic lines. The response to exogenous cytokinin and to altered levels of
endogenous cytokinin will be tested to confirm the ability of the nanosensors to
report cytokinin levels in vivo. Finally, using different targeting sequences,
nanosensors will be targeted to the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum to
explore how cytokinin levels vary within the cell and the dynamics of cytokinin
movement in response to various inputs. This is of particularly importance for
cytokinin because its receptors are localized to the ER membrane, and the site
of perception is within the ER lumen. If successful, this project will allow for
the quantification of bioactive cytokinins at the cellular and subcellular
levels and for dynamic measurements in living cells.

Cytokinins play key roles in regulating many plant properties of agricultural
significance. For example, cytokinins play a critical role in regulating grain
yield in rice. Development of nanosensor technology will facilitate and advance
studies to improve these cytokinin-regulated traits. Vectors and transgenic
Arabidopsis and rice lines for the nanosensors will be made available to the
research community on request and/or through appropriate stock centers including
the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center. The project will enhance the
infrastructure of research and education by providing hands-on interdisciplinary
training for undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
research associates.