* 1403495
* Hormone-Responsive Electrodes for Quantitative Discourse with Endocrine Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Christopher Easley, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 329,990.00

Proposal Number: 1403495&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Christopher J.
Easley&lt;br/&gt;Title: Hormone-Responsive Electrodes for Quantitative Discourse
with Endocrine
Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological systems
communicate using cascades of molecular signals, exploiting numerous feedback
control loops similar to automobile cruise control. To aid our understanding of
these systems, there remains a need for materials that respond to biological
signaling molecules such as proteins and DNA. We have developed measurement
techniques (proximity assays) that can respond to very low levels of proteins,
translate this signal into controlled DNA binding, then communicate the signal
to an electrode for recording protein quantity. These techniques can also
release DNA strands in proportional amounts to input proteins. The main
objective of this proposal is to show that our surface-based proximity assays
can sense hormone levels secreted by endocrine cells, then respond
proportionally by releasing agents that modify secretion. Upon completion, we
will have developed a tunable "cruise control" system for hormone secretion, one
that should allow cell culture systems in the laboratory to more closely mimic
their natural biological
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our recently
developed proximity-based protein assays are based on cooperative assembly of
dual proximity probes, and they are highly sensitive and generalizable to
essentially any protein with two available antibodies (or aptamers). These
assays decouple target binding from the reporting mechanism by exploiting DNA
hybridization and/or strand displacement reactions. We propose that our
proximity assay format is amenable to two-way communication, rather than the
one-way information transfer in typical biosensing systems. The objective of
this proposal is to show that surface-based proximity assays can sense hormone
levels secreted by endocrine cells, then respond proportionally by releasing
agents that modify secretion. Such hormone-responsive electrodes could generate
new paradigms in cell culture and allow endocrine tissue to be monitored in more
in vivo like, responsive environments. Completion of our objective through the
following goals will deliver transformative impacts in biosensing, responsive
materials, and synthetic biology: 1) Develop an entirely surface-bound
electrochemical proximity assay, 2) Synthesize functional DNA-drug conjugates,
and 3) Develop hormone-responsive electrodes for quantitative communication from
surfaces, through DNA circuits, and to living endocrine cells.