* 1403049
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Void Symmetries  to Control the Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 195,000.00

PI: Kumar, Sanat / Panagiotopoulos, Athanassios Proposal Number: 1403049 /
1402166 Institution: Columbia University / Princeton University Title:
Collaborative Research: Exploiting Void Symmetries to Control the Self-Assembly
of Nanoparticles

The assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) into colloidal crystals is a promising way
to obtain ordered nanocomposite materials with unique properties determined by
the choice of the constituent NPs. If successful, this novel approach will have
a significant impact on the ability of experimentalists to rationally design
ordered colloidal crystals for a wide range of optical and catalytic
applications, such as photonic crystals, optical switches and filters, and
catalytic devices. The PIs have shown a novel way to selectively stabilize one
crystal structure over another possible one by the use of polymers that can
intercalate between the NPS.

Essentially, the PIs have made an interesting discovery that, even when the
energy, pressure, and packing fraction for two isomorphs, e.g., HCP and FCC, are
the same, the distribution of voids within the crystals are different. By
filling the voids with polymers of different length, they were able to show that
one can selectively stabilize HCP over FCC crystals. Based on these findings,
they propose to make use of this novel insight about void symmetries and size-
distributions to select a desired polymorph from a suite of competing crystal
structure. In this proposal, they propose to investigate what design principles
are needed to achieve their goal.