* 1403929
* Optical Properties and Physics of Cr3+-Activated Near-Infrared Persistent Luminescent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Zhengwei Pan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
and the Ceramics Program, both in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Persistent
luminescence, also called afterglow and phosphorescence, is an optical
phenomenon that materials glow in the dark for hours after the end of the
initial light irradiation. The phenomenon of persistent luminescence has been
known to mankind for over 1,000 years. Nowadays persistent luminescence
materials emitting in the visible spectral range have been widely used in daily
life, e.g., security signs, emergency route signs, traffic signage, dials and
displays, and medical diagnostics. In contrast to their visible counterparts,
persistent luminescence materials in the near-infrared (NIR; with the wavelength
in the range of ~700 to 2500 nanometers), a spectral region that is invisible to
naked eyes but has implications to many important applications such as night-
vision surveillance, biomedical imaging, anti-counterfeiting, are lacking. This
research project investigates a novel series of NIR persistent luminescence
materials, trivalent chromium doped lithium gallates, which exhibit super-long
NIR persistent emission of more than 1,000 hours after short (seconds to
minutes) excitation by ultraviolet light or sunlight. The project provides an
interdisciplinary training experience to postdocs plus graduate, undergraduate
and K-12 students in luminescent material synthesis, spectral characterization,
and luminescence mechanism investigations. The K-12 education is implemented
through the UGA Young Dawgs - Science Laboratory Internship program for local
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This
project aims to conduct comprehensive material synthesis, optical
characterizations and theoretical investigations on a novel series of near
infrared (NIR) persistent luminescent materials: trivalent chromium doped
lithium gallates. These materials exhibit super-long NIR persistent emission of
more than 1,000 hours and new photostimulated persistent luminescence
properties. The ultimate goals of this project are to fabricate high
performance, trivalent chromium activated NIR persistent materials and to
understand the underlying mechanisms associated with electron trapping, storing,
and releasing in the persistent luminescence process. A solid-state reaction
method is used to fabricate the materials. Several major processing parameters,
such as sintering temperature and the concentrations of dopants and co-dopants,
are explored to determine their influences on material structures and optical
properties. Various advanced structural and spectral characterization tools
(including synchrotron facilities) are used to acquire structural properties and
spectral data that are essential for understanding the charge trapping and
transfer processes. Several new optical measurement techniques for persistent
luminescence property, as well as theoretical models for two important issues in
persistent luminescence, i.e., the electron delocalization mechanism and
electron transfer dynamic process, are under development.