* 1403947
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Circular Dichroism Sensing of Biomolecules Using Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jan Kubelka, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 264,489.00

Proposal: 1403947/1403226 PI: Balaz, Milan/Dzyuba, Sergei Collaborative
Research: Enhanced Circular Dichroism Sensing of Biomolecules Using
Nanoparticles

Technical terms: The proposed project aims to utilize achiral metallic or
semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) to enhance and modulate circular dichroism
(CD) signal of chiral biomolecules. CD is the preferred technique for detection
and analysis of chiral compounds and their interactions. Significant enhancement
of the sensitivity of CD spectroscopy coupled with the ability to shift CD
signals to longer wavelengths will allow examining structures of biological
molecules as well as supramolecular biorecognition phenomena at biologically
relevant concentrations with minimal amount of unwanted overlaps. The enhanced
sensitivity and modularity is anticipated to rise from the electronic coupling
between achiral NPs and chiral molecules in their proximity. We will prepare
achiral NPs functionalized with chiral molecules and study their structure and
experimental CD characteristics. We will perform theoretical simulations of CD
spectra to gain detailed structural and mechanistic insights into the origins of
induced CD in metallic and semiconductor NPs capped with chiral biomolecules.
This is the first time that the achiral metallic and semiconductor NPs will be
designed and optimized to specifically enhance CD of chiral molecules. The
project will further enhance our understanding of the origin of induced
chiroptical activity in achiral metallic and semiconductor NPs and will have an
immediate impact on the fields of biosensing and chiroptical nanomaterials.

Layman terms: Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy allows to detect chiral
biomolecules and study their interactions. The project will develop novel
methods that enhance the sensitivity and resolution of CD detection by utilizing
metallic or semiconductor particles of nanometer size as potent amplifiers of CD
signal. Enhanced signal detection will be strongly beneficial for the detection
and study of low concentration and complex mixture of biologically active
molecules that are difficult to explore by current methods.