* 1403228
* Collaborative Research: Sense-and-Act Systems for Substance Release Modeling Drug Delivery Triggered by Immune-Sensing Based on Nanostructured Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Luis Martinez-Lemus, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,569.00

Proposal: 1403208/1403228&lt;br/&gt;PI: Katz, Evgeny/Martinez-Lemus,
Luis&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Clarkson University/University of Missouri,
Columbia&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Sense-and-Act Systems for
Substance Release Modeling Drug Delivery Triggered by Immune-Sensing Based on
Nanostructured Electrodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program combines a
nanostructured biosensing system with a drug-release system. The transformative
nature of this work is in the novel concept of integrating the electrochemical
sensing and electrochemical release processes, promising revolutionary changes
in personalized drug administration, particularly in emergency situations and in
point-of-care and end-user applications. Specifically, the program aims at
designing new systems for detecting critical conditions associated with
diabetes, with the detection followed by automated drug release to compensate
for the medical problem. The research is initially carried out with model
systems, but will culminate in animal study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description of the project&lt;br/&gt;This research program address key
challenges to developing bioelectronic systems for sensing non-electrochemically
active biomolecules, e.g., proteins, as well as redox non-active low-molecular-
weight substances. The sensing process is integrated with the actuation
resulting in the signal-triggered release of biomolecular substances mimicking
drug-release, for example, Insulin release triggered by ketone bodies that are
biomarkers of ketoacidosis. The developed bioelectronic systems integrate parts
characteristic of biosensing/immunesensing systems, biofuel cells and signal-
triggered substance-releasing systems, thus representing a unique combination of
components for autonomous self-powered operation. Specifically, model systems of
increasing complexity are developed that can yield negative potential at a
nanostructured electrode by utilizing attached enzymes and immunesensing
assemblies, in response to antigens. The resulting potential suffices for
activation, on another part of the connected electrode system, of the process of
dissolution of an alginate layer in which the molecules mimicking drug are
entrapped, triggering drug release. Such self-powered and self-activated drug-
release systems operating in response to biomarker sensing represent novel
approach to the ?Sense-and-Act? systems.