* 1403532
* Collaborative Research: Design of Redox-Active Molybdenum Metalloproteins
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Neal Zondlo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 285,885.00

Proposal Numbers: 1403532 / 1403663&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Zondlo, Neal J. / Kuhlman,
Brian&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: University of Delaware / University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research:
Design of Redox-Active Molybdenum Metalloproteins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen
is a critical component of DNA and proteins and is essential for all forms of
life. However, most organisms cannot make use of the nitrogen gas (N2) that
makes up 78% of our atmosphere. Nitrogen gas must be "fixed" to reduced forms
such as ammonia (NH3) before it can be metabolized by plants and animals. This
process is accomplished in nature by bacteria that live symbiotically with
plants. Synthetic nitrogen fixation, performed at high temperatures and high
pressures via the Haber-Bosch process, is central to the production of
fertilizers, allowing the planet to sustain far larger populations than was
possible prior, at the cost of 1.5% of the planet's total energy use.
Nitrogenases are molybdenum-containing proteins employed by nitrogen-fixing
bacteria to accomplish nitrogen fixation in water at ambient temperature and
pressure, in contrast to the harsh and energy-intensive conditions of the Haber-
Bosch process. Nitrogenases are also capable of reacting with carbon dioxide
(i.e. conducting carbon sequestration) and carbon monoxide, reducing them to
molecules that can be used as liquid fuels and feedstock chemicals. However,
nitrogenases are large proteins (approximately 2000 amino acids), which prevents
their application as isolated proteins. In this work, the investigators will
develop synthetic proteins, only 2%-4% of the size of nitrogenase, that can bind
molybdenum and react with molecules in a manner analogous to that of
nitrogenases. The basis of this work is the development of novel amino acids
that can both bind to molybdenum and donate electrons to the metal to engage in
reaction chemistry at the molybdenum metal center, combined with computational
protein design to allow the incorporation of these unnatural amino acids within
a well-defined and stable protein structure that will support strong metal
binding and reaction chemistry. These designed molybdenum proteins will be
analyzed and characterized for their structure and ability to conduct reaction
chemistry, both to understand how native molybdenum proteins can conduct
important reactions and as a first step toward their potential use in processes
critical to problems in energy use. This work will address critical processes
central to the nitrogen cycle, the carbon cycle, energy, and sustainability,
providing new insights into processes of broad fundamental importance. In the
long term, this work could lead toward novel sustainable solutions to reduce
energy use and synthesize feedstock chemicals from non-petroleum sources. This
work will train undergraduate and graduate students in highly multidisciplinary
methods, including computational protein design, peptide synthesis and
characterization, organic synthesis on functional-group rich substrates,
training them for integrated multidisciplinary science of the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen fixation, the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen
to ammonia, is one of the most significant processes on the planet. Nitrogen
fixation is accomplished by bacteria containing the enzyme nitrogenase, a large
(~2000 amino acids) enzyme containing molybdenum or vanadium and a unique iron-
sulfur cluster. The accomplishment of this ancient process under mild conditions
has to date never been achieved in proteins outside the native nitrogenase
proteins. As inspiration, catalytic nitrogen fixation has been demonstrated
using synthetic molybdenum complexes with small molecule ligands. Toward the
goal of developing redox-active proteins capable of reaction chemistry similar
to nitrogenase, the team will develop a synthetic molybdenum metalloprotein
containing novel redox-active amino acids capable of greater electron donor
ability than the native 20 amino acids. Nitrogenases and synthetic analogues
accomplish dinitrogen reduction (a six-electron, six-proton process) in part due
to the multiple oxidation states readily available to molybdenum (Mo(III) to
Mo(VI)), plus the presence of strong electron donor ligands, including the iron-
sulfur-carbide cluster. Nitrogenases and organomolybdenum complexes can also
reduce electronically related compounds such as diimides (including diazine
HN=NH), hydrazines (H2N-NH2), and cyanide. This work aims to develop new
approaches to allow the reduction of simple compounds using synthetic proteins
and provide fundamental insights into the design of catalytically active
proteins. The investigators will design synthetic proteins with redox-active
side chains that are not found in naturally occurring proteins and readily bind
to molybdenum, vanadium and tungsten, allowing multi-electron reductions of
dinitrogen and related molecules. The metal-binding properties of these designed
proteins will be characterized in different metal redox states using
electrochemical, biophysical, and structural methods. The designed redox-active
metalloproteins will be examined for reactivity toward reduction of a series of
pi-bonded compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology.