* 1403089
* Collaborative Research: Thermionic Transport across Single and Multiple Barrier Heterostructures Based on 2D Layered Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Keivan Esfarjani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

CBET-
1402906/1403089&lt;br/&gt;Cronin/Esfarjani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therm
ionic transport is especially exciting for its potential to provide high-
efficiency energy conversion devices for waste-heat recovery (e.g., in
automobiles) and co-generation of electricity in power plants. In addition,
highly efficient thermionics can provide efficient solid state cooling that
rivals conventional vapor-compression refrigeration systems. These devices could
be used to provide active cooling of electronic circuits, ultimately leading to
increased performance of computing, sensing, and imaging. In addition to
thermoelectric energy conversion, the proposed study of thermionic transport
will impact a wide range of other device systems, including light emitting
diodes (LEDs), field effect transistors (FETs), and resonant tunnel diodes
(RTDs), currently being investigated by other research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid state thermionic energy conversion can be
more efficient than conventional thermoelectric energy conversion based on bulk
Peltier and Seebeck effects, if the thermionic barriers can be properly
engineered. However, there have been relatively few studies on solid state
thermionic energy conversion, mainly because of the difficulty of fabricating
interfaces with the appropriate energy barriers, characterizing thermal
transport across these interfaces, and separating the bulk thermoelectric
properties from the interfacial properties. 2D Layered heterostructures enable
us to overcome these difficulties, and can potentially create a paradigm shift
in the design of thermoelectric power generators and coolers with high
efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is designed to
overcome the challenges previously facing thermionic energy conversion using
layered heterostructures with gate-tuning of the thermionic barrier height. In
addition to optimizing and measuring the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) of
these novel devices, this project will: 1.) assess whether the highly
anisotropic structure and the weak interface van der Waals bonding give rise to
low cross-plane thermal conductance, 2.) establish the conditions under which
electron transport across van der Waals bonded interfaces occurs with little
scattering, 3.) evaluate the performance of various emitter and barrier
materials (e.g., BN, MoS2, Bi2Te3), 4.) ascertain the extent to which hot
electrons give rise to thermal non-equilibrium phonon-populations, and 5.)
separate bulk and interfacial effects, and 6.) develop a rigorous model of the
electron and phonon transport across these novel devices using a first-
principles approach in order to address the above questions.