* 1403345
* Capstone Design Projects in Rehabilitation  to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Kunal Mitra, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 124,995.00

PI: Mitra, Kunal&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403345&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A BS
program in Biomedical Engineering started at Florida Institute of Technology in
the Fall 2012 semester. The strategic vision for the Department of Biomedical
Engineering at Florida Tech is to advance healthcare by integrating education,
discovery, innovation and entrepreneurship. The objective of this proposal is to
develop a novel approach to senior year capstone design projects for students
enrolled in BS in Biomedical Engineering by engaging the local medical community
and industry representative. The capstone design project is structured as a
three-semester sequence beginning in the spring semester of the junior year and
introduces students to the team approach for problem solution. Every year a
student Design Showcase is organized where all capstone projects are presented
in a poster format setting sometimes with working breadboard designs. Members of
industry are invited to attend the showcase to judge projects and speak to
students and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;A
unique aspect of the proposed senior capstone design project is that it will be
guided jointly by Florida Tech faculty and practicing physicians and as well as
industry professional supporting the project. The physicians along with the
faculty and industry representative will provide presentations of case studies
to the students during the junior year. Then during that semester, the students
will be required to develop proposals and to make presentations that will be
evaluated by the participating faculty and physicians. In their senior year,
students on multidisciplinary teams will execute the projects under supervision
of participating faculty and physicians. In order to better prepare students for
the capstone project, a clinical immersion experience is proposed. As part of
clinical immersion period during summer at end of the junior year, eight to ten
undergraduate students entering their senior year will be invited each year to
participate in six or seven weeks program to observe the clinical activities,
acquire communication skills necessary to interact with clinicians, and identify
needs that can subsequently be addressed in their biomedical design projects.
The clinical immersions will be held at organizations such as Orlando VA Medical
Center, Brevard Rehabilitation Medicine, HealthSouth Sea Pines Rehabilitation
Hospital, NASA Kennedy Space Center, and The Back Center. While this approach
may be common in universities with medical schools, such an approach for a
university without a medical school is unique and is being proposed for
conducting team-based senior year design projects. The goal of the clinical
immersion program is to provide opportunity to students to interact with the
physicians so as to understand the working principles and any limitations of
existing technologies and this in turn will trigger discussions and need to
develop new design projects. The students interested in developing the
entrepreneurial dreams will be provided an opportunity to take elective courses
in Junior and Senior Year offered through Business Incubator
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This development of
devices which will aid persons with disabilities will (a) provide a practical
engineering experience as well as a personally rewarding experience to the
student; this may also encourage them to use their specialized skills in the
future to benefit individuals with disabilities; (b) to help individuals with
disabilities become more independent by designing and building custom assistive
technology devices that address their needs; (c) to facilitate learning and
reflection about the daily life of an individual who has a disability, as well
as the daily lives of the family members, therapists and educators who are in
close contact with them. Students develop their teamwork and communication
skills (both oral and written), learn about the product development process used
in industry, and are made aware of the unique requirements and constraints of
medical device design thereby preparing them for careers in biomedical
engineering.