* 1403167
* Capacious Deep-Cavity Cavitand/Hydrophobic Guest Assemblies with Tunable Interior Volumes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 347,897.00

PI: Ashbaugh, Henry Proposal Number: 1403167 Institution: Tulane University
Title: Capacious Deep-Cavity Cavitand/Hydrophobic Guest Assemblies with Tunable
Interior Volumes

The hydrophobic effect (the tendency of nonpolar molecules to separate from
water) affects many different fields: the pharmaceutical industry (formulation
and drug affinity), life sciences (proteins and macromolecular structures),
material sciences (properties of polymers, emulsions, and liposomes), and indeed
any chemical engineering or chemical application involving aqueous solutions
(e.g., natural gas liquid separations and reactions in aqueous solution). This
collaborative proposal aims to advance foundational knowledge of the hydrophobic
assembly of cavitands (molecular assemblies that contain a cavity for guest
molecules) and quantify the various factors governing their assembly and
stability. Achieving the goals of this project will provide valuable information
to exploit the class of dimeric, tetrameric, and hexameric assemblies in a range
of potential technological applications, such as drug delivery vehicles, using
either direct drug encapsulation or entrapment within cavitand/polymer networks.
In addition, graduate and undergraduates will gain valuable training in both
simulation techniques and experimental experience. The PIs will also incorporate
the results of their research into a public service course.

Simulations will be carried out in the Ashbaugh lab to characterize the
structures of cavitand/guest assemblies in solution in molecular detail,
quantify the thermodynamic driving forces for capsular assembly, and determine
the guest binding free energies that drive complex structural transitions with
increasing guest size. Experiments will be carried out in the Gibb lab to
synthesize cavitands with varying chemical functionalities and pocket sizes,
determine the binding affinities of alkyl guests within the cavitand complexes,
and characterize the aggregation state of the complex and conformational motifs
of confined guests. These tasks will enable the investigators to determine the
influence of alkane host size, cavitand chemical structure, and solution
conditions on the aggregation state of the cavitand assembly, as well as enable
them to determine the molecular structures associated with cavitand assembly.