* 1403409
* Intrathecal magnetic drug targeting to the central nervous system  with superparamagnetic nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Andreas Linninger, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 324,848.00

Proposal Number: CBET - 1403409 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Andreas A.
Linninger&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Intrathecal magnetic drug targeting to the
central nervous system with superparamagnetic
nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a family of diseases of the central
nervous system (CNS), especially brain tumors and spinal metastases, few
effective treatment options exist. Existing treatments have serious side effects
including acute pain, nausea and even paralysis, due to lack of a targeted drug
delivery strategy. In order to localize drug molecules in specific diseased
target sites within the CNS, the investigator proposes a novel nanoparticle drug
delivery technique termed Intrathecal Magnetic Drug Targeting (IT-MDT). It
combines traditional intrathecal drug administration with magnetic drug
targeting for highly localized treatment of neurological disorders. In this
technique, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) conjugated to therapeutic agents are
directly infused into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and collected at the desired
target site via an external magnetic field. The drug then desorbs from the MNPs
to begin its therapeutic mechanism of action. The most notable benefit of MDT
resides in highly confined local drug action in the desired region such as the
tumor site. At the same time, systemic side effects are minimal because of the
limited drug spread. The project will advance the fundamental understanding of
magnetically targeted nanoparticle transport within the CNS and develop
fundamental insights about biotransport phenomena within the intrathecal space.
This study will also create intellectual advancements necessary to elevate MNP
based carriers from a research subject to a clinically useful
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) regulates
molecular transport and protects the CNS against harmful compounds, but also
hinders therapeutic interventions by preventing drugs from reaching the brain or
spinal cord. Therefore, there is a critical need for developing drug delivery
techniques for guiding and localizing therapeutic agents at specific target
cells in the CNS. The proposed IT-MDT delivery technique uses magnetic forces to
guide and confine intrathecally delivered, superparamagnetic drug functionalized
MNPs to any desired target location within the CNS. This mode of drug
administration offers the following advantages: it (i) bypasses the BBB, (ii)
reduces toxicity while enhancing treatment efficiency in the target site, and
(iii) enables active external control over the spatial and temporal distribution
of the drug inside the CNS. To establish this novel mechanism, it is planned to
(1)design and synthesize magnetic nanoparticle based drug delivery vehicles, (2)
conduct IT-MDT experiments in a physiologically relevant 3D live cell spine
model,(3) perform IT-MDT treatment of in vitro spinal cord tumors using
doxorubicin loaded magnetic nanoparticles. This study will establish a novel
technique for effectively conjugating tumor drug molecules to MNPs, build and
validate a 3D live tumor cell spine model to demonstrate cellular uptake and
tumor cell death from the drug functionalized nanoparticles. The experiments
will study cellular uptake of MNPs at the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-pia
interface in the presence of pulsatile CSF motion and eddies caused by the
spinal micro-anatomy. The results will enable to select critical parameters such
as MNP infusate concentration, flow rate and duration to achieve desired
therapeutic concentrations of MNPs at specific target locations along the CNS.
Optimal magnetic field parameters for steering nanoparticles to desired
locations in the CNS will be established both by experiments and by
computational fluid dynamic methods and
magnetostatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program of the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.