* 1403226
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Circular Dichroism Sensing of Biomolecules Using Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sergei Dzyuba, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 80,880.00

Proposal: 1403947/1403226&lt;br/&gt;PI: Balaz, Milan/Dzyuba,
Sergei&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Enhanced Circular Dichroism Sensing of
Biomolecules Using Nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical terms: The
proposed project aims to utilize achiral metallic or semiconductor nanoparticles
(NPs) to enhance and modulate circular dichroism (CD) signal of chiral
biomolecules. CD is the preferred technique for detection and analysis of chiral
compounds and their interactions. Significant enhancement of the sensitivity of
CD spectroscopy coupled with the ability to shift CD signals to longer
wavelengths will allow examining structures of biological molecules as well as
supramolecular biorecognition phenomena at biologically relevant concentrations
with minimal amount of unwanted overlaps. The enhanced sensitivity and
modularity is anticipated to rise from the electronic coupling between achiral
NPs and chiral molecules in their proximity. We will prepare achiral NPs
functionalized with chiral molecules and study their structure and experimental
CD characteristics. We will perform theoretical simulations of CD spectra to
gain detailed structural and mechanistic insights into the origins of induced CD
in metallic and semiconductor NPs capped with chiral biomolecules. This is the
first time that the achiral metallic and semiconductor NPs will be designed and
optimized to specifically enhance CD of chiral molecules. The project will
further enhance our understanding of the origin of induced chiroptical activity
in achiral metallic and semiconductor NPs and will have an immediate impact on
the fields of biosensing and chiroptical
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Layman terms: Circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy allows to detect chiral biomolecules and study their interactions.
The project will develop novel methods that enhance the sensitivity and
resolution of CD detection by utilizing metallic or semiconductor particles of
nanometer size as potent amplifiers of CD signal. Enhanced signal detection will
be strongly beneficial for the detection and study of low concentration and
complex mixture of biologically active molecules that are difficult to explore
by current methods.