* 1403421
* GOALI: Pioneering a Quantum Mechanical Route Towards Transforming the  Future of Industrial Silicon Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Massimo Fischetti, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 349,996.00

Abstract Title: Pioneering a Quantum Mechanical Route Towards Transforming the
Future of Industrial Silicon Electronics &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract: The 2011 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
challenges the silicon electronics industry to achieve highly aggressive
performance targets by 2026 that are deemed vital for the future health of the
industry and the global technological society the industry supports. However,
the Roadmap admits that it is presently unknown whether continuing evolution of
state-of-the-art silicon technologies can achieve its 2026 goals. The Roadmap
implicitly assumes that future incarnations of silicon transistors will remain
based on the same set of physics principles established in the 1940s. Hence it
is potentially rewarding to go off this conventional path and explore
unconventional device physics paradigms capable of achieving Roadmap targets in
a way amenable to industrial manufacturing. This research project aims to open a
new route in silicon electronics that exploits explicitly quantum mechanical
phenomena in silicon transistor operation. It has been known for over 30 years
that overt quantum effects in electronics can yield transformative improvements
in transistor performance that would not be possible in the conventional
pathway. However, such quantum transistors have never been successfully executed
in a manner acceptable to industrial scale silicon processing. The chief aim of
this research project is to demonstrate feasibility of and pioneer a route
towards incorporating quantum transistors into silicon electronics using the
toolset and protocols already part of standard industrial fabrication methods.
As a consequence, this project will enhance US technological competitiveness and
STEM training by providing a working and mentoring opportunity for US citizen or
permanent resident students to gain exposure to forefront science and technology
research bridging academic and industrial
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This research project aims to
demonstrate explicit quantum transport in a new class of quantum well (QW)
silicon CMOS devices fabricated by industrially standard processes, and pioneer
a path towards room-temperature quantum CMOS operation. Electron channels and
potential wells constructed using 45 nm and smaller industrial CMOS nodes are
comparable to the electron quantum wavelength so that quantized states can be
well-defined possibly up to room temperature. The important open question
addressed is to determine the viability of, and best route towards, achieving
room temperature quantum CMOS devices within industrial constraints. To these
ends, this project will measure and understand quantum transport as evidenced by
negative differential transconductance in specially designed transistors,
fabricated on Texas Instruments, industrial line, that incorporate low-
dimensional lateral QWs. The empirical knowledge gained will be used to model,
design, and test, QW Si CMOS devices with the goal of obtaining usefully strong
quantum transport characteristics at room temperature. This research pioneers a
transformative approach to Si electronics that will directly advance
RF/analog/mixed-signal CMOS devices towards the ITRS 2026 end-of-roadmap goals
in a manner not currently pursued in industrial research. This research sits at
the intersection among fundamental physics, electrical engineering, and
semiconductor processing, and thus provides a uniquely valuable cross-
disciplinary training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students. This
work will expose students to an industrial perspective and approach to research,
which will be particularly valuable to both students and society when they enter
the workforce.