* 1403887
* Decoding organ-level intercellular signaling in an active, regulated microenvironment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Mark Alber, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 599,999.00

CBET-1403887&lt;br/&gt; Principle Investigator Jeremiah Zartman
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Decoding organ-level intercellular signaling in an active,
regulated microenvironment &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regulation of organ size
during animal development depends on both internal and external inputs: internal
factors include genetic makeup and external factors include applied mechanical
stresses and the chemical composition of the surrounding local environment. The
mechanisms by which internal and external factors regulate organ size are still
not fully elucidated. A greater understanding of organ size regulation may
enable researchers to better understand developmental growth in tissue and stem
cell engineering constructs. Organ development in basic model systems such as
the fruit fly provides valuable insight into human biology. The organ culture
system will be used to test basic hypotheses of how internal and external
stimuli affect organ development. The researchers will use the latest biological
reporters to quantify intra-organ, cell-to-cell signaling. The technical
research will be augmented by a digitized learning module illustrating
principles of growth and intercellular communication based on the live-imaging
data obtained from the proposed scientific study. Research impacts will be
enhanced with an academic outreach program mentoring a diverse population of
high school students pursuing science fair projects at local high schools near
South Bend, IN. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intercellular coordination of pattern
formation, homeostasis and organ growth is a fundamental biological process
during organ development. Despite this basic function, a unifying theory
integrating known contributors to the mitotic cycle remains elusive. The
proposed study aims to investigate the hypothesis that intercellular calcium
waves encode information on the size, differentiation state and overall
physiology of epithelia. To test this hypothesis, the investigators propose
developing new biophysical methods to investigate intercellular calcium
signaling in intact epithelial organs within a controlled microenvironment. The
proposed coupling of a controlled microenvironment with live-imaging studies in
a genetically modifiable model system will enable a systematic investigation
into the response of developing epithelia to genetic, chemical, mechanical, and
electrical perturbations. The proposed biophysical methods provide a level of
experimental control and evaluation unseen in previous efforts. If successful, a
quantitative understanding of the functional role of intra-organ calcium waves
in developing epithelia will be a salient metric that is translatable to
understanding development in high-order biological structures. A unified model
of exogenous and intrinsic growth regulation will have broad implications for
biomedical research; an example is the ability to direct cellular signaling in
stem cell culture and tissue engineering as well as correctly scaling the
features of organ-on-a-chip for basic biomedical research. Further, the REMChip
will be a translatable tool that can be utilized in other model systems. A
digitized learning module illustrating principles of growth and intercellular
communication will be developed based on the live-imaging data obtained from the
proposed scientific study. Research impacts will be enhanced with an academic
outreach program mentoring a diverse population of high schools students
pursuing science fair projects at local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems.