* 1403891
* Theory and Phenomenology of Strong Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Richard Lebed, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,998.00

One of the most difficult unanswered problems in nuclear and particle physics is
how to understand systems in which the components are so tightly bound together
that it is impossible to separate them, as occurs inside the proton and neutron
and many other particles. This project is designed to explore several methods of
obtaining definitive information from such complicated systems, so that one can
understandand how they are put together and why they interact the way they do.
For most of the approaches to be researched, the investigators initiated the
development of the methods used here. This project emphasizes collaborative work
with researchers at several other universities and laboratories. The educational
component represents an important part of the work to be performed here. The
project allows for the training of graduate and undergraduate students both on
the analytical aspects of theory, and will also make possible the mentoring of
these students for success in their future carreers in industry or academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes six specific problems that will be
studied, three each for the PI and co-PI in areas of their respective expertise,
all related to the question of how to understand systems in which the component
particles are so tightly bound that it is difficult or impossible to separate
them, such as inside protons and neutrons. These specific problems are 1) how
the proton and neutron would be assembled if the strong nuclear force that holds
them together had a different number of interaction charges than the three in
our universe; 2) how best to extract the maximal amount of information about
their detailed internal structure from experiments; 3) how to compute their
actual dynamical interactions in a strong-force theory that is a realistic
simplified model of the one studied experimentally, and 4) how closely this
idealized theory appears to mimic the real one, since much more can be computed
exactly from the ideal than from the real theory; 5) how to simulate the
structure of an atom, much smaller than conventional atoms, formed from
particles (muons) that appear in cosmic rays, which is guaranteed to exist but
has not yet been experimentally observed; and 6) using a connection between
strongly-interacting theories and gravity in curved spacetimes to study systems
in which the strongly-interacting particles have such a high ambient energy that
they can be said to have a finite temperature.