* 1403118
* Kinetics and Thermodynamics of the Self-Assembly of Polyhedral Nano-Colloids into Pure and Mixed Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Fernando Escobedo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 283,754.00

PI: Escobedo, Fernando A. Proposal Number: 1403118 Institution: Cornell
University Title: Kinetics and Thermodynamics of the Self-Assembly of Polyhedral
Nano-Colloids into Pure and Mixed Crystals

Polyhedral nanoparticles (NPs) can be assembled into super-lattice materials
that has the potential to form phases exhibiting vastly different optical,
electronic, physical, and chemical properties. This proposal, building on past
successes, will focus on understanding the kinetics of the transitions between
phases, mesophases, and crystals. Such kinetics play a crucial role in the
experimental realization of these structures and the insights gained would allow
ways to catalyze the self-assembly process, or design ways to steer the systems
into desirable phases. In the long term, such results could have an impact on
the ceramic, plastics, and semiconductor industries by helping broaden the
approaches available to develop stable nanocomposites, liquid armors, colloid-
based mesocrystals for photonic materials, and nanocrystal arrays for
photovoltaics.

Advanced Monte Carlo (e.g., Gibbs-Duhem integration with semi-grand canonical
ensembles) and Molecular Dynamics simulations will be used to study how hard (or
square-well attraction) shapes organize at different volume fractions. For such
systems, it's easy to become kinetically trapped experimentally (either as a
desired or undesired structure), so it's very important to understand, not just
the equilibrium state, but the kinetics, which is the focus here. In this
context, the mesophases that are formed may provide intermediate states that
lower the otherwise high energy barrier between disordered and crystalline
states. The investigations will include not just pure systems (containing one
type of polyhedral particles), but also the thermodynamics and kinetics of phase
transitions in binary mixtures. Particles to be investigated include polyhedra
that can be produced in experiments (cubes, cuboctahedra, truncated octahedra,
and octahedra), and mixtures of those (including also spherical particles). The
simulations will model the thermodynamic behavior of the mixtures, and new order
parameters and variants of the forward flux sampling method will be used to
simulate the kinetics of phase transitions.