* 1403171
* Identifying and resolving discrepancies in kinetic models of hydrocarbon combustion.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Richard West, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 12/31/2016
* USD 140,773.00

1403171 West

Kinetic modeling of combustion chemistry has made significant progress. Dozens
of recent models, which describe tens of thousands of reactions between
thousands of intermediate species, are capable of explaining complicated
combustion phenomena, allowing increasingly accurate engine simulations.
However, these ever-proliferating published models are rarely compared with each
other due to a lack of tools. A web-based teaching laboratory suitable for
undergraduate chemical engineers will be developed, to introduce combustion
science to a wider audience. As part of a summer Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) program a high school STEM teacher will help develop a web-lab
for high schools and bring these ideas into the classroom. Several undergraduate
and graduate students will gain research experience and training. Efforts will
be made to recruit students of under-represented groups to fill these positions.
The results will be presented at conferences, published in journals, and
included in an interactive web-database.

This project develops tools to help identify of chemical species in a kinetic
model that facilitate comparison of models. The tools will be built upon the
open-source Reaction Mechanism Generator (RMG) software. A web-based user
interface will make it easy for users to import models to the database, and
provide instant reward for doing so (the ability to check the model, fill in
gaps, and merge with other models). The proposed work will massively reduce the
barriers to converting detailed kinetic models into a machine-readable format
with unambiguous and consistent species definitions. This will enable: (1)
comparison between models, leading to more replicable science, (2) error
identification, leading to higher quality data, (3) better rate estimates and a
broader impact for mechanism generation software, and (4) wider use of process
informatics tools. The unified database of all previous kinetic models will
greatly assist progress in combustion modeling.