* 1403339
* Radiation Enhancement in High Temperature Industrial Furnaces to Increase Efficiency and Reduce Pollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Arvind Atreya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2019
* USD 323,757.00

1403339&lt;br/&gt;Atreya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop a novel and desirable combustion technology for high temperature
furnaces used in the manufacturing of steel, aluminum, glass, and others. The
conventional burning process in furnaces relies on the heat reflection from
furnace walls to achieve heating purpose, thus requiring the isolated flames,
much like candles, to be at a higher temperature than at the wall. High
temperature flames generate high level of pollutants such as oxides of nitrogen
(NOx) that are responsible for ozone depletion and smog. The proposed work is to
have more evenly distributed flames over a larger volume to achieve the same
amount of heating. Because the distributed flame volume can be generated at
lower temperatures, the pollutant emission level can be greatly reduced. A
higher energy efficiency and lower emission levels of greenhouse gases are
expected. This project will also provide training in innovative and industrially
relevant research to graduate and undergraduate students. Students will also
have industrial site visits and present their research results at technical
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept is based on establishing a
Radiation from Homogeneous Combustion (RHC) zone through intense mixing,
dilution and preheating of initially separated fuel and oxidizer streams. The
proposed work will: (i) Experimentally determine the RHC operating regime; (ii)
Quantify the energy efficiency and pollutant reduction benefits of intense
radiation; and (iii) Develop a theoretical/computational framework to enable
designing and controlling industrial furnaces. Measurements of spectral and
total radiation along with NOx, CO2, CO, O2, soot, and total unburned
hydrocarbons will be made to quantify the efficiency and pollutant reduction
benefits. This experimental and theoretical work will firmly establish the non-
dimensional controlling parameters and the operating domain of the RHC furnace.
The proposed RHC furnace technology is expected to have a tremendous impact on
energy efficiency and pollutant formation in the manufacturing industries. It
will yield considerable financial benefits for industries and will make them
more competitive. A significant reduction in greenhouse gas emission is also
expected. Moreover, if 100% O2 is used, the furnace efficiency is further
increased and carbon sequestration can be easily accomplished.