* 1403844
* CDS&amp;E: Theoretical Foundation and Computational Tools for Complex Nonlinear Stochastic Dynamical Engineering Systems - A New Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Achintya Haldar, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 413,492.00

Engineered structures excited by dynamic loadings, including natural events like
earthquakes, cause enormous damage in terms of loss of life, property damage,
and lost economic activity. Because of the unpredictability of these events, the
excitation time histories cannot be known in advance. The cost of designing
structures against such excitation is enormous, and there is considerable room
for improvement in the current state of knowledge in predicting the response of
structures under these conditions. This study will provide a theoretical
foundation and computational tools to analyze structures, and thus to improve
the efficiency and overall safety of engineering designs. The impact of the
study is expected to be multi-disciplinary in nature. However, the immediate
major beneficiary will be the engineering profession interested in designing
seismic damage-tolerant and risk-consistent structures. Since the underlying
risk cannot completely be eliminated, it needs to be managed and the study will
provide the necessary tools. This multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups in research and will impact
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-disciplinary
transformational theoretical concept will address the knowledge gap mentioned
above. Instead of using the classical random vibration approach, the uncertain
dynamic loadings will be applied in the time domain and will explicitly
incorporate information on major sources of nonlinearity, improved modeling and
several recently introduced energy dissipation features, and associated
uncertainties, as the stochastic system goes through several phases just before
failure. Some of the basic challenges are the understanding of input
uncertainties, propagating them in large nonlinear dynamic systems from the
parameter to the system level satisfying the underlying physics, obtaining
reliable probabilistic response characteristics/metrics/statistics, and
validating them using limited data. The research objectives will be achieved by
taking into account sensitivity analysis, model reduction techniques,
intelligent sampling schemes, and several advanced factorial schemes producing a
beneficial compounding effect to obtain efficiency without sacrificing accuracy.
They will be implemented in a multi-scale environment exploiting state-of-the-
art computational power. The formulation will extract stochastic dynamical
behavior using only tens of intelligent analyses instead of thousands of
simulation-based analyses. Essentially, this is intelligent multiple
deterministic analyses. The overall effort will effectively integrate education,
outreach, research, and training.