* 1403826
* Pseudocapacitive and  Intercalation Compounds for Water Desalination: Surface Chemistry, Electrode Structure and Foulant Tolerance
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Meagan Mauter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 345,166.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 1403826&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mauter,
Meagan&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Carnegie-Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Pseudocapacitive and Intercalation Compounds for Water Desalination: Surface
Chemistry, Electrode Structure and Foulant Tolerance&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVE DATE:
10/29/2013&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With only 0.03% of the world's water is suitable
potable water for human use, the need for clean water is a current concern that
can only become more urgent in the future. While much of the attention has been
on desalination of seawater into potable water, the ability to desalinate
brackish/briny water (~0.5 to 30 ppt salt) efficiently would be a significant
option for water reclamation. If successful, there should be positive economic
and water-resource impact of desalination of brackish water, which affects most
the in-land water desalination efforts in agricultural, municipal water, and
wastewater treatment, where the high recovery rates of capacitive desalination
processes are particularly attractive and where post-treatment, or brine
disposal, makes low-recovery membrane-based systems expensive. In terms of
educational impact, the PI and co-PI will develop an introductory course that
focuses on water and energy, integrating engineering and social sociopolitical
perspectives (both PI and co-PI hold joint appointments in the Department of
Engineering and Public Policy). In addition, the PI and co-PI will incorporate
the proposed research into teaching and outreach through participating in the
Pittsburgh Water Economy Network and the NAS/NAE Science and Engineering
Ambassador Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capacitive de-ionization (CDI), whereby
charged species are captured by porous electrodes and then released into a waste
stream, is a promising approach for desalination of brackish water; but the
technology is limited by the low efficiency of the cation/anion removal cycle
and by the tendency of the electrodes to foul. This proposal seeks to replace
existing carbon electrode structures with new composite electrode structures
that exhibit pseudo-capacitive and/or fast intercalation properties, where the
materials quickly capture and release ions from weak faradic reactions. These
electrodes will be able to access electrochemical reactions that are
significantly denser, from a charge accumulation perspective, thereby allowing
for thinner, more efficient electrode structures that are also less susceptible
to diminished performance under fouled conditions. The PIs will first select
viable candidate materials and evaluate their interfacial charge and ion
transfer mechanisms in a relevant pseudocapacitive deionization (PDI)
environment. They will then characterize the impact of PDI particle and
electrode macro/meso-structures on the performance observed for PDI reactions,
followed by evaluations of the performance of PDI surfaces in the presence of
model colloidal foul ants, since electrode fouling by colloids and bacteria
severely diminishes the ion adsorption capacity of conventional CDI electrodes.