* 1403053
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Polypeptide-Templated Nanoparticles as Colorimetric Sensors of Ionizing Radiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Heys, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,430.00

Proposal: 1403860/1403053&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rege/Hayes&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Arizona State University/ Montana State&lt;br/&gt;Title: Polypeptide-Templated
Nanoparticles as Colorimetric Sensors of Ionizing
Radiation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionizing radiation, including X-rays and gamma
rays, is useful in several medical, defense, space, and agricultural
applications. However, uncontrolled ionizing radiation can lead to large scale
disasters and damage to human health. Given the necessity to balance potential
deleterious effects and widespread application, it is important to develop novel
radiation-sensing methods in order to ensure safety and prevent accidents. We
have recently developed a novel nanobiosensing approach in which we employed
proteins for templating the formation of metal nanoparticles from colorless
metal salts. This change from colorless metal salts to colored dispersions of
nanoparticles in water is a simple and visual indicator of ionizing radiation.
In the proposed research, we will carry out a fundamental study on how different
amino acids and small peptides mediate nanoparticle formation in the presence of
different doses of ionizing radiation. Both, experimental and mathematical
modeling approaches will be employed to study this behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our preliminary results indicated that polypeptides are
capable of templating plasmonic metal nanoparticles from colorless metal salts
in presence of ionizing radiation (X-Rays). In the proposed research, we will
carry out an extensive investigation into how each of the 20 natural amino acids
template bimetallic gold-silver nanoparticles upon exposure to different doses
of ionizing radiation. We will then investigate dipeptides (?minimal peptides?),
in which an amino acid with activity for templating the formation of plasmonic
nanoparticles is juxtaposed with an amino acid that can bind and stabilize the
templated nanoparticles. In addition, pentapeptides in which the binding and
templating amino acids are separated by a tri-glycine linker will also be
investigated. Mathematical modeling will be employed in order to investigate how
different amino acids and peptides, together with experimental physicochemical
conditions influence the formation kinetics of bimetallic nanoparticles. Water
radiolysis, metal ion reduction, and nanoparticle formation will be modeled, and
effects of pH, scavenging agents, and templating biomolecules will be
investigated. Experimental and modeling studies will be employed for molecular
engineering and developing sequence-property relationships for polypeptide-based
colorimetric nanobiosensors for ionizing radiation.