* 1403742
* Collaborative Research:  Novel, Energy-Efficient, Self-Cleaning Water Purification Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 04/30/2017
* USD 162,770.00

1403670/1403742 Freeman/Emrick Collaborative Research: Novel, Energy-Efficient,
Self-Cleaning Water Purification Membranes

This collaborative research program between the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst?s Polymer Science and Engineering program and The University of Texas at
Austin?s Chemical Engineering Department focuses on one of the grand challenges
of our time, the energy-efficient purification of water for beneficial use in
industrial, agricultural, and municipal applications. There are many steps
involved in purifying groundwater or contaminated water from operations such as
hydraulic fracturing into water suitable for use (or reuse) in oil and gas
production operations, as well as agricultural and drinking water applications.
However, many of these purification steps begin with removing particles or other
contaminants in the water, such as oil droplets in the case of hydraulic
fracturing flowback water. When such particulate contaminants are removed from
dirty water using membrane filters, the filters become dirty and clogged,
leading to reduced performance and increased energy consumption, a problem
ubiquitous throughout the membrane filtration industry. This research program
builds upon previous encouraging joint research findings between the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst and The University of Texas at Austin showing how to
modify the surfaces of membranes so that particulate material, such as oil
droplets or other particles, are less likely to stick to the membrane surface
and subsequently clog the membrane filters. This fundamental research program
will explore the basic science that limits the application of current membranes
in operations such as municipal wastewater purification and purification of
water generated through oil and gas production and exploration activities. The
long-range output of this research program would be an enhanced understanding of
the fundamental mechanisms that result in contaminants sticking to membranes and
clogging them and in understanding novel ways to modify the surfaces of
membranes to make them more resistant to particulate contaminants in water. This
research could result in membranes with higher performance and longer lifetimes
as well as reduced energy consumption to purify many sources of water for a
broad range of applications.

Professors Benny Freeman (U Texas Austin) and Todd Emrick (UMass Amherst)
propose a collaborative project focusing on fundamental research to prepare,
apply, and characterize polymer coatings to ameliorate fouling in water
purification membranes. The project seeks to combine synthesis and
characterization activities in two primary areas: 1) the development of novel
phosphorylcholine (PC)-substituted polyolefins for coating water purification
membranes (including microfiltration, ultrafiltration, and reverse osmosis
membranes) using polymers carrying a high density of PC groups pendent to the
polymer backbone, and 2) the preparation of catechol-containing
phosphorylcholine polymers that combine non-fouling zwitterions with surface
adhering cross-linkable aromatic derivatives. Both areas share the objective of
realizing a dramatic improvement in membrane performance relative to materials
in use today, and this objective will be met by collaborative interaction
between synthesis in Emrick?s group and membrane characterization efforts in
Freeman?s group. The proposed research responds to the pressing need for
advanced fouling-resistant membranes, by producing coated membrane materials
that exhibit water flux characteristics in the presence of contaminated water
sources (e.g., oily water) that approach flux values of pure water. The
collaborative interaction will operate through frequent exchange of students and
scheduled teleconference meetings to review progress and plan for productive
interactions.

The project responds to the critical scientific and technological challenges
associated with water purification, recognizing that the combination of
population growth and increasing strain on fresh water supplies represents a
serious societal threat in the United States and worldwide. Accelerating
discoveries that improve water purification membranes can be accomplished most
effectively through collaborative research that enables rapid and effective
testing of novel polymer materials prepared specifically for membrane coating
and fouling prevention. Membranes with greater fouling resistance would use less
energy to purify, for example, hydraulic fracturing flowback water, produced
water and other impaired water sources.

Broader impact efforts are intended to benefit both the research and broader
scientific communities, with areas of emphasis including: 1) leadership and
organization in conferences and symposia dedicated to polymer membranes and
water purification; 2) providing research and educational opportunities for
minority and physically challenged individuals; and 3) pursuing technology
transfer strategies that facilitate the transition of laboratory discoveries to
products and processes that contribute to American competitiveness.