* 1403428
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: The Joule Fellows: Teachers in Sustainable Technologies Research Laboratories
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 496,129.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of Connecticut (UConn) entitled, RET in Engineering
and Computer Science Site: The Joule Fellows: Teachers in Sustainable
Technologies Research Laboratories", under the direction of Dr. Kazem
Kazerounian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy focus will equip Joule Fellows to
teach, mentor, and enlighten students and colleagues on energy alternatives,
conservation, impacts, and the potential for engineering research to find
effective solutions for a sustainable future. This mentoring program will enable
broad dissemination of energy knowledge throughout the State. An important focus
of this proposal is the integration of Technical High School teachers into the
teacher cohorts who will be recruited for the Joule Fellow program which will
also include participants from conventional high schools and community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project will build and improve upon
a previous successful NSF RET project. It will expand and enhance the previous
project as a comprehensive three-year program to host 54 (18 each year) teachers
and instructors-including Technical High School teachers-at the UConn Storrs
campus for six weeks during the summer. The research theme will be in the
important areas of sustainable technologies production and applications,
including energy, structural and environmental arenas. Participating
teachers/instructors will be called Joule Fellows and will be recruited from
Hartford, Willimantic, Bridgeport, Bloomfield, New Haven and Waterbury. Planned
activities are integrated into: (i) research preparation, (ii) research
participation, (iii) professional development, (iv) bridging technology and
G7-14 curriculum, and (v) mentorship and outreach. An additional component is
program sustainability/institutionalization. Joule Fellows will: 1) Examine
engineering developments through classroom instruction; guest lectures; and
half-day tours of Connecticut energy and environmental firms illustrating
practical applications of lab technologies; 2) Gain exposure to sustainable
energy discoveries through collaboration with faculty researchers and graduate
students in labs; 3) Learn best engineering research practices (including
safety, data collection and analysis, and computational tools), technical
communication, scientific ethics and conduct, to expand their experiential
impact beyond the RET program; 4) Learn techniques for creatively solving
laboratory problems and how to translate this knowledge into effective classroom
lessons; 5) Develop and implement experiments based on the research activities
of the Joule Fellows program to use in their home institutions during the
academic year; 6) Participate in workshops during the academic year to assist
colleagues to develop and improve science and mathematics instruction based on
the experiential learning developed in the research laboratories; 7) Gain
exposure to life-long learning possibilities at the University and remain
connected to the faculty and administrators at the School of Engineering; and 8)
Benefit from ongoing collaborations with their Joule Buddies and UConn faculty
mentors throughout the school year to enhance teaching and to develop proposals
for equipment, travel, and training grants.