* 1403861
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Primate Re-infection with Environmentally Transmitted Parasites: a Field Experiment
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Sagan Friant, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,565.00

As our social environment changes, combinations of physical, biological and
social stressors are increasingly affecting human health. Using a social group
of red-capped mangabeys in Nigeria naturally re-infected with environmentally
transmitted pathogens, this research will take a novel and interdisciplinary
approach to understanding how human societies respond to emerging environmental
health threats. This study will provide data that can help inform real and
lasting solutions to the great problem of health disparities in the United
States today. These research activities will foster scholarly cooperation
between academic institutions in the US and Sub-Saharan Africa. Additionally,
research activities in the field will have both direct and indirect benefits to
endangered species and vulnerable habitats. The dissemination of the results to
diverse audiences will enhance translational value of this research and increase
public scientific literacy. Finally, because primate populations make good
models for social animals, including human societies, the results will benefit
the well-being of humans and wildlife living in shared changing environments
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will examine how primate behavior,
stress, and social and health status influence susceptibility to infection
during host exposure to new pathogens. Specifically, red-capped mangabeys will
be followed after a de-worming event, and patterns of re-infection with
gastrointestinal parasites will be measured. Fecal samples and behavioral data
will be collected using combined focal and ad libitum sampling and will be used
to measure individual host characteristics influencing exposure and
susceptibility to infection and ensuing reductions in fitness. Laboratory
analyses of gastro-intestinal parasites and stress hormone analysis will be
conducted using high-performance liquid chromatography to predict individual
levels of infection and re-infection. Lastly, data from social interactions will
also be analyzed using UCINET to explore social network and proximity
characteristics of exposure and susceptibility. Data from parasites recovered
from non-human primates will be submitted to the Global Mammal Parasite Database
(http://www.mammalparasites.org/ ).