* 1403873
* GOALI:  Tuning Renewable Solvent Systems for Lignin Purification and Fractionation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 327,824.00

1403873 Thies&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Tuning Renewable Solvent Systems for Lignin
Purification and Fractionation&lt;br/&gt;Lignin is one of the most common
organic compounds on earth, comprising about 30% of all organic carbon. Lignin
is also unique among biopolymers in having significant aromatic character, which
makes it potentially attractive for a wide range of uses, including coatings and
carbon fibers. Unfortunately, the commercial-grade lignins available today are
severely limited in their applications because of their high metals (primarily
sodium) and ash content. Thus, less than 0.2% of these 50 million tons/yr of
available lignin is being recovered. Clearly, cost-effective separations
processes must be devised to dramatically improve the purities of today's
commercial lignins, if lignin is to achieve its potential as a biopolymer. Such
an ultrapure lignin would be of great interest for the production of high-value
products, such as carbon fibers for automobile applications (for large
reductions in fuel consumption). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clemson researchers have
discovered a powerful, versatile, yet renewable hot solvent system that can be
"tuned" to reduce the sodium content of lignin derived from the Kraft pulping
process 100-fold down to &lt;150 ppm in a single step. Furthermore, preliminary
evidence indicates that by incorporating compressed CO2 into the solvent system,
the ultrapure lignin can be fractionated into cuts of well-defined molecular
weight and chemical composition. A fundamental investigation of these phenomena,
in order to lay the groundwork for future commercial application, is the
overarching objective of this work. The research plan is as follows: (1) Measure
elevated-temperature, liquid-liquid equilibrium phase behavior for the solvent
system with lignin. Phase boundaries for the lignin-rich and solvent-rich
phases, solvent compositions in each phase, and the effect of temperature will
be the focus of these measurements. (2) Determine the distribution of metal
salts between the lignin present in the above two phases. (3) Investigate the
addition of CO2 to the lignin-solvent system for fractionating ultrapure lignin
by molecular weight. (4) Characterize the lignin constituents in each phase in
terms of phenolic and carboxylic acid content. (5) Evaluate ultrapure lignins as
replacements for petroleum-derived polymers in coatings applications. The
industrial partner will use the lignin for different polymer coating
applications.