* 1403854
* Continuous Chromatography with Reactions for the Purification of Rare Earth Elements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nien-Hwa Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 412,000.00

1403854 Wang Purdue University

The project aims to develop new efficient and economical methods to produce
compounds of rare earth elements (REEs), such as neodymium, Nd, praseodymium,
Pr, and samarium, Sm. Such elements are widely used in many high-tech products,
such as petroleum refining catalysts, phosphors in color television and flat
panel displays, permanent magnets, and rechargeable batteries. They are in short
supply in the US and need to be imported from China, which produces over 95% of
the world's REE supply and plans to restrict exports. It is important for the US
industry and national security to develop environmentally sustainable methods to
increase domestic REE supply, while minimizing production costs.

The objective of this proposed project is to understand the fundamental concepts
and generate the new data required to develop efficient continuous
chromatography with reactions to replace the current extraction-based
purification processes for REEs production. Systematic design and scale-up
methods based on intrinsic adsorption and mass transfer parameters and
dimensionless groups will be developed. The Standing Wave Design methods for
continuous isocratic-elution systems without reactions will be extended to
continuous systems with reactions. The design methods will be verified with rate
model simulations and experimental data from three REEs (Pr, Nd, and Sm). The
two purification methods (step-wise elution and displacement) will be integrated
with capture chromatography in an efficient continuous process. A new six-zone
continuous chromatography unit will be designed, built, and tested for the
separation of Pr, Nd, and Sm. Both ligand-assisted stepwise elution and
displacement chromatography will be tested using this new equipment. Both
purification methods will be evaluated and compared with batch chromatography
and tandem SMB for productivity, solvent usage, and separation costs. The
results will have a major impact on managing the life cycles of REEs, while
minimizing purification costs, solvent usage, waste production, and
environmental impact. The design methods and the simulation tools developed in
this project can be used to develop efficient continuous chromatography
processes with reactions to produce other high-purity chemicals with high yield
from complex mixtures.

The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students, and will lead to
improved teaching materials. The results potentially will be used by industry
for REE production and by other researchers for similar or different
separations. The results will have a major impact on the production costs of
fine chemicals, biochemicals, foods, and pharmaceuticals, which have
multibillion dollar annual sales. The project will also impact teaching of
separations and help transfer this new technology to industry.