* 1403060
* High-Resolution Spectroscopy of Heteronuclear Alkali Molecules: Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* John Huennekens, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 227,426.00

This project involves the study of small molecules and how they interact with
different atoms. In one experiment, a laser is used to give the molecules a
precisely defined amount of vibrational and rotational energy. The molecules,
which are in a small chamber, then have close encounters (collisions) with
various other atoms (helium, argon, or potassium) that are also present in the
chamber. A second laser is used to determine how the forces between the atoms
and the molecules affect the vibration and rotation of the molecules. In a
second experiment, lasers are used to measure the energy levels and other
properties of the molecules. The results of both experiments will be compared
with computer models based on the theory of quantum mechanics in order to test
the understanding of how atoms and molecules interact. The proposed work is
relevant to research in other areas of current interest, such as quantum
computing and laser cooling of atoms and molecules. It will also contribute to
the advanced education of several students. Three or four graduate students will
write Ph.D. dissertations based on this work, and approximately six
undergraduate students will participate in these projects during the summers
through Lehigh University's REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates)
program.

The specific activities that will be carried out involve measurements of the ro-
vibrational energy levels of triplet states of NaCs and NaK, and the
investigation of fine and hyperfine structure of these levels. The goal is to
map out potential energy curves and transition dipole moments as functions of
internuclear separation, to study spin-orbit and non-adiabatic coupling between
states, and to use patterns of energy levels to investigate predissociation and
other fundamental molecular interactions. In one such effort, the supported
research group is developing a technique using quantum interference effects to
determine detailed information about molecular perturbations. The interacting
NaCs 11(0+) and 12(0+) states are being used as the test case. The group is
currently extending their work to NaCs, because it is of interest for cooling
and trapping. The large spin-orbit interactions in this molecule, which lead to
strong perturbations and avoided crossings, provide interesting new challenges
for both experiment and theory. In addition, the group's recent studies of
rotationally inelastic collisions of alkali molecules have revealed a strong
propensity for Delta J = even transitions in collisions of NaK molecules with
either Ar or He atoms. However, this propensity is not observed in collisions of
NaK with K atoms. The group has found that orientation is largely preserved in
rotationally inelastic collisions of NaK with Ar or He, but is almost completely
destroyed in collisions with potassium. The group's theoretical calculations are
beginning to provide explanations for these results. Recent calculations predict
strong J dependences in the probabilities for transfer of either orientation or
alignment in rotationally inelastic collisions. Further experiments will test
many of these predictions and provide stringent tests of molecular collision
theory.