* 1403846
* Senior Design Projects to develop Assistive Technology at San Diego State University
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Kee Moon, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 124,995.00

Proposal: 1403846 PI: May-Newman, Karen D. Title: Senior Design Projects to
develop Assistive Technology at San Diego State University

Broader Significance & Importance The senior design project course is the
capstone experience for SDSU engineering students and allows them to explore
areas of specialization such as biomedical or rehabilitation. The goal of the
proposed effort is to sponsor 7-10 senior projects each year that focus on
developing Assistive Technology (AT) solutions to allow physically challenged
individuals to safely and independently overcome neural or motor deficits.

Technical Description These projects will leverage SDSU's partnership in the
ERC/SNE and develop the students' expertise in a newly emerging area. By teaming
the undergraduate engineers with clinicians, therapists, as well as the users
with disabilities, the proposed multidisciplinary approach is expected to yield
robust, suitable, and effective designs. The proposed efforts in senior projects
will synchronize with the educational and outreach efforts to promote learning
in SNE for the next generation of SDSU engineering graduates.

Intellectual merits of the project include: - Educate our students to create a
design solution including design concept, implementation and testing under a
unique set of circumstances, and involving the end-user - Give our students the
experience of solving real-world problems in a team environment - Develop
assistive technology that improves the quality of life for specific individuals
with disabilities in terms of their recreational, vocational, educational, and
daily living options. - Fabrication, delivery, and implementation of assistive
devices that can meet the needs of specific individuals with disabilities. -
Instill into the students a sense of the critical role that end users play when
developing new products; ultimately enabling them to create more value for
products they design in their careers.

Broader impacts of this project include: - Expanded vocational, educational, and
daily living task independence for persons with limited mobility such as the
elderly, people with arthritis, and those with significant sensory or motor
limitations. - Fuller integration and participation in school, social, and
employment settings for individuals with disabilities. - Heightened awareness in
the community at large and increased participation for disabled individuals
through the products, modifications, and work done by the design teams.