* 1403215
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Investigating life history and environmental drivers structuring host-associated assemblages of mycorrhizal and endophytic fungi in subalpine tree islands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sydney Glassman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,297.00

Prior to recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies, scientists could never
have imagined the vast microbial diversity associated with each individual plant
and animal. Rather than individual discrete organisms, all higher organisms are
home to diverse consortia of microscopic bacteria and fungi, called microbes.
From our mouths to plants' leaves, unique communities of microorganisms play
important roles in higher organisms'ability to function. This research focuses
on understanding the mechanisms driving the community structure of the fungi
associated with the leaves of plants (foliar endophytes) and beneficial fungi
associated with the roots of trees (ectomycorrhizal fungi). This research has
broad ranging societal impacts by uncovering fungal diversity that can be
helpful to improving tree health, ecosystem stability, and resilience to climate
change. One of the focal trees in this study, the white bark pine, is a
foundation species central to ecosystem function in subalpine environments.
White bark pine trees are highly threatened by a combination of blister rust,
mountain pine beetles, and climate change. Foliar endophytes are known to
improve the resistance of trees to both disease and temperature fluctuations
caused by climate change. Thus, uncovering the diversity of foliar endophytes
associated with these trees has the potential to lead to beneficial treatments
for this endangered tree species. In addition, this project also has strong
educational and outreach components. Students involved in the proposed work will
gain experience with fieldwork and cutting edge DNA sequencing methods.

Despite being incredibly important drivers of plant community composition and
ecosystem function, little is known about the basic biology or patterns of
diversity of these fungi. This project applies cutting edge next generation
sequencing technologies to isolated pine trees located in Yosemite National Park
to answer important questions about the community structure, diversity, and
basic biology of these fungi. Here a simple host-island setting is used to test
for the effect of dispersal distance, host type, environment (host physiology,
soil chemistry & season), on community structure in two host-dependent guilds of
fungi. The main aim of this proposal is to compare the relative effects of niche
versus dispersal assembly in two functional guilds of host-associated fungi.