* 1403062
* Topics in algebraic geometry codes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Shuhong Gao, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

Error control is essential in all digital communications or storage, ranging
from bank transactions to internet commerce, from CD or DVD to cloud computing,
from cellphone conversations to outer space explorations, among many other
applications. Many practical error correcting codes are constructed via
algebraic curves over finite fields. These codes have been extensively studied
from both theoretical and practical point of views. However, many questions
still remain open, particularly on code structures, code constructions and
decoding complexity. This project will strive to study structural properties and
decoding algorithms for codes from algebraic geometry with the aim of making
these codes more amenable to applications. The project is multi-disciplinary
lying at the crossroads of mathematics, computer science,and electronic
engineering. It bridges pure mathematics, particularly discrete mathematics and
algebraic geometry, with practical applications in digital communications. Any
new result or any good algorithm for codes could be used to improve
communication capability in practice.

Algebraic geometry (AG) codes have a tremendous amount of algebraic structure.
Exploiting this algebraic structure enables construction of codes, efficient
encoding, and efficient decoding. While many advances in decoding algorithms for
AG codes has been made in the last decade, most of these apply only to one-point
AG codes. Multipoint codes can have much better parameters than comparable one-
point codes. This project will study how to realize this advantage in term of
encoding and decoding algorithms. Another important issue relates to explicit
constructions of bases for AG codes, especially those from curves in higher
dimensional spaces (function field towers). This project studies both list
decoding beyond half distance and fast unique decoding below half distance.
Techniques include power series and Grobner bases. For many AG codes, even if
decoding is only up to half distance, their error control capability is much
higher than Reed-Solomon codes which are widely used in practice. To make AG
codes more suitable for practical implementations, the project aims to reduce
the decoding complexity and memory requirements via power series
representations.