* 1403150
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Uncovering the geographic pattern of species evolution in Madagascar using the myrrh genus (Commiphora Jacq.) and a target-enriched nuclear genomic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Andrea Weeks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,309.00

In the last decade, scientific exploration of Madagascar's remarkable
biodiversity and its origin has shifted to characterizing the drivers of
evolution within the island. This project will use two endemic lineages of the
myrrh tree genus (50 spp., Commiphora, Burseraceae) as models to test hypotheses
regarding the influence of geography on species diversification in the
seasonally dry tropical forests of western Madagascar. These hypotheses predict
that species have arisen as a consequence of isolation caused by 1) watershed
expansion and contraction, 2) river barriers, and 3) historical climate change.
A subset of 959 nuclear genes will be sampled from all endemic species using a
cost-effective high-throughput method that combines microfluidic amplification
and massively-parallel sequencing. The resulting data will be used to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of these species and will be combined with
specimen-based mapping to test the overarching biogeographical hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic markers developed as part of this research will
also be evaluated for their transferability to other species across the
angiosperm tree of life, which may expand the methodological toolkit for all
plant systematists. This research will provide mentorship opportunities for two
undergraduate students and will support their professional development,
including presentation of their research at a national meeting. Additional
outreach will be provided to involve K-12 and undergraduate students through
ongoing mentorship activities.