* 1403154
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolutionary genetics of crossover rate differences across the Drosophila phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Cara Brand, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,862.00

Meiosis is a specialized form of cell division that ultimately produces gametes
(i.e., sperm and egg). This project will examine recombination, the exchange of
genetic information between paired chromosomes, that occurs during meiosis. The
project has broad educational and societal impacts, including opportunities to
train undergraduate and high school students in classical genetics, basic
molecular biology, and evolutionary biology. Furthermore, the portability of the
experimental system facilitates outreach efforts involving middle school
students participating in summer programs in science education. The research has
potential societal impacts including human health as meiotic disruptions
contribute to infertility and aberrant chromosome number in progeny.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recombination that occurs during the first stage of
meiosis serves two important functions. First, recombination ensures the
distribution of the appropriate number of chromosomes into gamete cells. Second,
recombination generates novel genetic combinations that are potentially
beneficial to the progeny. Despite these benefits, recombination has risks
because it can generate deleterious duplication and deletion mutations. The
frequency of recombination may therefore evolve to balance the benefits of
recombination against its risks. Using the fly genus Drosophila, this research
will investigate how the frequency and physical placement of recombination
events along chromosomes has evolved between species. In particular, this
research will investigate how the rapid molecular evolution of a meiosis gene
has resulted in the evolution of differences in recombination rate observed
across the evolutionary tree of Drosophila species. The project will investigate
the rapidly evolving mei-218 gene which is responsible for most of the crossover
rate difference between Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila mauritiana using
a candidate gene approach. The project will test the degree to which molecular
evolution at mei-218 contributes to the variation in recombination rates across
the Drosophila phylogeny using a molecular evolutionary analysis to test for
histories of recurrent positive selection at mei-218 in multiple Drosophila
lineages. The project will also use a transgenic approach to assay the
phenotypic effects of the mei-218 gene from multiple Drosophila species.