* 1403456
* van der Waals mediated interaction dynamics between individual nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2019
* USD 380,943.00

CBET-1403456&lt;br/&gt;Walker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
microelectronic devices extensively used in telecommunications, computing, and
energy conversion applications rely on ever shrinking feature sizes where
materials are manipulated at atomic scale and exhibit new and extreme
properties. As characteristic lengths decrease, interfaces between materials
begin to dominate the performance of the materials, and hence the devices. Yet,
our understanding of how charge and heat transmit through these interfaces is
still limited. To create better materials and devices, we must study the effects
of interfaces on carrier transport that are responsible for the extreme
properties these highly scaled structures exhibit. This project will measure the
flow of energy through several carefully controlled interfaces and predict the
performance of those interfaces using atomistic-scale modeling. The combined
theoretical and experimental approach will produce new design rules for creating
and optimizing future devices. Consequently, the results of this project have
far reaching implications and could lead to a reduced drain on our energy
resources, faster computers, and increased communication
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of thorough understanding of
interfacial phonon transport is a current bottleneck in microelectronic cooling
and thermal design of composite materials. This project aims at understanding
the interaction dynamics of van der Waals interfaces between individual
nanostructures, which determines the phonon transmission and scattering
mechanisms at these interfaces. The interaction dynamics at the van der Waals
interface will alter the phonon transmission coefficient, leading to different
thermal conductivities between single and double ribbons. Therefore, our
approach is to measure systematically the intrinsic thermal conductivity of
individual silicon nanoribbons, silicon double nanoribbons, and silicon and
boron double ribbons, and to perform corresponding atomic scale modeling.
Comparison of results from different samples will provide new insights into how
different factors, such as adhesion energy, acoustic impendence mismatch, and
amorphous layers affect phonon transmission through van der Waals interfaces,
which will provide new insights into manipulating thermal transport through
these interfaces. Since van der Waals interfaces are one of the most common
interfaces between individual nanostructures or nanostructures and
substrates/host materials, the obtained fundamental understanding will shed
light on how to better manage the heat dissipation in microelectronic devices
and tune the thermal properties of nanocomposites.