* 1403458
* CIF: Medium: Modeling, Analysis, and Code Design for Portable Wireless Device Transmitters Subject to an Electromagnetic Exposure Constraint
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jianming Jin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

Portable wireless devices sold around the world number in the billions,
and&lt;br/&gt;they are used daily because of their ability to provide
connectivity by&lt;br/&gt;integrating processing power, touch screens, cameras,
and motion sensors&lt;br/&gt;with multiple radios, many of which can run
simultaneously. Portable&lt;br/&gt;wireless devices used in close proximity to
the human body have transmitter&lt;br/&gt;power constraints that are dictated
largely by regulatory limits on a form&lt;br/&gt;of electromagnetic exposure
called ``specific absorption rate'' (SAR).&lt;br/&gt;SAR, measured in Watts per
kilogram, is a measure of the rate of&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic energy
absorption by the body. Many portable wireless&lt;br/&gt;devices sold today
operate near the accepted human SAR limit. This&lt;br/&gt;research examines how
multiple transmitters on a portable wireless device&lt;br/&gt;can be modeled,
analyzed, and used while subject to a SAR constraint. The&lt;br/&gt;work looks
at how to model the constraint, and how to realize the&lt;br/&gt;reliability and
high data-rate advantages of multiple antennas subject to&lt;br/&gt;the
constraint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because portable devices are generally small,
transmitters will be&lt;br/&gt;physically close to one another and couple
electromagnetically. Hence, the&lt;br/&gt;research requires a blended effort in
three distinct areas: (i)&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetics and near-field exposure
modeling with multiple&lt;br/&gt;transmitters, (ii) wireless communication
system far-field&lt;br/&gt;information-theoretic performance evaluation with a
near-field SAR&lt;br/&gt;constraint, (iii) the design of SAR codes for optimum
performance. Code&lt;br/&gt;performance will be determined by simulation and by
laboratory evaluation&lt;br/&gt;with microwave equipment for near-field SAR and
far-field error-rate&lt;br/&gt;measurements.