* 1403906
* Symmetry Energy from Nuclear Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Filomena Maciel Nunes, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 570,000.00

Atomic nuclei occurring in nature tend to have the same number of neutrons and
protons. For larger nuclear masses, this is attributed to the symmetry energy, a
contribution to the nuclear energy associated with neutron-proton imbalance,
that becomes larger the larger the imbalance. Nuclei with large imbalance can
decay to more energetically favored products and, when that imbalance is
excessive, the nuclei cannot even be formed. Understanding the symmetry energy
is essential for extrapolating from the properties of existing nuclei to neutron
stars kept stable by gravity while at the verge of collapse to black holes. In
their efforts, the inverstigators will rely on their complementary expertise and
will benefit from the expertise in nuclear structure of other members of the
National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) Nuclear Theory Group and
from the expertise in nuclear astrophysics of the members of the Joint Institute
for Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA), housed partly at Michigan State University.

This project will advance our understanding of nuclear reactions, emphasizing
aspects pertaining to the so-called nuclear symmetry energy. The symmetry energy
governs average evolution of nuclear properties with neutron-proton imbalance
that is now easier to vary experimentally given the modern existing and planned
accelerators that can accelerate short-lived isotopes. The symmetry energy is
important for extrapolating from the properties of the nuclei to those of
neutron stars. The latter are macroscopic nuclear systems made stable, right at
the verge of collapse into a black hole, by opposing forces of gravity and
pressure tied to the dependence of symmetry energy on nuclear density. The
symmetry energy at densities higher than normal for nuclei is studied using
observables from central collisions of heavy nuclei, in particular charged pion
ratios and collective flow. The investigators will improve on theoretical
descriptions of those central collisions, by incorporating dynamic production of
alpha particles into transport theory for the collisions. Because of large
binding energy per nucleon and equal proton and neutron numbers, alpha particles
are, on one hand, rather copiously produced and, on the other, they
significantly change relative neutron-proton imbalance in their surroundings;
hence their importance. The symmetry energy at normal and subnormal densities
will be studied by simultaneously interpreting data from elastic scattering and
charge exchange reactions, thus learning about differences in the neutron and
proton distributions in those nuclei that have neutron-proton imbalance.
Finally, the investigators will extract optical potentials of neutrons and
protons from many-body theory relying on fundamental interactions, paying
particular attention to the dependence of those potentials on neutron-proton
imbalance. The fundamental extraction can help to reduce ambiguities in the
interpretations of peripheral reaction experiments.