* 1403564
* Design and Characterization of Multi-Targeted Gene Delivery Nanoparticles for Specific Cancer Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Efrosini Kokkoli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,334.00

Proposal Number: CBET-1403564 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Efrosini
Kokkoli&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Design and Characterization of Multi-Targeted
Gene Delivery Nanoparticles for Specific Cancer Therapy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
2030 there could be 27 million incident cases of cancer worldwide, 17 million
cancer deaths annually and 75 million persons alive with cancer within five
years of diagnosis. Active targeting of an adhesion molecule that is expressed
on the surface of the tumor cells, is a promising area of research and targeted
nanoparticle delivery to cancer is an area of interest that may offer hope in
improving the treatment of therapy-resistant cancers. Unfortunately, cancer-
specificity by selective recognition of individual cellular receptors has rarely
been achieved adequately to date, suffering from unintended delivery to healthy
organs as some target disease markers are also expressed in areas other than
tumors. The focus of this work is on the problem of specific delivery of non-
viral gene delivery vehicles to cancer cells versus healthy cells. Proposed is
the development of a multi-targeted therapeutic system, that will make the
recognition of cancer cells more specific. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis
of this work is that a higher degree of specificity for cancer cells could be
achieved by designing a modular multi-targeted non-viral system that: i)
introduces simultaneous targeting of the overexpressed cancer surface receptors
alpha(5)beta(1) and alpha(6)beta(4) integrins as the first level of targeting at
the extracellular level, and ii) targets the upregulated transcriptional
activity of NF-kB that is inactive in healthy cells while it is highly
upregulated in a variety of diseases including cancer, thereby introducing a new
form of transcriptional targeting as the second level of specific targeting. To
test this hypothesis the following tasks have been set:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Task 1: Evaluate the effect of peptide
concentration on the miscibility of peptide-amphiphiles and polyethylene glycol
(PEG) molecules. Langmuir-Blodgett membranes will be designed that will mimic
the interfaces of the dual-ligand stealth liposomes by mixing lipids, lipidated
PEG and the peptide-amphiphiles that bind specifically to the alpha(5)beta(1)
and alpha(6)beta(4) integrins. The effect of peptide concentration on the mixing
behavior between the peptides and PEG will be investigated by atomic force
microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Task 2: To engineer multi-targeted
stealth liposomes, functionalized with peptide-amphiphiles that bind
specifically to the alpha(5)beta(1) and alpha(6)beta(4) integrins, and deliver
them to cells with different integrin expression levels. Peptide-functionalized
stealth liposomes will be prepared with different concentrations of the two
peptides. The liposomes will be delivered to different cancer cells with varying
levels of integrin expression. Fluorescent dyes will be encapsulated initially,
and the binding and internalization of the liposomes will be evaluated with
plate assays and confocal microscopy studies. The liposomes will be evaluated
further with respect to promoting specific transcriptional targeting as they
will deliver the diphtheria toxin fragment A (DTA) gene under the control of the
NF-kB promoter. The toxicity of different cells with varying levels of integrin
expression will be evaluated with plate assays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
Task 3: To evaluate the multi-targeted stealth liposomes in vivo. Dual-ligand
formulations from Research Task 2 that will be shown to bind best to DLD-1 colon
cancer cells will be evaluated in this task for their ability to reach the colon
tumor site in vivo, with microPET/CT imaging and biodistribution studies. Non-
targeted and single-ligand stealth liposomes will be used as controls. The
single- and dual-ligand optimal formulations will further be evaluated for their
efficacy and toxicity. For these studies the DTA gene under the control of the
NF-kB promoter will be employed.&amp;#8203;