* 1403506
* Single Nanoparticle SPR Imaging and Nanostructured Interfaces for Ultrasensitive Biosensing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Robert Corn, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2018
* USD 511,251.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Robert Corn and his research group at the
University of California, Irvine are developing novel optical sensors for the
simultaneous detection of multiple DNA, RNA and protein molecules at extremely
low concentrations that can be used for the early identification and diagnosis
of cancers, heart attacks, and other diseases. The development of low-cost,
easy-to-use biosensors that can be used for early disease detection, patient
status monitoring, and DNA diagnostics has been identified as essential for the
improvement of the health of the general population, especially for those who
currently do not have access to health care. Additionally, some of the novel
materials and sub-microscopic surface structures created in this project exhibit
special optical and wetting properties that are similar to those found in
biological systems; potentially, these "bio-inspired" surfaces can be used to
create inexpensive anti-reflective and self-cleaning surfaces over large
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Two major research efforts are being
undertaken in this project: (i) ultrasensitive biosensing via the detection of
single biofunctionalized nanoparticles with near infrared surface plasmon
resonance microscopy and (ii) the fabrication and application of ordered arrays
of gold nanorings, nanowires and nanocones with unique plasmonic, optical and
surface properties. The biosensing methods developed in these two projects will
incorporate a variety of biomolecular functionalization and surface enzymatic
detection chemistries developed previously for planar interfaces. In addition to
biosensing applications, novel nanostructured interfaces for applications in
near infrared optical metamaterials and biomimetic interfaces including
broadband anti-reflective, super hydrophobic and bactericidal surfaces will be
developed. The broader impacts of this work include: (i) potential societal
benefits from the development of ultra-sensitive multiplexed detection of
cancer, cardiac and other disease biomarkers at femtomolar concentrations, and
also the development of low cost nanostructured surfaces with unique optical and
chemical properties, (ii) the training of students with combined backgrounds in
enzymatic bioanalysis, surface biomaterials and surface spectroscopy requisite
for jobs in modern biotechnological and next-gen DNA sequencing companies and
(iii) the exposure of undergraduates both to the importance of early detection
diagnostics and also to possibility of careers in scientific research and
biotechnology.