* 1403336
* Astroparticle Physics with the VERITAS Gamma-Ray Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jamie Holder, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 302,397.00

Ground-based gamma-ray observations have revolutionized the field of high energy
particle astrophysics over the past decade. Supernova remnants, pulsars, active
galactic nuclei, starburst galaxies and stellar-mass binary systems have all
been shown to emit very high energy gamma-radiation, along with sources whose
identification is still unclear. The detection of gamma-rays indicates that
these objects are accelerating particles to almost the speed of light, but the
acceleration mechanisms, and the connection between the accelerators and the
origin of cosmic rays remains unclear. Using the VERITAS gamma-ray observatory
the Delaware group has led studies in many areas of gamma-ray astrophysics,
including supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae, active galaxies and searches
for dark matter annihilation. The PI is currently the spokesperson for the
VERITAS collaboration. With this award the University of Delaware group will
continue their broad scientific program as well as technical work associated
with the VERITAS observatory. The Delaware group will also continue its
education and public outreach activities. Members of the group mentor students
at the high school and undergraduate level, give public astrophysics
presentations, and support the VERITAS outreach program. The group will continue
to organize an annual "Fermi Summer School" that caters to graduate students and
post-docs from around the world. Finally, as Spokesperson, the PI will
communicate VERITAS science to the general public, and to the wider scientific
community, through interactions with the press and with various scientific
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astrophysics activities funded through
this award are both scientific and technical. Firstly, the group will use gamma-
ray observations with VERITAS to study sites of particle acceleration, and
specifically supernova remnants, gamma-ray binary systems, and blazars, through
deep observations of known sources, and discovery observations of new
candidates. They will also search for high gamma-ray emission from regions of
excess astrophysical neutrinos as identified by IceCube. Secondly, the group
will contribute to the maintenance and improvements to the capabilities of
VERITAS. This consists of hardware maintenance of the upgraded telescope camera
pixels, and the development of new analysis methods to improve sensitivity.
Finally, the group will work on the commissioning of a prototype telescope at
the VERITAS site for the next generation Cherenkov Telescope Array project.