* 1403135
* Engineering Highly Specific and Orthogonal CRISPR-Cas Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Chase Beisel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2018
* USD 412,000.00

1403135&lt;br/&gt;Beisel, Chase L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An organism's genome
provides the blueprints for all cellular functions and behaviors. Accordingly,
editing the genome is an essential step toward understanding and controlling any
of these activities. A powerful method of genome editing recently became
available with the discovery of prokaryotic defense systems. While these tools
have been used to genetically engineer diverse organisms, these natural editing
systems are constrained in the types of DNA sequences that can be targeted and
their ability to function independently if more than one system is present. To
overcome these limitations, this project seeks to engineer editing systems that
are more flexible and that can act independently. The resulting systems have the
potential to transform how genome editing is performed in all forms of life,
thereby driving efforts to understand the basis of genetic diseases and to
engineer microbes that can produce chemicals sustainably. Insights from these
efforts will also help reveal how the components of these systems interact with
each other and how the assembled systems identify DNA targets. Beyond these
scientific advances, this project will train the next generation of scientists
and engineers to harness natural biological processes as tools for studying and
engineering biology. This project will also integrate topics on gene editing
systems into existing coursework for undergraduate and graduate students and
expand a campus-wide biotechnology seminar series to include local industry
representatives and students from surrounding schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this research is to generate tools that permit facile,
affordable, and efficient genome manipulation of any organism. CRISPR-Cas
systems offer one of the most promising tools, yet each system can only target
DNA sequences flanked by a DNA motif called a PAM. Furthermore, many of these
systems utilize the same CRISPR RNAs responsible for target recognition,
preventing the use of multiple systems at one time. To address these particular
challenges, this project will generate orthogonal CRISPR-Cas systems that
recognize different PAMs. These variants will be generated based on a well-
characterized CRISPR-Cas system and a unique selection scheme that couples
bacteriophage resistance and genome targeting. The resulting collection of
evolved variants can specifically target diverse DNA sequences and can be
implemented together without any crosstalk. As a proof-of-principle
demonstration of their functionality, multiple variants will be simultaneously
introduced into the dairy-culturing bacterium S. thermophilus for the
combinatorial regulation of exopolysaccharide genes associated with yogurt
texture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division and by the Synthetic and
Systems Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cell Biology.