* 1403403
* Simulation and modeling of soot formation and transport in turbulent flames
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Lignell, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 205,213.00

1403403&lt;br/&gt;Lignell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soot emission from flames is a
pollutant, a health hazard, and affects heat transfer. Soot formation is a
challenging problem that involves non-trivial flame interactions over a wide
range of conditions in their size and time. Efforts are focused on how soot
forms in practical flames that are usually embedded in turbulence, such as those
in jet engines and furnaces. Computer-based models will be developed and their
validation will be carried out. Research advances will be communicated through
publication, presentation, and on the web. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be mentored and trained in computational combustion. Elementary school
students will be introduced to what engineers do through flame and flow
demonstrations that get students to look carefully at how combustion drives
society. High school seniors will be mentored by undergraduate students as they
participate in a junior-level fluid mechanics course project where groups define
a problem, gather and analyze data, and present
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will address problems in
turbulent soot modeling by applying three simulation approaches: one-dimensional
turbulence (ODT), direct numerical simulation (DNS), and large eddy simulation
(LES), in a single study to understand soot formation and transport, and to
validate models used in engineering simulations. Four tasks are considered: (1)
implementing consistent soot models into simulation codes; (2) performing ODT,
DNS, and LES simulations to understand soot-flame interactions; (3) evaluating
subgrid soot models; and (4) educational outreach to elementary and high school
students. However, the only simulation approach that resolves all scales is DNS,
which is prohibitively expensive for practical flows. For DNS and LES, models
are needed below certain scales, because fine-scale information is not
available. This work will use ODT, DNS, and LES to understand fundamental soot-
flame-turbulence-radiation interactions, and quantify soot transport models. ODT
and LES will be compared to well-characterized experimental jet flames. The
strengths of these models, used together, complement their weaknesses and
provide guidance as to where research needed.