* 1403257
* Optical Chopsticks for Multidimensional Cellular Mechanics Study
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Qi Wen, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2017
* USD 486,857.00

PI: Liu, Yuxiang &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403257&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Worcester Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;Title: Optical Chopsticks for
Multidimensional Cellular Mechanics Study&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical forces
play an important role in cell morphology, motility, proliferation, and
physiology. Despite their importance, the current knowledge on the role of
mechanical forces on cell biology is still limited, especially for cells in a
three-dimensional (3D) environment, which behave very differently compared with
those on two-dimensional (2D) substrates. One of the reasons is lack of suitable
techniques and tools to non-invasively apply well characterized forces to and
precisely measure mechanical response from cells in 3D environments. The
proposed studies aim to develop and use a novel tool entitled ?optical
chopsticks,? which would enable simultaneous force application and cell response
measurements in a nonlinear heterogeneous 3D environment, breaking the
limitation of existing techniques. The developed optical chopsticks will be
portable, easy to work with, and supported by a broad spectrum of commercialized
fiber optic components. The outcome of this research will not only have a
significant impact to multiple areas such as cellular biophysics,
mechanobiology, and biophotonics, but also shed further light on pathological
mechanisms and diagnosis. The research project will provide interdisciplinary
training and education for a broad audience of students ranging from high school
to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell mechanics have been quantitatively
investigated with different methods, including fluorescence imaging-based
traction force microscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and optical tweezers.
However, no work has been shown so far to both apply and measure 3D forces in a
3D environment, which is much closer to the in vivo environment. AFM is limited
by the resolution of lateral force measurements, while conventional optical
tweezers are not suitable for measurements on cells in a 3D matrix due to
limited working distances. The proposed optical chopsticks are based on fiber
optical tweezers that can create 3D optical traps for non-contact force exertion
and measurements. Fiber optical tweezers can reach anywhere inside the medium as
long as the medium is transparent, which is especially important for force
measurements on cells embedded in a 3D matrix. Moreover, a fiber optic
modulation and detection system will be implemented to facilitate dynamic
control of optical forces with desired waveforms on cells in a 3D matrix. With
these capabilities, optical chopsticks will be integrated with fluorescence
imaging techniques for spatiotemporal characterization of force propagation in
cytoskeletons of cells on 2D substrates. More importantly, optical chopsticks
will be used to precisely measure cell forces in a nonlinear heterogeneous 3D
matrix. In the meantime, 3D forces with controllable directions and magnitudes
will be applied to cells to study cell migration under external mechanical
stimuli. Four specific aims are proposed. 1) To develop the optical chopstics.
2) To implement the optical chopsticks and model the optical force generation.
3) To perform cell mechanics studies on 2D substrates. 4) To perform cell
mechanics studies in 3D matrices. The outcome of this research is expected to
have a significant impact on multiple areas, including cellular biophysics,
mechanobiology, and biophotonics, and also shed further light on pathological
mechanisms and diagnosis.