* 1403350
* A PLATFORM FOR COMBINATORIAL BISPECIFIC ANTIBODY ASSEMBLY AND EVALUATION
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Ronald Raines, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 350,000.00

1403350&lt;br/&gt;Shusta, Eric V. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibodies that are
capable of simultaneously engaging two different antigens are known as
bispecific antibodies (BAbs), and their unique properties have spawned a rapidly
growing field of research and therapeutic development. Given the capability for
BAbs to crosslink two antigens, they can be employed to recruit components of
the immune system to cancerous cells, can better antagonize signaling pathways
by simultaneously inhibiting two compensatory pathways, or can lead to better
cell type targeting specificity, among many other therapeutic applications. In
addition to the research objectives, this proposal possesses significant broader
impact. First, it provides a new conceptual framework and toolkit for the
creation of bispecific antibodies. In addition, bispecific antibodies discovered
by researchers using the BAb platform could yield new therapeutic approaches for
a variety of diseases including cancer, brain disease, and viral infection.
Next, the project is designed to train one full-time graduate student and one
part-time graduate student along with several undergraduate students in the
protein engineering/chemical biology field to prepare them for careers in
industry and academia. Research results will be integrated into courses that the
PI teaches as protein engineering modules. Finally, research results will also
be disseminated to high school students through the Wisconsin High School State
Science Olympiad in an 'Applied Protein Modeling for Medical Uses' symposium
that the PI will organize and host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collectively, the
state-of-the-art BAb design strategies possess many drawbacks, with the most
robust systems requiring laborious molecular redesign, cloning, and recombinant
protein expression. These challenges limit the current approaches to the
evaluation of a handful of BAbs when antibody discovery technologies can easily
generate 10's or 100's of possible BAb combinations that should be tested. To
address these issues, a new BAb platform that will enable the facile
combinatorial assembly of BAbs is proposed. The platform will be based on yeast
displayed antibody-intein fusions that can be chemically cleaved and site-
specifically chemically functionalized. Subsequently, pairs of released and
functionalized antibodies will be covalently linked resulting in bispecific
antibodies. Importantly, all of the requisite steps for CliBAb assembly would be
performed directly using yeast displayed antibody clones without any subcloning,
reformatting or purification, greatly facilitating BAb antibody assembly and
evaluation. In order to develop such a BAb platform, intein engineering will be
used to maximize yeast surface display of antibody-intein fusion proteins. In
parallel, the chemical handles will be optimized to drive efficient BAb
formation. Finally, the BAb platform will be validated by creating and testing a
set of 36 BAbs resulting from the combinatorial pairing of 8 different
antibodies previously identified for cell binding and
internalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program of the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.