* 1403615
* Workshop: Stress in the Healthy Organism, December 5-6, 2013, Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2015
* L Romero, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 10/31/2015
* USD 34,933.00

The vertebrate stress response (the physiological mechanisms involved in
protecting an organism from a stressor) is a major mechanism of resilience and
an important transducer of biotic interactions (between organisms), and between
organisms and their non-living environment (abiotic interactions). It is
astonishing, however, that even after nearly 100 years of studying stress, the
overall field of stress biology lacks an integrated theory and associated models
to enable quantitative and predictive research connecting the multiple
mechanisms and outcomes of the stress response. This workshop will include equal
numbers of researchers interested in the basic biology of stress in animals
(typically funded by NSF) and researchers interested in the role of stress in
healthy humans specifically (represented by researchers from NASA). NSF-funded
and NASA researchers have substantial common ground. Both communities are
interested in how stress biology is manifested in healthy individuals, rather
than a cause of disease. However, these two communities do not typically
interact owing to the conceptual and methodological constraints on the scope of
their research. Both communities see an opportunity to make substantial progress
in understanding this complex area of biology by sharing their perspectives and
developing multidisciplinary collaborations. The cross-fertilization created by
the workshop should yield novel insights about conceptual and technical
challenges and opportunities, which will help guide future research in both
communities. The overarching aims of the workshop will be to: 1. Identify and
surmount bottlenecks that are preventing progress, and 2. Begin to develop
specific research approaches to implement integrated studies. This workshop
could have profound impacts on the field by facilitating the development of a
new conceptual model of stress. Such a model could result in more quantitative,
predictive research linking cellular and physiological stress responses with
individual-, population- and species-level outcomes. The Principal Investigator
anticipates publishing a peer reviewed workshop report. New avenues of research
identified by the workshop participants and disseminated by the report will
provide a blueprint for further study that should have a broad impact on many
scientific fields.