* 1403058
* Molecular Organization and Transport in Synthetic and Biological Nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Igal Szleifer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 386,071.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 1403058&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Szleifer,
Igal&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Molecular Organization and Transport in Synthetic and Biological
Nanopores&lt;br/&gt;NSF RECEIVE DATE: 10/29/2013&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
and synthetic pores and channels of nanoscale dimensions display unique ionic
and protein transport behavior. Nanopores&lt;br/&gt;modified with supramolecular
chemical species (such as polyelectrolyte brushes) have dimensions that are
similar to the range of the&lt;br/&gt;electrostatic interactions, and also to
the molecular size of the tethered macromolecules. In cells, Nuclear Pore
Complexes (NPC)&lt;br/&gt;control the transport of species between the cytoplasm
and the nucleus using disordered proteins as gate keepers. The
competition&lt;br/&gt;between molecular and interaction length scales, as well
as the geometry of the surfaces, creates interesting possibilities for
the&lt;br/&gt;creation of stimuli responsive gates and ion channels and for the
fundamental understanding of the interplay between
molecular&lt;br/&gt;organization, charge, proteins and nanoparticle transport in
nanoconfined environments. The proposed work involves the
development&lt;br/&gt;and application of theoretical approaches that capture the
coupling between molecular organization, physical interactions and
chemical&lt;br/&gt;equilibrium in order to describe the behavior of the
nanopores. Most of the theoretical work will be based on an equilibrium
and&lt;br/&gt;kinetic molecular theory that has been developed in the group of
the PI. Furthermore, comparing the predictions of the molecular&lt;br/&gt;theory
with detailed molecular dynamics simulations (when possible) will check the
range of applicability of the theory. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;work is separated
into two main thrusts: 1) Synthetic nanopores. Understanding how responsive
polymers, bulk solution conditions&lt;br/&gt;and the geometry of the nanopore
affect the structure and transport of nanoparticles, proteins and small ions
through the nanopores.&lt;br/&gt;The types of responsive polymers include: weak
polyelectrolytes, hydrophobic polymers and pH sensitive zwitterionic polymers.
2)&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Pore Complex. Systematic studies of the role that intrinsic
proteins forming the NPC as well as adsorbed proteins have on
the&lt;br/&gt;ability of the pores to gate transport of proteins across the
pore. The proposed work is of fundamental importance in the
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of interfacial properties of responsible materials as
well as transport. Moreover, the proposed work will provide guidelines for
the&lt;br/&gt;design of nanoconfined soft materials with a wide range of
applications in biosensing, charge or proteins separations,
chromatography,&lt;br/&gt;drug delivery and microfluidics among
others.&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of responsive soft materials in confined
environments requires multidisciplinary expertise at the interface
between&lt;br/&gt;materials science, engineering, physics, chemistry and
biology. The proposed work has the dual purpose of: i)
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the coupling between molecular
organization, physical interactions and chemical state in confined soft matter
and ii)&lt;br/&gt;the outcomes of these studies will be used for the molecular
design of responsive coatings that lead to desired transport behavior.
The&lt;br/&gt;study of these complex systems requires the understanding of
equilibrium and time dependent properties. The time dependent
behavior&lt;br/&gt;spans over many orders of magnitude in time. The proposed
work, thus, combines molecular dynamics simulations that are
excellent&lt;br/&gt;for short time scales with time dependent molecular theory
that enables the study of very long times maintaining a molecular
level&lt;br/&gt;description of the mixtures. The continued collaboration with
the experimental group of Prof. Omar Azzaroni (UNLP, Argentina)
and&lt;br/&gt;the theoretical group of Prof. Yitzhak Rabin (Bar-Ilan, Israel)
will provide the theoretical work with realistic checks at all stages of
the&lt;br/&gt;work.&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here will include educational
research experiences for graduate and undergraduate students. The PI plans to
attract&lt;br/&gt;women and underrepresented minorities for this project, as he
has been successful to do it in the past. The PI will use the
resources&lt;br/&gt;from the REU programs administered by Northwestern MRSEC and
by the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute. The main finding&lt;br/&gt;from
this research will be included in the undergraduate and graduate courses taught
by the PI. The findings from the research will be&lt;br/&gt;published in peer-
reviewed journals and will be posted on the PI's web site. The software
developed from this project to apply the&lt;br/&gt;molecular theory to complex
soft materials will be available for download from the PI's web site and will be
aimed for the use by&lt;br/&gt;non-expert due to the multidisciplinary nature of
the potential applications of the proposed work