* 1403293
* Enzymes of Ornithine-Hydroxamate Siderophores
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Audrey Lamb, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2018
* USD 606,000.00

Nearly all bacteria require iron to grow. Understanding the main processes by
which bacteria gain iron provides valuable insight into how to disrupt the iron
uptake process, and potential new strategies to limit growth of infectious
microbes. The focus of this proposal is the biosynthesis of siderophores.
Siderophores are natural materials produced by bacteria that bind iron very
tightly, and facilitate iron uptake by the bacterium. The goal of the proposal
is to figure out how bacteria make these compounds stepwise from simple building
blocks. The research plan aims to understand three of these steps for a specific
siderophore called pyoverdin. Portions of this proposal are structured such that
undergraduate students will obtain meaningful research experiences to inspire
careers in research. This proposal also includes a project to be conducted by a
graduate student, providing training and mentoring of future scientists at the
interface of chemistry and biology. Ongoing programs at the University of Kansas
will aid in the active recruitment of under-represented minorities to
undergraduate research positions. The PI is also an active participant in
mentoring and recruiting students of diversity to graduate programs at the
University of Kansas, and is involved in community outreach to inspire an
interest in science in even the youngest (preschool)
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to Dr. Audrey Lamb of the University
of Kansas by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division
provides funding to investigate the enzymes of hydroxamate siderophore
biosynthesis. The first enzyme under study, the ornithine hydroxylase, is a
class B flavoprotein monooxygenase with interesting properties that make it an
excellent system for crystallographic visualization of the flavin-oxygen
intermediates of the catalytic cycle. The second enzyme to be studied is the
hydroxyornithine formyl-transferase, a putative 10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate-
dependent glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase-like enzyme, for which we
will provide the first biochemical and structural characterizations for this
enzyme class. Finally, in a project driven by undergraduate researchers, we will
study the substrate specificity of the adenylation and condensation domains of
the nonribosomal peptide synthetase PvdJ. This two module NRPS incorporates the
formyl-hydroxyornithine generated by the first two enzymes under study, as well
as a lysine. The experimental approaches include steady state and transient
state kinetics, and x-ray crystallography. The outcomes of this project will
significa ntly advance the understanding of the structure-function relationships
required for catalysis. Furthermore, this proposal is designed to address our
gaps in knowledge regarding flavin chemistry, N-formylation chemistry, and the
formation of bioactive peptides in these three enzyme classes.