* 1403237
* Realizing non-close-packed colloidal crystals using directional-bonding superparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Talid Sinno, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

This proposal uses an innovative approach to make hierarchical materials, the
so-called metamaterials, which hold promise of possessing properties that do not
exist in conventional materials, such as negative refractive-index materials.
These negative-index materials are finding uses in the development of
superlenses (to allow imaging below the diffraction limit), in optical
nanolithography and in other fields, such as for making radar-microwave
absorption (i.e., stealth) materials. They have been successful in developing
novel ways to make the component pieces for metamaterials and seek, in this
proposal, to scale up the process and then determine, with the aid of computer
simulations, how best to assemble the individual pieces into metamaterials.The
PI has a strong record of outreach, developing instructional materials on cell
mechanics and disseminating it via cable television and lecture series to local
high schools, and including underrepresented groups in his research activities.
He has already involved a promising African-American REU student in this work
and will continue to recruit and train underrepresented students under the new
project.

An "inverse self-assembly" approach is proposed by the PI and Co-PI, whereby
they start with a robustly assembled super-structure and then ask what
structured smaller building blocks (clusters) should be used. This problem is
more difficult than it appears because the packing of the clusters have been
shown not to simply depend on the cluster shape, but is rather strongly
influenced by the directional entropic interactions between the particles. The
investigators will use their previously developed colloidal crystal-templating
technique to custom make clusters of defined geometrical packing and will use
simulations to aid in exploring the phase diagram and kinetics of assembling the
clusters into super-structures or metamaterials.