* 1403817
* Biophotonic neural probes for studying the brain's immune response
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 387,376.00

Proposal Number: 1403817&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Roukes, Michael L.&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Biophotonic neural probes for studying the brain's immune
response&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Importance: An award is made to
Caltech to engender new tools for studying the immune response to a brain-
machine interface in small mammals. To develop the next generation of neural
probes for massively parallel stimulation and recording, and facilitate advanced
brain-machine interfaces, we must attain a better understanding of the brain's
immune response to chronic neural implants. The existing state-of-the-art
generally only enables such studies to be performed after an animal has been
sacrificed. The technology developed through this research will merge the latest
advances in nanobiophotonics, implantable neural probes, and state-of-the-art
microfluidics to develop, fabricate, and test next-generation technology that
will enable real-time monitoring of the immunogenic response of the brain to
implanted neural probes, including the ability to perform real-time monitoring
of the use of drug regimens to temper the immune response. The project provides
an exceptional opportunity for training interdisciplinary scientists and
engineers. In broader outreach, the researchers will collaborate with the
Community Science Academy at Caltech to develop an iPAD-facilitated learning
module for K-12 use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The overarching
goal of the 3-year project will be the design and development neurochemical
probes targeted to the detection of cytokines and chemokines in mice and other
small animals. Year 1 will focus on demonstration of detection of targets of
interest at concentrations of physiological relevance (100pg/mL to 10ng/mL) with
photonic micro-ring resonators. Year 2 will focus on the integration of photonic
micro-ring resonators with etched microfluidics with dialysate membranes
appropriate for the detection of specific chemokine and cytokine targets (a
100kDa molecular weight cut-off will be targeted). Year 3 will focus on the
development, fabrication, and calibration of neurochemical probes for use in
vivo. Evaluation and calibration of probes will be performed in 'tissue
phantoms' made from agarose with dissolved chemokines and cytokines. These will
include both targets of interest and potential interferents. We anticipate that
by the end of this effort we will be able to provide at least 10 calibrated
probes to each of the Siapas (Caltech), Tolias (Baylor College of Medicine) and
Laurent (Max Planck Institute for Brain Research) neuroscience research groups
for use in vivo. In this third phase we will also begin design discussions in
the Alliance for Nanosystems VLSI (very-large-scale integration; co-founded by
the PI in 2007) to transfer our Caltech-based fabrication processes to
standardized production en masse within our partner's (CEA/LETI) micro-/nano-
electronics foundry. The graduate student funded by this effort will learn to
employ optical engineering, microfabrication techniques, and neuroscience in
order to produce and employ advanced experimental measurement systems. In
addition to graduate student education, undergraduate students will contribute
to the project through the SURF and MURF (summer- and minority- undergraduate
research) programs at Caltech. The K-12 learning module developed as an outreach
effort in collaboration with the Community Science Academy at Caltech will
include a low-cost, portable, iPAD-interfaced refractometer and demonstration of
total internal reflection for use in Pasadena Unified School District and Los
Angeles Unified School District classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Biophotonics, in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (Engineering
Directorate), and (2) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate).