* 1403144
* GEM:  Dipolarization Fronts and Reconnection Onset in Realistic Models of the Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 329,834.00

The magnetosphere is very dynamic. Magnetospheric substorms occur every few
hours. Viewed from the Earth they are visible as auroral displays. In space one
of the main phenomena associated with magnetospheric substorms is the generation
of dipolarization fronts. These are rapid increases in the component of the
magnetic field normal to the plasma sheet that propagate from the magnetotail
toward the Earth. They are called dipolarization fronts (DFs) since the magnetic
field assumes a more "dipole like" configuration. The most common explanation
for DFs is that they are related to magnetic reconnection. This work is relevant
to other studies of current sheets such as those in planetary magnetospheres,
the solor corona and the solar wind.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to investigate the formation of DFs in realistic tail models. The
team proposes to construct new classes of self-consistent 2D current sheet
equilibria similar to those observed during the growth phase of substorms. They
will investigate their stability to reconnection by using kinetic theory and 2D
particle in cell (PIC) simulations with realistic electron to ion mass ratio.
This will be extended to 3D PIC simulations to investigate the whole spectrum of
tail plasma responses including tearing, ballooning/interchange and flapping
motions. The kinetic picture will be compared with that from global
magnetohydrodynamic models with the goal of including the kinetic physics in the
global models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Applied Physics Laboratory has a
program for summer students to help with the research.