* 1403358
* 2014 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Ludwig Nitsche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2015
* USD 10,000.00

PI: Nitsche, Ludwig Carlos&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET -
1403358&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at Chicago
&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2014 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM)
Conference, University of Illinois at Chicago, June 3-4,
2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant proposal is for support of the 2014 Midwest
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference at the University of
Illinois at Chicago on June 3-4, 2014. This ongoing conference (since 1988) is a
regional forum for scientific presentation and exchange for 104 participants:
graduate students, postdocs, young faculty and undergraduates--many of whom will
be presenting at a major technical meeting for the first time. A distinctive
feature of MTSM is its focus on graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
junior faculty. The overwhelming majority of the contributed talks are given by
either graduate students or, less often, by postdoctoral fellows. In addition,
undergraduate researchers will be invited to attend the meeting and present
their research at a dedicated poster session. For most undergraduates, this will
be their first opportunity to interact in detail with more senior researchers
from other institutions. Recruitment will be facilitated by working with the
Minority Affairs Committee (MAC) of AIChE along with announcements submitted to
the websites of the Society of Women Engineers (SWE), National Society of Black
Engineers (NSBE) and Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE). The
student chapters of these organizations among the Big Ten Plus universities will
also be contacted with a flyer. Thus, this conference represents a serious
effort to recruit interest among underrepresented minorities and also serves a
critical need for ?growing? the future community of researchers in one key area
of the NSF IPT program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamic and materials
properties and the underlying understanding of molecular and meso-scale
mechanisms retain and increase their central importance amid rapid changes in
nanoengineering, biotechnology, and energy resources. While the technical
program will, in significant measure, be shaped by the abstracts contributed by
the various research groups attending,the organizers anticipate forming sessions
around themes of (1) Phase Equilibria, (2) Molecular Simulations, (3)
Thermodynamics of Advanced Materials, and (4) New Developments in Theory.
Applications covered by these headings could include multi-scale modeling,
interfaces and biological membranes, nanotechnology, and biotechnology and drug
delivery.