* 1403084
* Investigation of Nanoscale Thermal Transport Across a Point Constriction In Contact and Within a Sub-10 nm Gap
* ENG,CBET
* 06/30/2013,03/31/2015
* Keunhan Park, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 03/31/2015
* USD 110,093.00

Proposal number: 1067441 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Keunhan Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
recently emerging tip-based thermal applications have realized unprecedented
quality of nanoscale imaging, data storage, and manufacturing, they have also
created strong demands on the fundamental understanding of nanoscale thermal
transport across a point constriction with a nanometer scale gap or in contact.
The spatial resolution of these technologies is determined by the tip- induced
localized temperature distribution. However, direct measurement of nanoscale
thermal transport and local temperature distribution on the substrate has not
been successful mainly due to (1) poor spatial resolution and sensitivity of
currently available thermometers; (2) incapability to precisely control the tip-
substrate distance below 10 nm; and (3) the difficulty in the precise
temperature control of a highly local source and accurate temperature
measurement. Moreover, very few measurement and modeling have considered more
than one heat transfer mechanisms together in in-situ environments where real
applications take place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
fundamentally understand nanoscale thermal energy transport across a point
constriction and resultant non-uniform heated zone of the substrate. To this
end, nanothermometers that have a spatial resolution as small as the tip radius,
i.e., 10&amp;#8722;50 nm will be fabricated and characterized. The local
substrate temperature will be measured with the developed nanothermometer while
the cantilever is precisely controlled in its temperature and tip position
hovering with a sub-10 nm gap. A multiscale model that includes sub-continuum
air conduction, solid conduction at the contact, and near-field radiation will
be developed to understand the physics in tip-based thermal
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The success of this
project will provide the quantitative measurement of nanoscale thermal transport
between a heated tip and substrate across a sub-10 nm air gap and in contact,
and temperature distribution of extremely localized heated zone near the tip.
Proposed nanothermometers will provide a sensing probe size smaller than 50 nm,
fabrication and characterization of which will be well recognized in the thermal
science and engineering community. Systematic approaches on the sub-10 nm gap
control of heated cantilevers will be readily applicable to other AFM-based
metrologies and technologies, such as SThM and nanomanufacturing. In addition,
numerical modeling of coupled nanoscale thermal transport between the tip and
substrate will advance the fundamental understanding of nanoscale heat transfer
across a point constriction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results
from the measurements and simulations will fill in a knowledge gap and provide
timely support for the further advancement of tip-based thermal applications.
The research will provide training opportunities for one graduate student and
undergraduate students, many of whom will be recruited from underrepresented
group of students. To make synergetic effects in nanoscale educations, inter-
institute term projects will be initiated. To encourage K-12 outreach
activities, an AFM built with LEGO blocks will be developed and used in the
SMILE (Science and Mathematics Investigative Learning Experiences) program at
URI. Overall, research and education activities involved in this proposal will
enhance scientific and technological understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning.