* 1403862
* Functional Complex Palladium Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 440,000.00

Non-technical abstract: Magnetic oxide compounds are often made with the
magnetic constituent being drawn from the fourth row of the periodic table, from
what is also referred to as the first transition series. The elements that one
normally associates with magnets, such as iron, are also frequently the chief
components of useful magnetic oxides. In recent years, there has been a growing
recognition that developing new kinds of magnetic materials with elements that
are not from the first transition series can be highly rewarding. With support
of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, this specific project focuses on one member of the second transition
series, the element palladium. While making magnetic oxides of palladium is
highly challenging for a number of technical reasons, the results can be deeply
interesting, both from the fundamental science perspective as well as new
applications. The nature of magnetism that these new materials display changes a
lot of the current thinking on magnetic behavior, and allows for new directions
in magnetic technologies to be opened up. These include applications in magnetic
data storage, novel approaches to magnetic switching, and new generations of
magnets for high-efficiency electric motors and wind turbines.

Technical abstract: The problem addressed in the project is in regard to
functional complex oxide compounds containing divalent palladium ions: Can this
class of materials be significantly expanded, from the few, rare example that
are known. The goals of the project are to develop more examples of magnetic and
magnetodielectric oxide compounds of palladium, and separately, achieve
compositional tuning of palladium compounds across non-metal-to-metal
transitions. Two major challenges need to be overcome to achieve the stated
goals, associated with the oxophobic nature of palladium and the very strong
tendency of palladium ions to adopt the diamagnetic, square-planar configuration
associated with 8 d electrons. The first is simply the difficulty of preparing
and stabilizing oxides containing divalent palladium. Indeed, any effort in this
direction would add to a comparatively small inventory. The second challenge
associated with preparing magnetic palladium oxides is to induce divalent
palladium ions to adopt the kinds of polyhedral coordination that would result
in unpaired spins. The proposed solutions to the challenge of stabilizing
palladium ions in oxides include understanding and employing inductive effects
of electropositive cations to expand the number of known complex palladium
oxides. Electropositive cations "soften" oxygen, and result in stable palladium
oxides with significantly covalent palladium-to-oxygen interactions. The methods
employed for the project will include the use of first-principles calculations
on bulk structures and slab models, carried out concurrently with experimental
efforts, to aid in understanding such inductive stabilization. The use of
microwave heating techniques will aid in the rapid preparation of new compounds
at low enough temperatures that auto-reduction to Pd metal is avoided. The
activity will expand the domain, and enhance understanding of the materials
chemistry and physics of functional palladium oxides, and will inform 4d
magnetism. Insulating 4d magnets have higher ordering temperatures than their 3d
counterparts and are promising for applications including as novel
magnetodielectric materials with relatively high magnetic ordering temperatures.