* 1403447
* GOALI:Tradeoffs in Heat Dissipation and Optical Performance at Plasmonic Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* John Duda, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 340,087.00

CBET-1403447&lt;br/&gt;Malen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GOALI
partnership between Carnegie-Melon University (CMU) and and Seagate Technology
makes the research directly applicable to development of new technologies in the
data storage industry. The next generation of high-density storage will be
enabled by laser-excited near field transducers (NFTs) that focus
electromagnetic energy onto thermally-activated nanometer-scale magnetic bits.
Heat fluxes in excess of 100 times that present at the sun's surface at the
functional end of an NFT can result in excessive operating temperatures. Similar
limitations pervade plasmonics used for chemical catalysis, bio-sensing, and
steam generation. Further, the proposed in-situ measurement of the interface
temperature will enable entirely new metrology of plasmonic structures, and
represents a step towards near field thermoreflectance metrology. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities will expose students to industry-driven
academic research through curriculum development, guest lectures and seminars,
and potential internships at Seagate. Seagate, in turn, will receive exposure at
CMU through integration of the research topics and results within courses taught
by the academic PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this GOALI
proposal is to experimentally study tradeoffs in heat dissipation and optical
performance at plasmonic interfaces modified by nanoscale adhesion layers. The
interdisciplinary research team will study the nature of plasmonic resonance,
electron-phonon coupling, and phonon transmission in metal-dielectric interfaces
with metal adhesion layers. Open scientific questions include: how do adhesion
layers influence the physics of phonon transmission across a metal-dielectric
interface and plasmonic resonance at the interface? Can the temperature
dependence of plasmonic resonance be used to make in-situ measurements of
interface temperature and thermal properties? To answer these questions, the
research will investigate transport in prototypical Au/SiO2 and Au/AlN plasmonic
interfaces with Cu, Ti, Al, Cr, and Be adhesion layers as a function of
thickness from 1-5 nm. Relative to Au, these metals have successively better
electron-phonon coupling and vibrational alignment with the dielectrics. Thin
film samples will be sputtered and imaged by TEM. Thermal interface conductance
will be measured using two independent pump-probe thermoreflectance techniques.
Plasmonic response in waveguides incorporating the adhesion layers will be
measured with near-field scanning optical microscopy. A novel in-situ pump-probe
measurement of the thermal properties and temperature of the metal-dielectric
interface will be developed.