* 1403301
* Modulating the Mechanical and Biological Properties of Hybrid Decellularized Adipose Extracellular Matrix Biomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Gimble Jeffrey, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 274,701.00

1403301 &lt;br/&gt;Hayes, Daniel &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bone tissue from active,
healthy, and relatively young subjects is not routinely available for harvest
and donation. As the pool of potential donors remains limited to patients at end
of life with its associated infirmities, access to and availability of off-the-
shelf, low cost, readily accessible and procurable human tissue-derived donor
materials that can accelerate and promote bone repair for craniofacial, dental,
orthopaedic, and plastic/reconstructive surgical procedures will remain a
challenge for clinicians. As an alternative subcutaneous adipose tissue provides
a readily accessible source of human donor material as many healthy individuals
electively seek out plastic and reconstructive surgery to remove unwanted tissue
via liposuction or abdominoplasty. While subcutaneous adipose provides a large
volume of human donor material, potentially suited to many applications in
regenerative medicine, the application to bone repair is currently limited by
its lack of suitable mechanical and biological properties. To address this issue
a process for adipose tissue decelluralization and chemical modification has
been developed to provide a biologically active extra cellular matrix (ECM) with
tunable mechanical properties. This project will explore the suitability of this
material to support bone tissue growth and repair, both ex-vivo and in a mouse
model as a function of the material crosslinking and mechanical
stiffness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acellular ECM from adipose tissue has been
demonstrated to accelerate the regeneration of soft tissues but a lack of
predictable mechanical properties and integrity in vivo limit the application of
these types of material for orthopaedic reconstruction. This project will
address the need for a high volume, clinically available allogenic material for
use in musculoskeletal reconstruction. As a primary objective the project will
demonstrate that hybrid synthetic-acellular adipose ECM (adECM) biodegradable
scaffolds have the potential to provide control over mechanical and biological
properties modulating progenitor and stem cell fate. A secondary objective is
establishing lipoaspirates from living donors as a potential allograft resource
for repair of bone and related tissues. This research will provide critical
insight into: (1) the role of substrate mechanics in stromal/stem cell
differentiation and function; (2) mechanical characteristics, structural
integrity and biodegradability of hybrid scaffolds with respect to ECM content;
(3) pre-clinical utility of adECM and synthetic hybrids in bone regeneration
using a murine spinal fusion model. In the proposed system, a well-described
base catalyzed thiol-acrylate Michael addition will provide the basis for the
hybrid synthetic/adECM hydrogel. This system provides for scaffolds with a wide
range of mechanical properties but nearly identical chemical composition. The
detailed research tasks of the project are: (1) determine the mechanical
properties and integrity of hybrid synthetic/adECM scaffolds with respect to
adECM content. (2) Correlate hybrid adECM scaffold composition and mechanical
properties with the fate and behavior of adipose derived stromal/stem cells
(ASC), bone marrow derived MSC (BMSC) or stromal vascular fraction (SVF) in
vitro. (3) Determine the osteogenic properties of hybrid adECM to repair a
murine spinal fusion model in vivo either alone or in combination with ASC, BMSC
or SVF.