* 1403036
* Neuroprotective Engineering Based on Innate Responses to Stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* John Troy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,922.00

PI: Liu, Shu Q. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403036 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Neuroprotective Engineering Based on
Innate Responses to Stroke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stroke is a prevalent disorder
commonly caused by arterial plaques that block blood flow to the brain,
resulting in brain injury, depression, mental retardation, and/or paralysis. The
injured brain is often associated with bone-like structure formation, known as
brain calcification, a process disrupting the brain structure and intensifying
brain injury. To date, it remains poorly understood how stroke causes brain
calcification and there are few approaches effective for prevention of brain
calcification. In this application, the investigators intend to elucidate the
role of a cell membrane-associated family of calcium-carrying molecules known as
annexins in the induction of brain calcification in a mouse model of stroke.
These molecules may move from the cell membrane to the intracellular contractile
filaments when brain cells are injured to cause calcium deposition or
calcification, as these molecules carry calcium ions. The investigators have
discovered a liver-produced molecule known as trefoil factor 3 that potentially
protects the injured brain from calcification by blocking annexin deposition.
The significance of this discovery is that trefoil factor 3 may be potentially
used as a drug to prevent brain calcification and injury in patients with
stroke. In this project, the investigators will develop an engineering strategy
for boosting trefoil factor 3 production in a mouse model of stroke by delivery
of the trefoil factor 3 gene or protein and test the efficacy of the engineering
approach for brain protection against annexin-dependent calcification. If
successful, trefoil factor 3 can be produced by a biotechnology approach and
applied to human patients with stroke to prevent brain calcification, thereby
reducing brain injury and functional deficits. This effort may potentially lead
to a reduction in stroke-induced human morbidity and mortality. In addition to
these scientific aspects, the investigators will devote efforts to establish a
new undergraduate education model integrating independent research into lecture
topics. This form of education will allow students to understand scientific
concepts from hands-on experience and to be more engaged in cutting-edge
research, enhancing students creativity and capability of solving real-world
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebral ischemia or ischemic stroke is a
prevalent disorder commonly caused by cerebral artery thrombosis and/or
atherosclerosis, resulting in cerebral injury and neurological deficits
including depression, mental retardation, and/or paralysis. Ischemic stroke is
often associated with cerebral calcification or hydroxyapatite deposition, a
process disrupting neuronal structure and intensifying cerebral injury. To date,
the mechanisms of cerebral calcification remain elusive and few approaches have
been established for protecting the cerebrum from calcification. The
investigators have found that a cell membrane-associated family of calcium-
carrying molecules known as annexins may translocate from the cell membrane to
the cytoskeletal microfilaments in ischemic neurons to facilitate hydroxyapatite
formation. Furthermore, a liver-produced endocrine molecule known as trefoil
factor 3 (TFF3) is upregulated in response to stroke, potentially protecting the
ischemic cerebrum from calcification by blocking annexin deposition. In the
proposed research, the investigators intend to achieve three aims: (1) evaluate
the role of annexins A2, A3, and A5 in ischemic cerebral calcification and
injury; (2) assess the role of TFF3 in protection of the ischemic cerebrum from
annexin-dependent calcification and injury; and (3) establish neuroprotective
engineering strategies based on the mechanisms of TFF3 action for maximizing
protection against cerebral calcification in stroke. In a mouse model of
ischemic stroke, the role of annexins will be evaluated by using siRNA-mediated
loss-of-annexin and recombinant annexin-based gain-of-annexin approaches; the
anti-calcification role of TFF3 will be tested by using a TFF3-/- mouse model
with or without recombinant TFF3 administration; and the role of TFF3 in
interference with annexin binding to neuronal micro-filaments will be assessed
by molecular binding assays in the presence or absence of TFF3. Protective
engineering approaches will be established based on TFF3 gene transfection and
controlled TFF3 protein delivery technologies to boost TFF3 expression following
ischemic stroke. These investigations will provide a foundation for
understanding the mechanisms of ischemic cerebral calcification and establishing
engineering technologies for protection against ischemic cerebral calcification
and injury, thus potentially reducing stroke-induced human morbidity and
mortality.