* 1403725
* Precision Measurements on Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Edmund Myers, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,187.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The Florida State University cryogenic
Penning trap mass spectrometer is currently the world's most precise apparatus
for measuring atomic masses (more colloquially, for "weighing atoms"). The mass
of an atom is a basic property and so atomic masses have many important
applications in chemistry and physics. In particular, because of the equivalence
of energy and mass (through "E = mc2"), atomic mass differences determine the
energy released in nuclear reactions. Although many atomic masses have already
been precisely measured, there are several scientifically important applications
where measurements at still higher precision are required. These applications
include determining the mass of the neutrino, an extremely light and weakly
interacting fundamental particle that pervades the universe. For years it was
believed that the neutrino had no mass. We now know this not to be the case, and
this new knowledge raises fundamental questions concerning the origin and
structure of the universe. The project also provides training for student and
post-doctoral researchers who are likely to make careers in academe, industry or
national laboratories, hence contributing to the scientifically trained
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Three of the
measurements we propose will provide atomic mass differences, or nuclear
Q-values, that will be used to test systematics in other projects that seek to
set upper limits on the mass of the electron anti-neutrino from low energy beta-
decays. These are measurements of the 3T-3He mass difference for the ongoing,
very-large-scale tritium beta-decay spectrometer KATRIN; and the mass
differences 187Re-187Os and 163Ho-163Dy, for projects that will use micro-
calorimeter beta-decay spectrometers. Other measurements on light ions will
reduce the uncertainty of the atomic mass of the proton. Another mass
difference, 35Cl-36Cl, will enable a check of precision gamma-ray metrology.
Measurements of the atomic masses of 40,48Ca are also planned, to enable ongoing
precision g-factor measurements of 40,48Ca19+ to test relativistic atomic theory
for the g-factor of hydrogen-like ions and to probe the dependence on nuclear
structure. The measurements will consist of ratios of cyclotron frequencies of
pairs of ions in the 8.5 tesla magnetic field of the FSU Penning trap mass
spectrometer. Unique features of this spectrometer include the ability to make
and isolate, in the Penning trap, a single ion of nearly any element; phase-
coherent detection of the axial motion of an ion, via image currents, using a
high-Q super-conducting tuned-circuit coupled to a dc-SQUID; and measurement of
the ion's cyclotron frequency by mapping evolved cyclotron phase onto axial
motion using an rf pi-pulse at the cyclotron-to-axial coupling frequency.
Cyclotron frequency noise due to variation in the magnetic field is reduced by
trapping both ions in the pair simultaneously.