* 1403550
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological and evolutionary dynamics in temporally autocorrelated landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* David Vasseur, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,645.00

Uncertainty about how species respond to changing environmental conditions is
exacerbated by human growth and development, which is increasing the
fragmentation of natural landscapes all over the world. This project combines a
new theoretical approach to environmental variation in space and time with
experimental manipulation of habitat fragmentation to examine extinction risk at
large spatial scales. It challenges current understanding of the relationship
between environmental variation and extinction risk by providing a more
realistic spatio-temporal context for ecological processes. When environmental
change is similar, or correlated, among discrete populations that are separated
spatially, this change can synchronize population fluctuations, enhancing the
risk of extinction. The investigators have recently demonstrated that
differences among populations in the degree of environmental correlations reduce
population synchrony. This project will test these novel findings using
laboratory experiments that vary dispersal rates and environmental dynamics in
discrete populations of protists and bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance the training of a promising doctoral student. The research
also provides unique opportunities for young scientists for cross-disciplinary
training in mathematics and experimental ecology through an ongoing after-school
program run by the Yale University Peabody Museum. Simultaneously, the doctoral
student will gain experience mentoring these younger, incipient researchers. The
investigators will also develop an on-line demonstration that uses results from
this research to explain the relationships between environmental change and
population responses to this change. The demonstration will allow general users
to manipulate factors such as growth rate, dispersal rate, and environmental
change to understand the effects they have on population dynamics.