* 1403396
* Synthetic Gauge Fields in Quantum Gases of Dysprosium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Benjamin Lev, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 444,990.00

This research project explores uncharted regimes of 'strongly correlated matter'
(matter which behaves notably differently from what one would expect based on
knowledge gained by studying only the constituents in isolation) by pushing the
experimental state-of-the-art in atomic physics, quantum optics, and condensed
matter physics. In addition, the group actively collaborates with theoretical
groups to develop frameworks for understanding these novel tools and complex
systems. The project focuses on the diversity of quantum many-body phases that
may arise from the unusual properties of the element dysprosium under the
influence of specialized excitation by laser radiation. This program will build
the experimental capability to seek these phases using the successful machine
assembled under a prior NSF CAREER grant for laser cooling and trapping
dysprosium. The research concerns physics and technical skills that find
application in a variety of significant areas of technology, most notably lasers
and photonics for telecommunications and advanced novel solid-state materials
for electronic devices. The research provides opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate student education in a state-of-the-art laser lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several groups have realized a synthetic magnetic field
using alkali atoms either in traps or in optical lattices as well as one-
dimensional spin-orbit coupling. Spin-orbit coupling in a Bose gas can lead to
superfluid phases with stripe order and a rich phase diagram. These achievements
announce an exciting new frontier for exploring quantum many-body physics in
quantum gases, connecting to existing phenomena and challenges in condensed
matter systems. The group aspires to pursue brand-new phenomena barely, or
perhaps not at all, realizable in the solid state by employing high-spin quantum
gases of dysprosium atoms. Dysprosium (Dy) offers several advantages for
realizing unusual, strongly correlated states and exotic spinor phases beyond
those phases widely discussed in the context of utilizing dysprosium?s large
magnetic dipole moment. The large spin and narrow optical transitions of Dy
atoms should allow for the generation of synthetic magnetic fields one order of
magnitude larger than those in the alkalis, but with considerable reduction of
the heating rate. Consequently, creating quantum Hall states in Dy may be more
practicable than in the currently employed alkali atoms.