* 1403160
* Cold Atoms, Cold Molelcules, and Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Thomas Bergeman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,000.00

An understanding of nature, and of physical processes, proceeds most fruitfully
when there are correlated theoretical predictions and experimental results. This
theoretical and computational work builds on experimental advances achieved in
the last 15 to 20 years, in exploitation of laser cooling of atoms. An ensemble
of bosons, at cold enough temperature, can occupy just the lowest quantum state,
producing Bose-Einstein condensation, while two fermions cannot be in the same
quantum state. However, in one-dimension, if the density is low enough, both
boson and fermion ensembles collide without penetration. As pointed out by M.
Girardeau in 1960, in this regime bosons behave like fermions. Predictions and
experiments could test theoretical models and thereby extend the understanding
of cold atom dynamics in effective one-dimensional confinement. The second part
of the proposed work relates to current efforts to develop experimental methods
beyond those used for atoms, to simple molecules. The usual experimental
approach is to start with cold atoms, induce them to combine in a magnetic field
("Feshbach resonance states"), then excite these loosely bound molecules into
higher states of different electronic structure which can then decay into the
lowest molecular vibrational-rotational quantum state, with minimal
translational energy. This production method requires an accurate knowledge of
molecular energy levels so as to know where to tune the lasers. This group's
work has been to supply that data to find the optimum pathway for production of
cold NaK molecules from cold sodium (Na) and potassium (K) atoms. This work is
relevant to a broad range of areas including quantum information science and
chemical reactions at ultracold energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will
study one-dimensional ensembles of fermions and bosons in one-dimension in the
low density regiem. Recent experiments have tested theoretical models for
oscillation frequencies of atomic ensembles in harmonic potentials under various
conditions. This theory will be extended by performing calculations for the
behavior of atomic ensembles over a range of densities when there is a central
potential barrier, giving a "double-well" potential. In the cold atom regime
when quantum wavefunctions extend so as to penetrate a possible barrier, there
can be quantum tunneling through the barrier. But this will depend on the atomic
density, which determines the extent to which the atom ensemble resembles either
extreme limit of bosons or fermions. Because the intermediate cases present
rather complicated situations, predictions and experiments could test
theoretical models and thereby extend the understanding of cold atom dynamics in
effective one-dimensional confinement. For bosons, the time-dependent Gross-
Pitaevskii equation has successfully modeled dynamical behavior in a wide range
of conditions. For fermions, a determinantal wavefunction with one particle in
each basis state has been used, as in atomic theory. Dynamics calculations in
effective one-dimensional (1D) potentials intermediate between bosonic and
fermionic limits have been pursued only in special cases, such as a pure
harmonic potential. Recent time-independent matrix diagonalization approaches to
dynamical processses will be adapted. To extend the range of applications of
theory for cold atoms in 1D, it is also worth considering hydrodynamic
approaches without the usual simplification of small departures from
equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current work on the production of cold
molecules via Feshbach resonance states has been limited primarily to molecules
composed of potassium and rubidium. These atoms react on collision to make
potassium and rubidium molecules. Molecules composed of sodium and potassium do
not have this problem, so methods to produce cold NaK are being pursued in
several laboratories. This work has been and will continue to have the goal of
analyzing available spectroscopic data to accurately model a large number of
possible intermediate molecular energy levels to select the optimum pathway for
production of cold NaK molecules from cold Na and K atoms. This approach to
diatomic molecular energy structure employs direct fits of experimental data to
energy levels computed from numerical potentials and spin-orbit coupling
functions. This is in contrast to the traditional Dunham expansions over
vibrational and rotational parameters, which are quite satisfactory for
unperturbed states, but which cannot easily be used to characterize singlet-
triplet perturbation effects. This approach is motivated by the fact that
singlet-triplet mixing is crucial in the stepwise formation of singlet cold
molecules from typically triplet Feshbach resonance states.