* 1403433
* Experiments on Turbulence-Chemistry Interaction in Highly Turbulent Counterflow Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Alessandro Gomez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Proposal: 1403433&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gomez, Alessandro&lt;br/&gt;Title: Experiments
on Turbulence-Chemistry Interaction in Highly Turbulent Counterflow
Flames&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on understanding how energy
transfers occur in flames that are seen in practical burners such as power
plants and jet engines. A model flame, established by using the so-called
counterflow burner, serves the purpose for investigation in a university
laboratory, aiming to translate the knowledge gained into practical burner
systems. Advanced laser-based tools will be used in conjunction with a high-
speed camera to visualize phenomena that are not seen by regular cameras and
human eyes and that are of significance for understanding these flames. The
proposed research is leveraged with collaborations with Sandia National
Laboratory and Cornell University, where computer modeling of these flames will
be pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will focus on the
assessment of the energy transfer across scales in highly turbulent counter-flow
flames. Turbulent kinetic energy is generated at large scales, transferred down
in a cascade over a broad range of scales and eventually dissipated at the
smallest scale. Highly turbulent counter-flow flames will be used as a benchmark
configuration for this type of systematic experimentation. They offer
significant advantages, such as: flame stabilization without a pilot at high
Reynolds numbers; compactness, with significant advantages for highly resolved
computations; and versatility, with the ability to access a broad range of
combustion regimes, especially those of industrial relevance. The objective is
to quantify this energy transfer and contrast it in the non-reacting case with
the reacting counterparts, under both non-premixed and premixed conditions. A
filter-space technique will be applied to a three-dimensional set of velocity
measurements. After initial tests at Yale to identify the most interesting
flames, the bulk of the measurements will be performed at Sandia National
Laboratories by relying on a newly acquired facility for high-speed imaging that
will provide simultaneous tomographic PIV and planar laser-induced fluorescence
measurements at high repetition rates. The proposed research is leveraged with
collaborations with Sandia and Cornell University, where modeling of these
flames will be pursued. The proposed activity also has a computational component
developed at Cornell that is validated using these experimental data. The high
quality database, including well-characterized boundary conditions, will be made
available on the web to the combustion community for further modeling within the
framework of ongoing international collaborations.