* 1403660
* Enhanced Optogenetic Control of Neuronal Activity with Tailored Light Stimuli
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Stephen Boppart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Number: 1403660 P.I.: Boppart, Stephen A. Title: Enhanced Optogenetic
Control of Neuronal Activity with Tailored Light Stimuli

Non-Technical Explanation

Significance:

This project will investigate how new forms of light may enhance the electrical
output and control of neurons that have been genetically modified to be light-
sensitive. Optogenetics is a rapidly developing field that uses molecular
biology techniques to enable cellular functions to be controlled with light.
When neurons (nerve cells) are genetically modified to express a light-activated
membrane channel, they can be made to trigger electrical activity when exposed
to light. This new level of light-activated control over neuronal activity has
yet to be fully exploited, but is offering new opportunities for understanding
how neurons and their electrical circuits function within the brain to form
thoughts, memories, behaviors, and emotions. In optical science and engineering,
advances now make it possible to generate a wide range of new forms of light
with customized properties, or what is called tailored light. This research is
highly significant and important for the fields of neuroscience and
biophotonics. Biophotonics is the science of how light interacts with biological
cells and tissues, and neuroscientists seek to understand how the brain and mind
work. The new optical sources for generating tailored light in this project will
change the way in which we use optogenetics to investigate and understand the
function of neurons, neural circuits, and the brain. This project is also highly
interdisciplinary, and will provide a unique educational and training
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to help them solve the
complex interdisciplinary problems in engineering and biology in the future.
Results from this research will also be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate courses in biophotonics, neuroscience, and advanced microscopy. The
long-term societal benefits of this research will include raising the public's
scientific literacy of how neurons and neural circuits in our brain function,
and how new types of light and lasers can be used to probe the complex functions
of our brain.

Technical Description

Optogenetics is a rapidly expanding field, and one that originated out of the
field of neuroscience, where genetic modifications to mammalian neurons enabled
photo-activated control of membrane channels to elicit action potentials. While
this concept has provided a unique toolkit for exploring neuroscience questions
and envisioning new medical science applications, there have been relatively few
advances or contributions to optogenetics from the fields of optical science and
engineering. This proposal addresses this gap by using advanced optical sources
and precise control over the optical properties of the light stimuli to enhance
the neural control in optogenetics.

The innovation of this research project is the ability to generate new forms of
tailored light, and apply this light as new forms of stimuli to excite,
modulate, and control the output of optogenetically-modified neurons in new
ways. Conceivably, it is much more practical to modify and control the light
stimulus than to genetically modify the biological properties of cells and
tissues. As optogenetics advances to in vivo applications, this practical
advantage will be even more significant. Therefore, our hypothesis is that by
precisely controlling the spectral, temporal, and spatial parameters of novel
tailored light stimuli, it is possible to provide enhanced modulation and
control of the electrical output activity of optogenetically-modified neurons.
To prove our hypothesis, our research plan will be guided by three objectives.
First, we will construct an optical stimulus and microscope system to generate
these new forms of tailored light. Second, we will optically stimulate and
electrically/optically record from cultured hippocampal neurons that have been
genetically modified to express Channelrhodopsin-2, a light-gated membrane ion
channel, to investigate how tailored light stimuli alters the electrical output
and activity from these cells. Third, we will implement an optical feedback
system that will measure the optical response of the neurons and adjust the
light stimuli parameters to optimize, modulate, and control the electrical
output.

The successful outcome of this research project will have far-reaching impact in
not only the field of biophotonics, but also in neuroscience and optical science
and engineering. Just as optogenetics is expected to make a broad impact in
neuroscience, as well as medical science, this research will potentially have an
even greater and more rapid impact because it will conceivably be more practical
to tailor the light stimulus than to modify the biology to enhance the
optogenetic control in the future.

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Biophotonics, in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate), and (2) Instrument Development for Biological
Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate).