* 1403245
* Excitation and Ionization in Atomic Collision Processes -- General Theory and Accurate Numerical Calculations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

The project studies the interaction of light (mostly lasers) and charged
particles (mostly electrons) with atoms, ions, and small molecules. The results
are of importance for the understanding of the fundamental collision dynamics,
and they also fulfill the urgent practical need for accurate atomic data to
model the physics of stars, plasmas, lasers, and planetary atmospheres. The
short-pulse intense-laser part of the project deals with accurate solutions of
the time-dependent Schroedinger equation on a numerical space-time grid. With
the rapid advances currently seen in computational resources, such studies for
realistic rather than idealized model systems have only become possible in
recent years. This work is important for further developments in imaging and
ultimately controlling of submicroscopic reactions, which is expected to have
broad impact by reaching out from physics to chemistry and ultimately biology.
Many experimental efforts worldwide are supported through the present project,
which will also train a post-doctoral associate and a number of research
students in the basic understanding of the problem and the use of highly
sophisticated numerical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the numerical
calculations will be based upon the non-perturbative R-matrix (close-coupling)
method, as well as direct solutions of the time-dependent Schroedinger equation
using various grid-based approaches and basis-function expansions. For single
and double ionization of complex atoms by intense atto/femto-second laser
pulses, the methods will be combined in such a way that individual parts of the
"big problem" can be treated in highly efficient and optimized ways. This
strategy will be extended to the treatment of double ionization involving inner
shells as well as diatomic molecules. Of particular interest will be the highly
challenging, but ultimately necessary simultaneous treatment of the nuclear and
electronic motion. There are major difficulties associated with both the
formulation of the problem and the subsequent numerical treatment. Much emphasis
will be placed on the testing of numerical methods and the visualization of the
results, both of which are ideal for student involvement.