* 1403527
* Representation Theory,  Cluster algebras, and Canonical Bases
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Arkady Berenstein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2017
* USD 168,281.00

The PI plans to conduct research in an area of mathematics at the interface of
the representation theory of Lie algebras and quantum groups, cluster algebras,
and noncommutative algebraic geometry. The representation theory of Lie algebras
and quantum groups is a dynamically developing field of modern mathematics. It
has had a large impact in other areas of mathematics, as well as in physics. A
central theme of this proposal is to understand and investigate the properties
of canonical and crystal bases, which endow certain fundamental algebras (such
as quantized enveloping algebras) with an additional structure that has proven
to be fruitful for understanding these algebras and their realizations as
matrices. Understanding the relationship between these bases and closely related
structures, such as totally positive varieties, geometric crystals, and cluster
algebras, and their quantum and totally noncommutative analogues, is a unifying
theme of this proposal.

In one project the PI proposes a new approach to the study of Hecke algebras
based on the discovery of some new Hopf algebras: the Hecke-Hopf algebras which
contain Hecke algebras and co-act on them at the same time. The new information
resulting from this study allows for the construction of new solutions to the
quantum Yang-Baxter equation. Another project in the proposal is to explore new
bases in quantized enveloping algebras which possess remarkable properties such
as braid group action and the compatibility with Joseph's decomposition of the
quantized enveloping algebras. These new bases are expected to settle the
problem of decomposing endomorphism algebras of representations and to help
explicitly compute the center of the ambient algebra. New information resulting
from this study will be applied to constructing new quantum and noncommutative
cluster structures and to the proof of the quantum Gelfand-Kirillov conjecture
for those algebras.