* 1403004
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: A Low-cost and Non-invasive Method for Personalized Cardiovascular Health Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ramakrishna Mukkamala, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,432.00

This project develops a low-cost and non-invasive method that can help in
assessing cardiovascular health and disease by deriving personalized
cardiovascular risk predictors. Cardiovascular disease remains a major source of
morbidity and mortality in the United States and around the world. The developed
methods can be widely used to improve cardiovascular risk stratification and
thereby reduce the incidence of stroke and heart disease. This project provides
new opportunities for technological advances in pervasive and personalized
medicine, which can ultimately improve the quality of life of human beings. This
project also impacts education by developing new multi-disciplinary course
modules and encouraging minority students to participate in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research derives a methodological framework
to infer cardiovascular risk predictors from the analysis of blood volume
waveform signals measured by low-cost and non-invasive modalities such as
oscillometric cuff oscillations. In this framework, model-based adaptive signal
processing methods analyze blood volume waveform signals measured at peripheral
locations on the body to derive personalized blood pressure waveform signals.
Then, cardiovascular risk predictors are derived from a model-based analysis of
these blood pressure and volume waveform signals. The research work includes:
(1) deriving mathematical models that dictate the relation between blood
pressure versus volume waveform signals; (2) deriving adaptive signal processing
methods that transform blood volume waveform signals to blood pressure waveform
signals; and 3) deriving methods that compute cardiovascular risk predictors
from blood pressure and volume waveform signals. This project makes
contributions to the derivation of a unified framework for mathematical modeling
of the relation between blood pressure and volume waves. It also contributes to
the advancement of adaptive signal processing methodologies relevant to
physiological system modeling and health monitoring.