* 1403077
* SusChEM: Engineering and Evolution of Cytochrome P450 Enzymes for Non-Natural Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Frances Arnold, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 345,000.00

1403077&lt;br/&gt;Arnold, Frances H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A future chemicals
industry that is sustainable and environmentally friendly will make increasing
use of biological processes to convert both renewable and fossil resources to
useful chemicals. To date, the use of engineered microbes to produce fuels and
chemicals has depended on reassembling existing enzymes into biosynthetic
pathways. Unfortunately, many desired products fall outside the reach of the
rather limited set of known enzyme-catalyzed transformations or can be made more
efficiently using synthetic chemistry. Thus, a future where metabolic
engineering might produce nearly all of the organic molecules upon which society
depends is still a ways off. Progress in biological production will depend on
our ability to genetically encode new catalysts. The goal of this research is to
create new cyclopranation catalysts by engineering of a natural enzyme, a
bacterial cytochrome P450. Preliminary results indicate that this is possible -
the newly-discovered cyclopropanation reaction will be optimized and expanded
using modern protein engineering techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic
innovations in nature are rare events and difficult to observe. It is also
difficult to discover entirely new activities in the laboratory by evolutionary
methods designed to mimic nature. Recently, however, the PI's lab at Caltech
used chemical intuition to jumpstart the process and discover that variants of
cytochrome P450-BM3 are efficient catalysts of formal carbene transfers when
provided with appropriate synthetic reagents. This highly desirable non-natural
activity could be increased significantly using semi-rational mutagenesis based
on knowledge of the P450 structure and catalytic mechanism. Additional avenues
of investigation are needed to continue improving these catalysts and to
discover new ones. A three-tiered strategy has been designed to test specific
hypotheses regarding improvements while also allowing for evolutionary
innovation. Specifically, (i) the effect of heme redox potential on non-natural
reactivity will be investigated, with the expectation that achieving more
oxidizing redox potentials will increase reactivity; (ii) key conserved residues
will be examined by determining the effect of mutations on kinetic parameters
and overall turnover levels. (3) a true evolutionary strategy will be employed
to optimize non-natural activity using a novel high-throughput cyclopropanation
screen and identify and characterize beneficial mutations. This research will
both explore and explain the evolutionary potential of this important new enzyme
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division and by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.