* 1403950
* Novel Nanostructured Membranes for Gas Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Ferraris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 398,492.00

Ferraris, John &lt;br/&gt;1403950 &lt;br/&gt;Novel Nanostructured Membranes for
Gas Separations &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer membranes for gas pair separations
exhibit an inverse relationship between gas selectivity and gas flux. Maximizing
both would be a significant advance. The idea of combining the selective
separation properties of porous inorganic materials with the processability of
polymers has resulted in several advances. Nevertheless, it appears that the
performance of such membranes has reached a plateau, and a new approach will be
needed to achieve a revolutionary breakthrough in membrane-based gas
separations. The PIs have discovered that membranes constructed from otherwise
immiscible polymers can be engineered at the nanoscale through the addition of
small amounts of porous nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
limitation with current mixed matrix membranes (MMMs) for gas separations is
their low gas flux, primarily due to the membrane thickness (&gt;several tens of
micrometers) that is required to accommodate the porous additives. Colloidal
ZIFs with particle diameters of &lt;60 nm will enable the selective polymer
layer to be submicrometer in thickness, and the matrix-droplet geometry will
increase the interfacial surface area by 50 to 100X compared to a layer-by-layer
morphology, greatly increasing flux while maintaining superior permselectivity.
In order to fully utilize this novel membrane architecture, a thorough
understanding of the thermodynamic and kinetic factors that control the
structure will also be researched. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining the selective
separation properties of inorganic molecular sieves with the processability of
polymers to form mixed-matrix membranes (MMMs) has resulted in several advances
including the incorporation of porous additives such as metal organic frameworks
(MOFs) and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs). The organic-inorganic hybrid
nature of these additives has afforded improved interfacial contact with the
polymer matrix, enabling very high loadings in the MMMs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a unique membrane architecture comprising
blends of otherwise immiscible polymers that can be engineered at the nanoscale
through the addition of small amounts of ZIFs. By choosing component materials
with appropriate interfacial/surface tensions, the ZIF nanoparticles localize at
the interface between the polymers. This has the advantage of compatibilizing
high performance immiscible polymers thus greatly expanding the number of
polymer combinations that can be utilized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop membranes comprising thin, continuous ribbons of a highly
selective polymer embedded in a discontinuous matrix of a second, highly
permeable polymer, somewhat akin to the marbling in USDA Prime Beef. Such
architectures will significantly improve the performance of membranes,
especially by increasing flux and selectivity at lower additive loadings, thus
reducing cost. This project on energy and the environment includes numerous
tasks that will lead to the integration of research and multilevel education in
the area of membrane science and novel nanomaterials. The replacement of energy
intensive separations with membranes could result in economic savings. This
level of structural control could also be potentially useful for fuel cell
applications and other separations. Additionally, the strong educational
component coinciding with the research activities will engage students at both
the graduate and undergraduate levels, as well as students from underrepresented
groups and women. The skills acquired by students during this project will
enhance their preparation for careers in membrane engineering, nanotechnology,
energy, and materials science. We are also committed to high school student
research experiences and we anticipate that this project will also impact the
community at large by educating our high school teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIGNATURE
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Name: Rosemarie D. Wesson &lt;br/&gt;Title: Program
Director &lt;br/&gt;Program: Chemical and Biological Separations
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DATE: April 2014