* 1403086
* Cell-cell adhesion and stem cell fate commitment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Stelios Andreadis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 11/30/2018
* USD 451,130.00

PI: Andreadis, Stelios T. Proposal Number: 1403086 Institution: SUNY at Buffalo
Title: Cell-cell adhesion and stem cell fate commitment

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have significant potential as a cell source for
cellular therapies. Although the role of many soluble factors and extracellular
matrix molecules in MSC differentiation has been examined, the role of cell-cell
interactions remains unexplored. This project is based on an innovative research
plan to understand the role of cell-cell interactions in stem cell
differentiation and to develop novel strategies to tune stem cell fate decisions
by controlling the extent of cell-to-cell adhesion. In addition to addressing
basic scientific questions, the proposed work will enable design of strategies,
biomaterials and devices to control stem cell differentiation with applications
in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine and potentially also to cancer.
The proposed research will be integrated with educational and outreach
activities involving high school students, undergraduate students with emphasis
on students from underrepresented minorities, and will incorporate research
findings in coursework curricula and in distance-learning modules in a program
established by the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University at
Buffalo to provide the New York State industry and graduate students with
advanced engineering instruction.

The goal of the proposed work is to employ novel engineering technologies and a
multi-prong strategy to improve the understanding of the role of cell-to-cell
adhesion in stem cell fate decisions. Differentiation of MSCs is affected by
many soluble and insoluble signals in the local microenvironment. In addition to
soluble growth factors, cell-extracellular matrix interactions and substrate
mechanics have been implicated in stem cell lineage commitment. However, the
mechanical and biochemical signals originating from cell-to-cell adhesion remain
unexplored in this context. Recent studies implicated adherens junctions in the
maintenance of embryonic stem cell self-renewal potential and during cellular
reprogramming, but the role of cell-cell interactions in MSC differentiation
remains elusive. Therefore, the overarching hypothesis of the proposed work is
that cell-to-cell adhesion affects stem cell fate decisions. This hypothesis
will be addressed by a series of mechanistic studies to understand the role of
Cadherin-11 on MSC differentiation into smooth muscle cells. Methods to be
employed include novel microfabrication technologies to control the extent of
cell-cell interactions, and the novel lentiviral array (LVA) technology
developed in the PI's laboratory to monitor in real time multiple genes and
pathways during MSC differentiation. The proposed work represents a significant
step forward in understanding the role of cell-to-cell adhesion in stem cell
differentiation and will enable design of strategies, biomaterials and devices
for applications in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Finally,
although the proposed work will focus on MSCs, the research findings are
expected to impact other types of stem cells, such as cancer stem cells, where
intercellular interactions may also play an important role.