* 1403636
* AREADNE 2014 Conference, Santorini, Greece, June 26-29, 2014
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* John Pezaris, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

PI: Pezaris, John S. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403636&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Massachusetts General Hospital&lt;br/&gt;AREADNE 2014 Conference, Santorini,
Greece, June 26-29, 2014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support for
travel awards and registration support to US students and post-docs to attend
the AREADNE 2014 Research in Encoding and Decoding of Neural Ensembles
conference to be held June 26-29, 2014, at the Nomikos Conference Centre, in
Santorini, Greece. This will be the fifth conference in the biennial AREADNE
series that provides opportunities for US students and scientists studying
neural ensembles to be informed on the latest advances in the field, interact
with their international peers and develop long-term professional relationships.
The primary goals of the AREADNE conference include: 1. To provide an open,
interactive forum to foster discussion of cutting-edge results from scientific
leaders in the field of neural ensembles. 2. To enable the development of
lasting professional relationships by creating an informal environment that
predisposes attendees to free interaction. 3. To create a scientific venue that
offers US investigators exposure to their European and Eastern Mediterranean
peers in the field. Additionally, the conference will provide a forum to foster
interactions of established investigators with students, post-docs and other
young scientists in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encoding and decoding of
neural ensembles is a developing field in neuroscience. The biennial AREADNE
conference meets an important need in this field, as there is no other similar
conference that provides a tight, focused, and intensive presentation of the
subject and topics. Single-track morning and evening sessions with invited
speakers and evening poster presentations will be used to disseminate the latest
advances in the field and promote interactions among the attendees. Planned
sessions include (1) early visual systems, (2) decision making, (3) patterns and
network synchronization, (4) connectomics, (5) learning and plasticity, (6)
molecular mechanisms, and (7) visuo-motor integration. For each theme,
presentations will emphasize how sensory, cognitive, and motor states are
encoded in the interaction of multiple neurons and in turn how these states can
be reconstructed from neuronal ensembles. After the meeting, proceedings will be
published on the web for wide dissemination to the scientific community.