* 1403724
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Industrial Implementation of Smart Biopolymers for Purification of Biological Products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,954.00

Karande, Pankaj / Chen, Wilfred &lt;br/&gt;1403697 / 1403724
&lt;br/&gt;Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute / University of Delaware
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a collaboration between industry
(Bristol-Myers Squibb) and academia (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and
University of Delaware) aimed at developing the next generation and state-of-art
smart biopolymers system for the purification of protein therapeutics in
industrial bioprocessing. There is a significant need and interest in the
industry for the development of novel techniques for recovery of biological
materials that are advantageous in terms of scale, cost, and ease-of-deployment
compared to conventional chromatographic processes. The PIs propose to develop
affinity precipitation processes that combine the selectivity of affinity
chromatography along with the scalability and cost benefits of precipitation.
This project will employ new classes of affinity peptides in concert with
efficient smart biopolymers which can be induced to come in and out of solution
with minor changes in salt and/or temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
significant interest in the development of non-chromatographic affinity recovery
processes for biological products. Affinity precipitation combines the
selectivity of affinity chromatography along with the scalability and cost
benefits of precipitation. In prior research supported by NSF the PIs have
employed Elastin like polypeptides fused to the mAb binding Z domain (ELP-Z) to
develop a scalable mAb affinity precipitation method. The proposed work builds
upon the previous work to generate entirely new classes of smart biopolymer
affinity reagents and evaluate their utility for the industrial purification of
mAbs, FCfusions, and non-mAb biologics from inclusion body and pegylation
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their practical utility will be evaluated for
large-scale protein purification in partnership with Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS).
This research will result in a flexible platform for large-scale purification of
biological products. The first component of the proposed project will be a new
approach for affinity precipitation of mAbs and Fc fusion proteins under milder
operating conditions using ZELP-E2 nanocages. The second component of the
project will develop novel peptide affinity ligands for two classes of non-mAb
proteins provided by our industrial collaborator BMS. The affinity peptides will
then be employed in affinity precipitation formats to selectively capture the
products from challenging feed stocks such as refolded protein pools and post-
pegylation reaction mixtures. This work brings together Co-PIs with diverse
expertise in protein engineering, peptide affinity design, affinity
precipitation and downstream bioprocessing to develop entirely new classes of
affinity precipitation reagents (Z-ELP-E2 nanocages, ELPaffinity peptides, and
polyvalent affinity capture E2-(xAPy-ELP)) which if successful may result in a
new integrated platform that will greatly simplify the recovery and purification
of biological products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research could have a
dramatic impact on the affinity capture of a broad range of therapeutic products
represented by monoclonal antibodies, fusion proteins, biologics from inclusion
bodies, and pegylated proteins. The combination of these novel technologies
could represent entirely new approaches for the downstream processing of
biologics with significant long-term industrial impact. Success in this work
could not only impact the processing of difficult to recover and synthetically
modified biologics but may also establish new paradigms for the bioprocessing of
a wide range of many new biologics in development. This collaboration between
academia and industry will serve as a proof-of-concept study for the potential
industrial implementation of this transformative technology for the purification
of biological products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms for impact on education
via graduate, undergraduate and K12 inclusion in research opportunities are
discussed. This proposed molecular level and macroscopic separations level
training is highly sought after by the biotechnology industry.