* 1403545
* Cancer Stem Cell Mechanotransduction in Engineered Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Esmaiel Jabbari, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Jabbari, Esmaiel Proposal Number: 1403545 Institution: University of South
Carolina at Columbia Title: Cancer Stem Cell Mechanotransduction in Engineered
Matrix

Among different cancers, breast cancer is the most common type. A major
contributing factor to mortality in cancer patients is the return of the cancer
after chemotherapy. Cancer relapse affects 30% of breast cancer patients. Recent
observations indicate that cancer relapse may be related to a very small
population of slow-growing cancer stem cells (CSCs) in the tumor that are
unaffected by chemotherapy. After chemotherapy, the bulk of the tumor shrinks to
less than a few percent of the initial size, thus enriching the tumor with CSCs
that do not respond to conventional therapies. The enriched CSCs divide, grow
and regenerate the tumor volume, leading to cancer relapse or recurrence.
Consistent with that notion, the triple negative cancer (TNBC), which is the
most aggressive type of breast cancer, has the highest sub-population of CSCs
among different breast cancer types with 77% survival rate, compared to 93% for
other types, The broader significance of this project is understanding the role
of those factors in the tumor environment that contribute the survival of CSCs.
One of the factors that play a central role is the tumor tissue stiffness. For
example, lumps in the breast that feel stiffer than the rest of the tissue are a
sign of possible breast cancer that should be checked. The objective of this
project was to determine the role of tissue stiffness on CSC survival and growth
in a tissue-like three-dimensional matrix. The importance of this project lies
in identifying new agents that target tissue stiffness to destroy CSCs and the
development of a kit to test drugs against cancer stem cells. The PI will use
several programs to recruit under-represented students and he will work with the
South Carolina Children's museum to develop an interactive exhibit titled
"hydrogels" for kids. This proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering
Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
Division, and by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research.

Cancer relapse is related to a very small population of slow-growing cancer stem
cells (CSCs) that do not respond to conventional therapies. Naturally derived
matrices are widely used as a matrix to study CSC survival but due to many
ligand-receptor interactions, the effect of mechanotransduction on CSC signaling
pathways that maintain CSC cannot be investigated. The objective of this work is
to engineer a matrix with defined properties to serve as a sieve for selection
and enrichment of CSCs and to investigate the effect of matrix stiffness on
intracellular pathways that maintain CSCs. The overall hypothesis is that in the
absence of receptor-ligand interaction, matrix stiffness is the extracellular
activator of YAP/TAZ through GPCR/lipid rafts/Rho/ROCK signaling pathway,
leading to CSC survival. It is further hypothesized that in the presence of
integrin-binding ligands, focal adhesion is the extracellular activator of Hippo
through the FAK/Rac signaling pathway and stress fiber formation in the cell
periphery, leading to the expression of LATS1/2 kinases, inhibition of YAP/TAZ
transcription factors and loss of CSC maintenance. The following approach is
used to test the hypothesis. In Aim 1, cancer cells will be encapsulated in the
novel lactide-chain-extended polyethylene glycol (SPELA) hydrogel and cultured
in a medium supplemented with Doxorubicin (Dox) and/or Salinomycin (Sal) to
select and enrich for the most invasive CSC phenotype in the growing CSC
colonies. In Aim 2, the effect of matrix stiffness on the activation of YAP/TAZ
transcription factors through GPCR/lipid rafts/Rho/ROCK signaling pathway of CSC
will be investigated with the enriched CSC colonies encapsulated in the SPELA
hydrogel. And in Aim 3, the effect of conjugated integrin-binding ligands on the
activation of Hippo signaling pathway of CSC will be investigated with the
enriched CSC colonies encapsulated in the SPELA hydrogel with optimum stiffness.
The intellectual merit of this work is a model engineered culture system to
screen for the most effective drugs and targeting ligands against the most
invasive CSC colonies. The broader impact of this work lies in generating a
cancer stem cell-on-a-chip as a more relevant in vitro tumor model in basic
research, drug discovery and personalized medicine.