* 1403224
* Experimental and Computational Study of Soot Morphology and Optical Characteristics for Improved Soot Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Marshall Long, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

1403224&lt;br/&gt;Long, Marshall B.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Experimental and
Computational Study of Soot Morphology and Optical Characteristics for Improved
Soot Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion-generated soot particulates from
land-based power sources pose a significant health risk and have been the
subject of stringent regulations. The aircraft engine also contributes to
atmospheric aerosol levels via high altitude soot emissions with impact on long
term global climate change and ozone depletion. Mitigation of the negative
aspects of soot formation will lead to improved well-being of individuals in
society. In addition to&amp;#8232;the impact of the proposed research in
combustion-related technologies, there will be a spillover in teaching and
outreach activities. Graduate&amp;#8232;students will be trained and some
aspects of the proposed work can be tackled by undergraduate students and
possibly, upper level high school students. These activities are key components
in the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
understanding of soot formation in practical systems remains a daunting
challenge and laboratory flames are the best setting in which to make progress.
The proposed research has the realistic objective of examining the structure of
laminar flames under conditions favorable to soot formation. It entails the
characterization of temperature, gas species, including soot precursors and
growth species, and soot properties including volume faction, aggregate
morphology, and optical properties in flames. The proposal
represents&amp;#8232;a comprehensive effort with potentially transformative
impact in the context of the environmental footprint of combustion. Conditions
are chosen so that the formation of soot is highly controlled by using suitable
fuel-inert combinations to facilitate probing&amp;#8232;of the flame structure
by both intrusive and nonintrusive techniques. The approach is both experimental
and computational. Results of this research will be disseminated&amp;#8232;at
technical meetings and in peer-reviewed articles. Furthermore, data sets will be
made available on the web to allow convenient access to researchers for
subsequent modeling.