* 1403777
* Detection of Protein Misfolding Using Nanorod Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 299,988.00

PI: Nicholas A. Kotov&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403777&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Detection of
Protein Misfolding Using Nanorod
Assemblies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's
Parkinson's or Creutzfeldt-Jakob diseases (CJD) pose a great challenge for our
society because of their devastating impact on patients, their relatives, and
health system. One of the problems is that these diseases do not induce any
immunological response and thus, traditional diagnostics methods based on
antibody detection cannot be used. New methods of diagnostics that are highly
sensitive and selective are required. In the future, novel tools developed
during this proposal may enable diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer's. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common cause of these diseases
is self-assembly of the nanoscale biological molecules - amyloid peptides and
proteins - into larger structures represented by oligomers and micrometer scale
fibers. We shall develop a new diagnostics technique utilizing this property of
the disease agents that will be revealed in their interactions with inorganic
nanoscale particles. The project will involve evaluation of two methods of self-
assembled structures of amyloid peptides and proteins. The first one will take
advantage of self-assembly of uniform gold nanorods into large supercrystals and
our ability to make large patterns with them. Surface enhanced Raman scattering
(SERS) will be the key spectroscopic technique that would allow us to
differentiate benign and misfolded peptides. The second diagnostics method will
take advantage of chirality of nanorod pairs that can rotate the polarization of
light. Amyloid peptides and other species will change the twisting angle between
the nanorods that can be detected by the circular dichroism spectroscopy.
Additionally, complete theoretical analysis and characterization of their
photonic properties of nanorod assemblies with amyloid peptides will be carried
out. The expected impact will range from the understanding of self-organization
of nanorods and peptides into larger mesoscale structures. We also expect to
test the proof-of-concept techniques to detect the misfolded disease agents in
saliva and urine.