* 1403034
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Spatial sorting and Postglacial population dynamics in Plethodon dunni and P. vehiculum.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Bryan Carstens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,016.00

While natural selection is a well-characterized evolutionary force, it may not
be the only mechanism for evolutionary change -- particularly during rapid
evolutionary adaptations occurring in some populations. In species that
experience rapid expansion of their geographic range, it is hypothesized that
those individuals with phenotypic traits that enhance dispersal ability will
represent the leading edge of the expansion, and will mate with individuals that
possess similar traits. In theory, this assortative mating should lead to the
evolution of traits associated with enhanced dispersal ability. This project
will test this "spatial sorting hypothesis" in two closely related species of
salamanders. These two salamander species have limited dispersal abilities, were
restricted to southern refugial ranges during the last glacial maximum, and have
been expanding to the north at different rates for the last 20,000 years. The
researchers will collect genetic, environmental, and morphological data that
will allow them to measure rates of expansion, determine if expansion is
ongoing, and identify the traits that are evolving due to spatial sorting. More
broadly, an enhanced understanding of range evolution in response to a warming
climate will have important implications for the conservation of temperate
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on an ideal system for
testing the spatial sorting hypothesis. Spatial sorting is expected to occur
during sudden range expansions, when fast-dispersing individuals at the margins
of an expanding species are spatially segregated, and thus reproduce with
similar individuals. Once the range expansion reaches its limits (set by
environmental conditions or available habitat), the assortative mating that
produced spatially-sorted phenotypes will cease, and random mating will return
throughout the population. Documentation of spatial sorting thus requires a
system where phenotypes associated with dispersal can be quantified and where
expansion has not reached its limit. The proposed work will quantify such
phenotypes in a system where population expansion is ongoing and dispersal rates
are low. Preliminary genetic data collected by the researchers indicate that the
two focal species were confined to a single refugial population at the close of
the last glacial maximum and species distribution modeling (SDM) suggests that
this refuge was located in southern Oregon. The researchers will conduct
additional research to identify any suitable habitat that is unoccupied and to
refine the location of glacial refugia and expansion routes. The researchers
will measure phenotypic traits associated with dispersal ability and measure
direct dispersal via mark-recapture methods, ultimately quantifying evidence to
support or refute the spatial sorting hypothesis.