* 1403264
* Collaborative Research: Intracellular localization of biosynthetic pathways for conversion of lipids to dicarboxylic acids in oleaginous yeast
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Ian Wheeldon, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 302,403.00

1403264/1403099&lt;br/&gt;Wheeldon/Blenner &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project aims to develop an advanced bio-manufacturing process to
convert low cost feedstocks such as waste glycerol or biomass-derived sugars
into important precursors for specialty polymers, adhesives, anti-corrosive
coatings, and fragrances. Currently these molecules, long chain dicarboxylic
acids, are produced from non-renewable, petroleum feedstocks in processes that
suffer from poor catalysis and inherent safety concerns. This project
contributes towards NSF's mission of advancing national heath, prosperity, and
welfare by creating an inherently safe biochemical process that operates at low
temperature and pressures, is efficient in the conversion of low cost feedstocks
into high value products, and creates new sustainable bio-manufacturing
technologies. In addition to the scientific and engineering goals of this
project, educational outreach activities will connect graduate, undergraduate,
and community college students in Riverside County, CA with students in South
Carolina. The educational outreach efforts aim to increase participation of STEM
students in advanced bio- and sustainable-manufacturing research, thus
addressing critical needs in both South Carolina and Riverside County, CA for
well-trained STEM workforces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process exploits the
natural abilities of certain yeast species, such as the yeast Yarrowia
lipolytica, to metabolize glycerol and sugars, and produce high yields of long
chain fatty acids. The innovative technologies developed in this project will
allow for coordinated reactions to occur inside active yeast cells to
efficiently convert the naturally produced long chain fatty acids into
dicarboxylic acids. These technologies include synthetic biology tools that
enable the temporal control of gene expression and the spatial and temporal
control of biosynthetic pathway activity. The central hypothesis is that the
catalysis and yield of biosynthetic pathways for the oxidation of free fatty
acids can be enhanced by co-localizing oxidative enzymes with the lipid
mobilization machinery. &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis was formulated based on
experimental and theoretical results that demonstrate enhanced yields of
engineered biosynthetic pathways via enzyme co-localization and via
intracellular pathway localization. Moreover, the development and implementation
of gene regulatory elements sensitive to the fatty acid substrates of the
engineered pathway will enable tunable pathway expression and optimization of
pathway flux. The developed biochemical process focuses on the production of
long chain dicarboxylic acids, but it is anticipated that the innovative
synthetic biology tools needed to successfully create the process will be
broadly applicable to other biochemical processes for the conversion of lipids
into other useful chemicals such as advanced biofuels, short chain dicarboxlyic
acids, and food additives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program of the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.