* 1403491
* Interrogating Cadherin/Matrix Rigidity Dependent Neural Differentiation and Neuromuscular Junction Formation of Multipotent Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 451,416.00

PI: Kong, Hyunjoon &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403491&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Title: Interrogating
Cadherin/Matrix Rigidity Dependent Neural Differentiation and Neuromuscular
Junction Formation of Multipotent Stem Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
and recreating neural networks represents a major scientific and engineering
challenge with ramifications ranging from fundamental biology to clinical
translation. Stem cells residing in bone and fat tissue possess the potential to
be converted to neurons that constitute neural networks. This cell conversion
process is stimulated when cells contact each other and are cultured on a
substrate that is not ?too hard? or ?too soft?, but that is ?just right?. These
neurons will help control muscle tissue movement, thus serving to create various
biomedical tools used for fundamental and applied bioscience studies. The
studies in this proposal use a Jello-like hydrogel system linked with proteins
involved in cell-cell communication and tuned to present a ?just right?
softness. The successful completion of this project will therefore create an
advanced cell culture platform that will be broadly useful for studying a wide
array of stem cells and for exploiting this in neural tissue engineering. The
proposed work will also uncover the coordinate effects of cell-cell adhesions
and matrix softness on stem cell fates, including differentiation into neurons.
Finally, the results of the proposed study will be highly useful in creating
various neural implants more efficiently than previously possible and
intelligent, biological robots. Utilization of the results of this study as an
educational module will have broad impacts by attracting future young scientists
and encouraging them to pursue engineering careers. This proposal is co-funded
by the Biomedical Engineering Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems Division, and by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been
numerous attempts to reproduce neural networks and neuromuscular junctions in
vitro for both fundamental and applied neuroscience studies that used neuronal
cells differentiated from multipotent stem cells. Therefore, it is crucial to
regulate neural differentiation of stem cells in an elaborate manner, in terms
of differentiation levels and glial-to-neural cell population. The proposed
research seeks to systematically understand and modulate the potential interplay
between cell-cell adhesion and cell-matrix adhesion in regulating the neural
differentiation of stem cells. To this end, the goals of this proposed study are
(1) to modulate the neural differentiation of multipotent, bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSCs) by combining the effects of cadherin, a cell-cell adhesion
protein, and matrix stiffness; and (2) to use the differentiated cholinergic
neurons to build a functional, neuromuscular junction in vitro. This goal will
be accomplished by culturing BMSCs on a hydrogel chemically linked with a
specific number of recombinant N- or E-cadherin, and further tailored to present
controlled stiffness. The integrative effects of cadherin and matrix rigidity on
cellular differentiation, cell traction force, and Rac1-GTPase signal activation
will be analyzed. Finally, differentiated cholinergic neurons will be co-
cultured with skeletal myoblasts to form a neuromuscular junction and evaluate
neural control over muscular contraction and relaxation. Successful completion
of the proposed studies is expected to result in significant contributions in
neuroscience and neuroengineering and stem cell technology.