* 1403508
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Laser-Assisted Surface Cooling Enhancement (LASCE)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Guillermo Aguilar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,346.00

CBET-1403508/1402587&lt;br/&gt;Aguilar/Trujillo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
provides funding for studying and developing a non-intrusive method to enhance
local heat transfer between a target surface and a cooling fluid. The approach
takes advantage of thermocavitation bubbles, which are formed when continuous
wave (CW) laser light is properly focused within highly-absorbing liquid thin
films. These bubbles form and collapse within microseconds, vigorously agitating
the liquid and enhancing heat transfer. This phenomenon is called Laser-Assisted
Surface Cooling Enhancement (LASCE). The PI's preliminary estimates show that
heat transfer enhancement is as great as that of phase change
(evaporation/boiling), which is the current upper limit to liquid-based cooling
systems. LASCE may also match or exceed the performance obtained using micro-
modified structures, but without implementing any type of surface modification.
Also, CW lasers are often less complex lasing media, cheaper and simpler than
pulse lasers, and can control the frequency of bubble formation simply by
modulating their output power. The potential impact of this project, therefore,
is in novel ways of controlling surface heat. This has implications for systems
ranging from laser surgery to combustion engine
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study encompasses collaborative experimental
and computational research between University of California-Riverside and
University of Wisconsin-Madison aimed at studying and quantifying the: 1)
balance between the heat input to induce thermal cavitation and the cooling
produced by enhanced convection; 2) sensitivity of the resulting fluid flow to
the operating parameters of the laser and; 3) physics of interaction between
multiple cavitation events and its effect on enhanced convective cooling. Based
on highly accurate numerical simulations and detailed measurement techniques, a
thorough examination of the physics underpinning the most desirable heat
transfer conditions will be sought, which is essential in optimizing the
operation of LASCE. This will be followed by an equally important objective,
which aims to explore LACSE's suitability for applications where surface
modification is impossible, such as skin (scalp) cooling during laser therapy
across a novel transparent cranial implant ("Window to the Brain") developed at
UCR. The success of this project will open the door to many transformative
applications of optical thermocavitation aimed at low-temperature combustion
strategies for mitigating the levels of NOx and particulate matter emissions to
improve engine efficiency as well as transdermal drug delivery for diverse
biomedical applications.