* 1403815
* SusChEM: Development of microbial co-cultures for the production of fatty acids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Mattheos Koffas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Proposal Number: CBET - 1403815 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Cynthia H.
Collins &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: Development of microbial co-cultures for
the production of fatty acids &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in the production
of fatty acids has emerged in the last ten years because of the pressing need to
find alternatives for diesel fuels. Fatty acid-producing recombinant
microorganisms have the potential to significantly increase the availability of
oils for the production of biodiesel (i.e. renewable diesel). In addition to
biodiesel, fatty acids are important precursors to a range of high value and
commodity chemicals, such as monomers for new, sustainable biopolymers,
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals. The potential of sustainable,
low-cost and high yield production of free fatty acids cannot be overstated. The
overall goal of this project is to generate co-cultures of recombinant strains
of E. coli that produce high levels of fatty acids from mixtures of glucose and
xylose. To achieve this goal the investigators will divide the labor between
different strains of E. coli so that each strain is a specialist for either
glucose or xylose. The successful completion of the proposed project is expected
to lead to a paradigm shift from current methodologies that utilize single
strains optimized to efficiently convert all sugars found in treated biomass to
biofuels, to bacterial communities that can synergistically convert simple
carbon sources to a product of interest. The approaches used and the development
of the specialists will also contribute to our understanding of E. coli
physiology, as observed cellular behavior is the composite outcome of the
function of multiple genes. The methods and strains developed in this work are
likely to be used in future systems producing a multitude of other compounds
that can be used as biofuels, such as alkanes and fatty acid ethyl esters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop and apply
integrated computational and synthetic biology tools for the optimization of
metabolic flux in the genetically tractable microorganism Escherichia coli for
the biosynthesis of fatty acids from two different carbon sources, glucose and
xylose. In the past, significant effort has been extended towards engineering
and optimizing a single E. coli strain capable of biosynthetically converting
all simple sugars usually found in treated biomass to a biofuel of interest. In
contrast, the proposed project aims to create modular communities of recombinant
E. coli strains, where each member strain will be optimized for the conversion
of either glucose or xylose to fatty acids. The central hypothesis is that such
an engineered community will offer a competitive advantage compared with
currently used methods that rely on a single optimized recombinant strain
because it will reduce metabolic burden on each cell, reduce undesired cross-
reactions and will allow for flexibility through modularity. The proposed
systems approach will be based on the application of stoichiometric modeling
using methodologies developed by the investigators. These methodologies will be
extended in order to allow for the prediction of all combinations of gene
deletions and changes in gene expression that lead to optimal fatty acid titers
and yields from xylose and glucose. Fermentation data, together with proteomics
data, will be integrated for further strain and community optimization. The
modeling and strain development efforts will be complemented with metabolic
pathway balancing using a promoter library, in order to streamline more
efficiently the carbon flux through the metabolic modules responsible for fatty
acid biosynthesis. The final goal of this proposal will examine how a
combination of strains that have been engineered for improved conversion of
xylose or glucose to fatty acids affects fatty acid yield from mixtures of the
two carbon sources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology.