* 1403561
* Sensing Microsystems for Decoding Cellular Communications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yandong Gao, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 346,236.00

Alexander Revzin and Yadong Gao from the University of California Davis are
supported by an award from the Nano-Biosensing Program to develop sensing
microsystems for investigating the communication between liver cells in cases of
injury by toxic substances or infection. Signaling between nearby cells is
involved in inflammation responses and ultimately their damage or death, but
there remains uncertainty of what is cause and what is effect. This work is to
unravel the different aspects of signaling between liver cells in a laboratory-
on-a-chip environment with appropriate sensing capabilities built in. The
techniques and devices to be developed are expected to have benefits for other
problems in biology with complex cellular communications that need to be
unraveled, e.g., wound healing, fibrosis and so on. A diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students and post doctoral fellows are being trained
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paracrine signaling is particularly
relevant in the liver where an injury triggers a complex combination of
paracrine signals including inflammatory and fibrogenic cytokines/growth
factors. Recent findings suggest that, under toxication or infection,
hepatocytes may not be simple victims of stromal-cell/macrophage inflammatory
signals but may be active participants in and possibly triggers of the signaling
in the liver. The understanding of cellular communications remains limited
because the tools for discerning where and when secreted signals appear and how
they affect neighboring cells are not available. This project is working to
answer this need by developing novel biosensors and microfluidic devices for
dissecting cellular communication. These incorporate multiplexed aptasensors for
detection of several cell-secreted inflammatory cytokines in parallel as well as
reconfigurable microfluidics utilizing valves to control how and when different
liver cell types communicate on chip. There are several questions for which
technological solutions are being sought: How may cell secreted factors be
dynamically monitored? How may sensors be regenerated for simultaneous detection
of several cell-secreted factors? How may originating and responding signals be
recognized when two cell types are present? How do secretion rates change during
heterotypic cellular communications? This work aims at deeper understanding of
cell- and tissue-level responses to liver disease or injury and identification
of cellular targets and temporal windows for treatment. Because cellular
interactions in the local microenvironment are important throughout biology, the
tools being developed will be widely applicable.