* 1403582
* High density array biosensors for spatial mapping of cellular gradients and flux
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* David Janes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 05/31/2018
* USD 330,001.00

Proposal Number: 1403582 P.I.: Jenna L. Rickus Title: High density array
biosensors for spatial mapping of cellular gradients and flux

The flux of small molecules and ions at the surface of cells carries important
information that is communicated both internally to the cell and externally to
neighboring cells. Examples of such important cellular flux in biology include
neurotransmitter release and reuptake in neurons, glucose transport for adapted
cell metabolism in cancer cells, and ion flux in plant gravity sensing during
development. No method currently exists that can quantify the spatial map and
dynamics of true cellular flux and biomolecule gradients from many single cells
in a chip format. This project will apply recent advances and expertise in
nano/microelectronics, mathematical modeling, and biosensors to create such a
technology. The outcome of the work will be an on chip platform technology that
can be replicated for a wide range of cellular systems to answer basic
biological questions regarding cellular flux that cannot be answered today. For
example, a freshly resected tumor could be rapidly analyzed to examine how a
drug candidate affects glucose metabolism of the heterogeneous cell population
or neurotransmitter dynamics could be integrated with electrical activity
information to better understand information processing of neuronal networks
during learning and memory.

The flux and resulting concentration gradients of small molecules and ions at
the surface of cells carry important information that is communicated both
internally to the cell and externally to neighboring cells. Self-referencing
biosensors are currently the best method for quantifying cellular flux dynamics,
but this method is limited to measurements at one location in space on one cell
at a time. In addition, this method is not portable and cannot be used for
sensing in remote locations such as on space missions, in environmental
monitoring, or in high throughput biomedical applications. No method currently
exists that can quantify the spatial map and dynamics of true cellular flux and
biomolecule gradients from single cells in a chip format. The overall objective
of this work is to create a technology for the spatial and temporal mapping of
biomolecule gradients and flux at the level of single cells by creating 1D and
2D arrays of individually addressable nano/microscale electrochemical sensors.
The proposal develops and integrates novel solutions to the technical challenges
of creating such a device including synchronous detection to overcome noise
limitations, a field-programmable approach to reduce the need for precision
alignment between sensors and cells, electrode addressable biofunctionalization
to achieve high spatial resolution of bio-recognition layers and multi-analyte
sensing, and a mathematical framework to design and optimize electrode arrays
considering both the biological signal and sensor function in space and time.
Importantly each of these technical advances has application beyond flux sensing
and applies more broadly to the field of nano-biosensing. The end result of the
work will be an on-chip platform technology that can be replicated for a wide
range of cellular systems.

This award is being made jointly by two Programs- (1) Nano-Biosensing, in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(Engineering Directorate), and (2) Instrument Development for Biological
Research, in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences
Directorate).