* 1403304
* Single-Cell Iterative Mechano-Electrical Properties Analyzer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Jeannine Strobl, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 341,999.00

Proposal Number: 1403304&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Agah, Masoud&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Single-Cell
Iterative Mechano-Electrical Properties Analyzer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research
team of engineers and life scientists will coordinate efforts to micro-engineer
a new microfluidic biosensing platform called the iterative mechano-electrical
properties (iMEP) analyzer. This sensor will simultaneously capture electronic
records of biomechanical and bioelectrical properties of cells. The iMEP
analyzer provides instrumentation to analyze biophysical properties that can be
used to compare biophysical properties of cells with diverse functions such as
neurons and bones, biophysical changes in developmental cell lineages,
biophysical responses to hormones and drugs, as well as biophysical changes in
diseased cells. In the future this technology may enable novel ways for
diagnosing cancer and screening drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
lab-on-a-chip sensor that analyzes the bioelectro-mechanical properties of
living cells. This single-cell analyzer characterizes the biophysical properties
of cells including electrical and mechanical as they undergo dynamic changes in
their microenvironment and quantifies the biophysical differences between normal
and malignant human breast cells. As cells travel through narrow channels in the
chip, they undergo alternative deformation (compression) and mechanical
relaxation, the rates and intensities of which are modulated by controlling the
channel dimensions. Embedded electrodes link cell biomechanical events to real-
time, continuous monitoring of cell electrical properties (bioimpedance).
Simultaneously, quantitative cell mechanical deformation information is recorded
using video microscopy and a high speed camera; when coupled with fluorescent
tagging techniques, dynamic changes in intracellular signaling molecules can
also be captured by high speed video microscopy. The research represents a
significant advance in achieving a device for diagnosing cancer at the single
cell level in order to find this disease at its earliest and most manageable
stage, and for ascertaining drug-responsiveness of individual cells. This is a
research direction that will contribute significantly to the revolution in
medicine to provide individualized diagnostic and prognostic decisions for
cancer patients. Support for this project will also enhance the educational
development of students, from high school through graduate school, allowing them
at a young age to gain an appreciation of the power of merging engineering and
biological technologies. It is important to convey to the next generation of
scientists that biology is engineered and that engineering can be used to
dissect biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by two
Programs- (1) Nano-Biosensing, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate), and (2)
Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate).