* 1403828
* Microscale Heat Transfer in Digital Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-1403828&lt;br/&gt;Mohseni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat is an
unavoidable byproduct of the normal operation of an electronic device, generated
as a result of electrical energy being converted to thermal energy during
circuit activities. An increase in speed of an electronic system is often
achieved by reduction in circuit delay due to higher circuit packaging
densities. Unfortunately, this is accompanied by increased power dissipation per
circuit. As the need for fast electronic devices increases, the ability to
remove heat flux effectively and efficiently is in greater demand. To this end,
the ability to safely dissipate large amounts of heat from very small areas is
key to many of today's cutting edge technologies. Reducing heat fluxes by an
order of 100-1000 W/cm2 and beyond is currently encountered in high performance
supercomputers, power electronic devices, electric vehicles, advanced military
avionics, radars, and lasers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigation
will explore the active and on-demand micro actuation and transport of liquid
droplets, a process termed Digitized Heat Transfer (DHT), for effective thermal
management of high-power compact systems. The DHT technique has two main
advantages. First, the use of individual droplets and the subsequent
introduction of recirculation zones inside the droplets allows for an increased
heat removal rate as compared to continuous liquid-cooling flows as well as air-
cooling systems. Second, the droplets may be discretely manipulated, enabling it
individual, instruction-based programming of fluid processing, where droplets
are transported, mixed, reacted, stored, and analyzed in packets without the
need for moving mechanical parts. This capability of DHT is aptly-suited for
transient thermal management and the suppression of temperature overshoots
during the dissipation of power spikes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
technical advances in thermal sciences, fluid dynamics, and computational
techniques anticipated above, undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained in these topics. Undergraduate research assistants will be sought via
supplementary REU support, and can be expected to come from the previously
mentioned fields. The PI intends to develop a course in micro-scale transport at
the University of Florida and expand his current course on micro and nano
thermofluidics with the addition of both a fabrication and a computational
component. The PI's existing multidisciplinary courses will be enriched with
results from this work, expanding student exposure to different aspects of micro
fluidics.