* 1403768
* Inverse Design of Self Assembling Nanocrystals: Low Coordinated Superlattices via Isotropic Potentials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 412,093.00

PI: Truskett, Thomas &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1403768 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Texas at Austin &lt;br/&gt;Title: Inverse Design of Self
Assembling Nanocrystals: Low Coordinated Superlattices via Isotropic Potentials
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently much interest in making crystals
(assemblies) of nanoparticles (NPs), which can be considered 'superlattices' due
to the potential of these superlattices to be used as unique optical switching
devices or for sensing. While traditional nano-materials development is mostly a
top-down approach, whereby novel nanomaterials and structures are first
discovered and then their properties are determined and applications envisioned,
the PIs propose a materials-by-design approach, whereby they will devise and
experimentally validate a theoretical framework to rationally design ligand-
capped NPs to self-assemble into specific targeted structures (superlattices)
with low coordination. Their choice of spherical nanoparticles (NPs) as the
model system to be tested, rather than the harder to make anisotropic NPs, will
increase their chances of being successful. This is a well-thought, well-
integrated proposal to test and validate a new theoretical framework for the
inverse design of self-assembling nanocrystals. Results from the research will
have broad applicability, opening up the possibilities of rationally designing
interactions for novel self-assembling structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to extend the inverse statistic-mechanical (SM) optimization method
developed in his recent CBET grant 0165357 and suggests ways to explore, in-
silico, the assembly of various lattices (hexagonal, cubic, etc) in a simple one
component system of spherical particles by just adjusting inter-particle
potentials. He plans further to simulate the equilibrium phase diagrams and
dynamics of cush NP formation. The experimental Co-PI will then use the results
of the simulation to fabricate and characterize selected ligand-capped
nanocrystals, which had been optimized in the in-silico simulations. Their plan
comprises three major activities: 1) Use the XM-based inverse optimization to
determine interaction parameters that favor targetted superlattices. 2) Use
molecular simulations, together with the interaction potentials, to determine
equilibrium and kinetic phase behaviors (discover design rules). 3) Synthesize
and investigate the best candidate models and characterize the systems using
techniques such as grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS).