* 1403105
* The Rise of the Boson-Sampling Quantum Computer and  The Renaissance of the Linear Optical Quantum Interferometer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Dowling, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

In the twenty year long race to build the first quantum computer a number of
physical hardware platforms for such a computer have been investigated including
semiconductor circuits, superconducting circuits, charged ionic atoms
manipulated in electromagnetic chips, and neutral atoms controlled with lasers.
One approach that has lagged behind is the design of a quantum information
processor that uses quantum states of light or photons. This is because it is
difficult to get photons to interact or 'talk' to each other, a primary
requirement in making quantum-computing elements such as transistors. Prior to
2010, photon-based quantum computer circuit designs had a huge overhead in the
ancillary quantum and classical circuitry required to build even a simple two-
photon transistor. In some of the early designs, tens of thousands of ancillary
optical networks and electronic switches were required to construct even a
single photon transistor. In 2010 Aaronson Arkhipov at MIT showed that much
simpler optical circuit 'a linear optical interferometer' constructed with just
a few photons, lenses, mirrors, and other simple optical elements, could be used
to solve a particularly hard mathematical problem with an exponential increase
in processing power over any classical computer. Since then some five
experiments on this new type of optical quantum computer have been carried out
worldwide. For this project different circuit designs of this new type of simple
optical computer will be investigated and a search for additional mathematical
problems that it might be able to solve will be carried out. In addition the
possibility of using such a simple optical machine for making imaging devices
such as microscopes, or sensors such as magnetic field sensors, that operate
with more resolution, precision, and accuracy than is possible classically will
be investigated. The great intellectual merit of this project is that it is at
the interface of quantum imaging, sensing, and information processing all within
the field of quantum metrology. The language of quantum information provides an
exciting tool such that problems in one of these fields can be viewed using
tools developed in another. Hence any advance in one subfield can almost
immediately be applied, with creativity and work, to another subfield. The work
is synergistic across all the subfields. All the graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project will be trained in the foundations of quantum
mechanics, quantum information theory, quantum optics, and AMO theory. The power
of multimode, passive, linear optical interferometers for quantum computation,
imaging, and sensing will have broad cross-disciplinary commercial,
governmental, and scientific impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linear optical
interferometers have been thought to be unsuitable for quantum information
processing. While nonlinear interferometers provide a route to scalable and
universal quantum computation, the strong optical nonlinearities required to
implement such schemes have been difficult to attain. Even the so-called linear
optical quantum computing (LOQC) scheme proposed by Knill, Laflamme, and Milburn
(KLM) has effective nonlinearities that are generated by the detection and feed-
forward processes. The KLM scheme has also proved daunting from a technological
standpoint due to the immense number of ancilla resources required per logical
gate. It thus came as a surprise to the quantum optics community when Aaronson
and Arkhipov (AA) proposed that passive linear optical interferometers with
single photon inputs could efficiently solve a type of computational sampling
problem, a problem that is likely intractable on a classical or even a universal
quantum computer. This result has let to a flurry of recent experiments.
Dowling's group was led to a similar conclusion as that of AA in the study of
quantum random walks in linear optical interferometers with multiphoton Fock-
state inputs. Taken together, these new results indicate that simple linear
optical devices contain a hitherto overlooked computational capability that has
only yet begun to be explored. LSU has begun an investigation of the
computational complexity of such devices from a quantum optics point of view
using the standard theoretical tools for describing the propagation of quantum
states of lights through linear interferometers. In addition to providing an
elementary quantum optical argument for the complexity of the devices with Fock-
state inputs, it has been shown that spontaneous parametric down conversion
photon sources are a scalable resource for boson sampling and that there is very
likely a computational complexity associated with the number sampling of linear
optical interferometers with superpositions of coherent 'generalized cat'
states. The following tasks will be carried out: (1) investigate the
computational complexity of boson sampling in the number basis with non-Gaussian
state inputs such as photon added and subtracted Gaussian states; (2) carry out
a realistic resource analysis of what is required in practice to develop a
large-scale 'post-classical' linear optical quantum information processor; (3)
investigate the computational complexity non-Gaussian (number-resolved) sampling
with Gaussian inputs; (4) numerically design and test a small-scale programmable
post-classical quantum information processor; (5) investigate the performance of
linear optical interferometers for the purposes of quantum metrology including
optical sensing and imaging.