* 1404576
* 1S-2S Spectroscopy of Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 552,833.00

The interactions of the fundamental particles inside atoms underpins atomic
physics, chemistry, and the structure of all matter. The understanding of these
interactions is based on precise measurements of the light that is emitted and
absorbed by various atoms and molecules. The precise set of colors (or "resonant
frequencies") of this light is a unique fingerprint that is used for chemical
identification in a broad range of applications from medicine to defense and
quality control in manufacturing. The precise measurement of the fingerprint can
also tell us details about the fundamental particles that make up atoms.
Recently, a measurement of a particular resonant frequency in hydrogen (an
electron bound to a proton) and muonic hydrogen (a heavy version of the
electron, the muon, bound to a proton) has revealed a mystery: the diameter of
the proton appears to be different depending on which atom it is in. This
mystery arises if one assumes that the electron and muon interact with the
proton by the well-accepted theory called bound-state quantum electrodynamics
(QED) and that any differences must be attributed to the nuclear structure.
Assuming that there have been no mistakes, there are 3 possibilities: QED is
incorrect, the nuclear structure is incorrect, or there is some new kind of
interaction which has not been taken to account. To decide whether the mystery
is due to a problem with QED or not, two scientists from the University of
California, Riverside (UCR) propose to measure the resonant frequencies of
positronium, the simplest atom (consisting of an electron bound to an anti-
electron) that should be described perfectly by bound-state QED theory. The new
techniques developed for these measurements will lead to an improvement in the
spectroscopy of unstable atoms which are at the frontier of the field of
precision spectroscopy. The scientists involved with the project have a strong
record in increasing diversity in physics. The PI plays a special role in the
local community K-12 system, advising on increasing the number of students
taking high school physics and increasing the pool of physical
science/engineering majors in higher education and in teacher training. The co-
PI has established a pipeline for recruiting local area junior college transfers
to UCR, engaging them in research, and mentoring their eventual applications to
graduate schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purely leptonic atom positronium is
uniquely well-suited for testing bound-state quantum electrodynamics (QED) and
provides the understanding and background by which one may extract non-QED
physics out of precision atomic measurements on heavier leptons and hadrons. Few
have dared to try measurements on positronium at the few parts in 10^12 level
that would allow insight into physics such as the proton charge radius and
higher level recoil effect corrections in muonium, and that might show
differences between light and heavy leptons. The ideal level spacing for a
precision measurement on positronium is the 1S-2S interval at approximately
1.234 PHz. Last measured in collaboration with S. Chu, knowledge of the first 10
digits of this interval has stood for 20 years with an uncertainty of ±3.2 MHz.
The proposed experiment implements a new technique that would dramatically
improve the accuracy of Ps atom spectroscopy and potentially other high
resolution spectroscopy experiments, for example in muonium, by individual atom
trajectory analysis. A position sensitive time-of-flight detector will record
the trajectory and speed of every detected atom and thereby remove second-order
Doppler shifts, AC Stark Shifts, and better account for transit-time broadening.
The new detection method will allow for reducing the laser intensity and the
speed of the detected atoms that heretofore have limited the measurement
precision. The basic features of the analysis and development of the methods to
analyze and reduce uncertainties will be accomplished using a wavemeter with ±2
MHz metrology relative to an ultrastable reference cavity. This method will be
sufficient to produce narrow line widths (~1 MHz) and a vastly improved signal-
to-noise ratio in the 3 year period of the proposal. A 100 fold better
measurement and exploration of the systematic effects at 1000 fold better
accuracy will be achieved with the acquisition of a laser frequency comb
reference.