* 1404455
* Molecular Ion Entanglement Detection by Single-Molecule Fluorescence
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Odom, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 510,422.00

By removing an electron from an atom or molecule, one creates a "handle" which
allows one to grab it and hold onto it using electric and/or magnetic fields.
The ability to trap and manipulate atoms and molecules in this way has long been
recognized to hold great scientific and technological potential, with
applications ranging from quantum-controlled chemistry to precision tests of the
basic theories of physics which underlie virtually all of modern technology.
Trapped atoms (and their ionized counterparts) have been studied by many groups,
but it is more difficult (although potentially more rewarding) to trap and probe
the relatively fragile molecules. The mostly untapped potential of molecules
relates to their ability to rotate and vibrate, internal degrees of freedom
which are absent in atoms. However, before the full potential of trapped
molecules can be realized, techniques must be developed to determine their
degree of rotation and vibration without destroying the molecules in the
process. Here, the supported research group proposes capturing camera images of
trapped molecules in such a way that they only appear in the picture if they
have specific well-defined rotational and vibrational energies. These camera
images will provide a means to non-destructively determine the rotation and
vibration of trapped molecules, with detection resolution achievable down to the
single-molecule level. It is anticipated that the development of these
techniques will eventually find application in the chemical industry and in the
realization of more advanced quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With prior
NSF support, the supported research group at Northwestern University
demonstrated a technique to control the quantum rotational state of trapped
molecules using a single femtosecond laser to simultaneously optically pump from
all thermally populated excited levels. This technique works for molecular ions
with a special internal structure, those possessing a so-called diagonal
electronic transition, allowing many photons to be scattered before vibrations
are excited. These molecules can be roughly thought of as the alkali atoms of
the molecule world. In the present work, fluorescence of trapped molecular ions
will be imaged directly on a CCD camera, lighting up certain locations in a one-
dimensional Coulomb crystal where the single molecular ion at that site is in
the probed quantum state. These CCD images will thus provide molecular state
readout with single-molecule resolution. The group will then use fluorescence
state readout in order to observe electric-dipole mediated rotational
entanglement between co-trapped polar molecular ions. Future extensions of the
work proposed here could include scattering-free detection of single molecules
using optical phase shifts, directly using heavy molecular ion fluorescence
readout for parity-violation and time-reversal symmetry violation searches,
implementations of conditional quantum gates, entangling molecular ions with
external circuits, and studies of decoherence dynamics in ion traps.