* 1404465
* Searches for New Physics with Heavy-Flavor Rich Hadronic Final States in the Post-Higgs Era
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* David Miller, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 04/30/2015
* USD 155,000.00

Overview: A goal of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson, recently
discovered there in 2012, and to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model
of Elementary Particle Physics. These goals are relevant to the understanding of
the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting fraction of a second
just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. To meet
the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new detectors and
accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and analytical
methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader impact for the
training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement of
technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years represent a transition of the LHC
physics program from a collision energy of 8 Teraelectronvole (TeV) data-taking
and operation, to extended operations and data taking at nearly double the
energy, 13-14 TeV. Over a thousand scientists from the United States are
involved with this scientific program on several major
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research to be
conducted under this award to Prof Miller of the University of Chicago and his
group is aimed to address deep questions about the nature of the Universe from
data collected with the ATLAS experiment, one of the major multipurpose
detectors at the LHC. Scientific questions addressed include: Is the newly
discovered Higgs particle part of a larger theoretical picture that includes new
particles that could be discovered at the new higher collision energy? Why is
the observed mass of the Higgs boson so low, found to be 126 billion electron
volts, or roughly 135 times the mass of the proton? In fact this low mass value
is one of the most profound conundrums in all of science and is currently
driving much of the scientific discourse in the field of particle physics. What
are the detailed properties of the heaviest of the quarks, the top quark, and
the force carriers of the electroweak interaction, the W and Z bosons, at high
energy? These questions are critical to our understanding of the full context of
the Standard Model of particle physics and to new physics that lies beyond the
Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, Miller and his group will be
preparing the ATLAS detector, particularly the calorimetry which measures
particle energies, for operations at 13-14 TeV. Analytically, they will be
refining their physics analyses on the lower energy 8 TeV data in preparation
for new measurements and potential discoveries in the high energy collisions.
When the high energy data comes in, the group will focus on searches for
supersymmetry through the study of heavily boosted top quarks, which could
provide information on extended models of Supersymmetry. Such models, if shown
to be valid, are theoretically attractive as they can accommodate the observed
low value of the Higgs Mass. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Miller and
his group will lead activities will directly benefit the local community in
Chicago as well as society at large, both by training students (high school,
undergraduate, and graduate) and postdocs, and by enhancing the prominence of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) in the community. A
special new outreach program will be established with Lane Tech College Prep
High School. The proposed activities include directly mentoring and working with
Lane Tech students to bring the excitement felt by High Energy Physicists today
into the classroom and to truly stimulate the students using modern, high-tech,
and real-life projects in science.