* 1404995
* CDS&E: Compiler/Runtime Support for Developing Scalable Parallel Multi-Scale Multi-Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Atanas Rountev, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 10/31/2019
* USD 544,347.00

The dramatic strides in computer speed and performance over the last few decades
make it feasible to accurately model increasingly complex phenomena. However,
achieving high performance on massively parallel supercomputers is an extremely
challenging task. With deepening memory hierarchies, significantly higher
degrees of per-chip multi-core parallelism, the task of programming compute-
intensive engineering applications to attain high performance on a large scale
cluster system has become increasingly difficult. It is often the case that the
time and effort required to develop effective and efficient software has become
the bottleneck in advancing many areas of science and engineering. This
challenge can be overcome by advances in compile-time/runtime systems that can
ease the burden on the programmer while delivering a high performance portable
instantiation of the particular application on modern and emerging high
performance platforms.

To address this challenge, this project is developing a novel framework for
transforming irregular scientific/engineering applications in a global address
space framework. The research is grounded in a very different and complementary
research direction to most current efforts in addressing the challenge of
enhancing programmer productivity, maintaining portability, and achieving good
performance on scalable distributed-memory parallel systems. The project will
advance compiler/runtime techniques so that users can develop annotated
sequential programs, to be automatically transformed by our system for efficient
execution on distributed-memory parallel systems. This approach is motivated by
the success of the popular OpenMP and OpenACC pragma based approaches to
transforming annotated sequential programs for parallel execution on multicore
and GPU/accelerator systems, respectively. An annotation based OpenAPP (APP -
Asynchronous Partitioned Parallelism) framework is proposed for source-to-source
transformation of an important class of scientific/engineering programs using
the inspector/executor paradigm for execution on distributed-memory parallel
systems. The proposed framework will be validated using several medium to large
scale applications.

The project seeks to significantly lower the entry barrier associated with
effective use of scalable distributed-memory computers, which are essential if
more than 100x performance improvement over sequential codes is sought. A
successful outcome of this project will be transformative for computational and
domain scientists and engineers who seek to use next generation parallel systems
for their simulation and modeling. The developed tools will be made publicly
available to the community under an open source license. The project will also
organize workshops that bring together compiler/runtime experts and
computational scientists developing massively parallel scientific/engineering
applications.