* 1404370
* Evaluating Sea-Surface Conditions in the Interglacial Arctic Ocean Using Planktic Foraminiferal Assemblages and Mg/Ca Ratios
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Leonid Polyak, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 251,998.00

Summer sea ice cover in the Arctic Ocean is diminishing rapidly. The rate and
extent to which it decreases has implications for shipping, mineral development,
climate, and national defense. Models can be used to predict the future with
some accuracy, but we know that existing models cannot yet fully reproduce
observed changes in sea ice extent. Another approach is to look for analogs in
the past. What was the sea cover like in the geologic past? Was the Arctic ice
free under previous warm atmospheric conditions? Using independent estimates
such as from ice cores, it is known when the Arctic was warm in the past. This
project will develop an estimator, or proxy, for sea surface temperature. This
is based on single-celled organisms known as foraminifera that live in the
surface waters of the ocean. When the proxy indicates that sea surface
temperature was higher than the melting point of sea ice, we know that sea ice
was not present.

In the course of completing this research project, contributions will be made to
training the next generation of scientists, as well as to informing the broader
population about the Arctic. Partial support of a postdoctoral researcher on
this project will allow her to broaden her scientific expertise and
international experience. An undergraduate student involved in this work will
also receive valuable training in many technical aspects of the research.
Collaboration with scientists from several countries will aid in fostering
broader international cooperation in the Arctic. Results of this research will
enrich the content of courses taught by the principal investigator. Knowledge
from this project will be disseminated to both specialists and the broader
public through talks, publications in professional and popular journals, and
internet blogs. The target audiences will include K-12 students of various
grades, as well as parents and educators through the Byrd Polar Research Center
Learning Center.

Proxy reconstructions of the past warm intervals in the Arctic are needed to
compare and contrast with understanding of the ongoing and projected changes in
the Arctic marine ecosystem environment. Funds are provided to characterize
Arctic paleo sea surface temperatures based on the composition of planktic
foraminiferal species and their magnesium/calcium ratios in sediment samples
from the Fram Strait (the Arctic-Atlantic gateway) and the central Arctic Ocean.
This research will involve close collaboration with several national and
international partners to ensure sample exchange, interlaboratory data
compatibility, and a broad context for interpretation.

Achieving the project goals involves several methodological and data-producing
steps, including (1) development of the optimal cleaning/measuring procedure for
Mg/Ca analysis on fragile tests of subpolar planktic foraminifers, (2)
calibration of Mg/Ca to modern hydrography using improved assemblage-based
transfer functions, and (3) reconstruction of paleo temperatures at high-
resolution (decadal to century-scale) using Holocene cores from the Fram Strait,
as well as warming/ice-reduction events in the central Arctic Ocean (e.g.,
Marine Isotope Stages 1, 5, and 11). This research will provide insights into
the extent of surface warming and sea-ice retreat in the Arctic Ocean during
past climate amelioration events, as well as the short-term variability in the
export of sea ice and polar waters during the Holocene. It will also contribute
to understanding the response of Arctic biota, exemplified by planktic
foraminifers, to climatic warming and sea-ice reduction. The resultant data sets
will be made available through appropriate public archives.