* 1404976
* CNIC: US-UK-Czech Republic Research Planning for Collaboration on Aperiodic Protein Crystallography
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Gloria Borgstahl, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2016
* USD 63,016.00

The research planning visit with expert scientists in the United Kingdom and the
Czech Republic will initiate cooperative research intended to advance knowledge
in the atomic visualization of the macromolecules of life. Protein
crystallography uses X-rays and crystallized proteins to provide detailed
pictures of biologically-important large molecules. This project development
effort is focused on a type of crystal that currently cannot be imaged as the
needed software does not exist. The team's ultimate goal is to develop methods
to solve these important structures and, for this, the international
collaboration is essential. This catalytic collaboration is expected to impact
the field of structural biology in a fundamental way by providing new tools to
solve structures that currently can not be deciphered. The research is
integrated with education to provide graduate and undergraduate students with
early career research experiences abroad.

Technical Abstract: This purpose of this visit is to initiate and plan the
development of software for the refinement of incommensurately-modulated
aperiodic protein crystal structures. The U.S. PI and two U.S. student
researchers will visit Dr. Garib Murshudov at Cambridge University, in the UK,
who is a leading authority in periodic protein crystal structure refinement, and
author of the REFMAC software package. Then, they will visit Dr. Václav
Petrícek, Dr. Michal Dusek and Dr. Lukás Palatinus at the Institute of Physics
of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, who have written JANA, an
aperiodic crystallography software package that is used to refine small molecule
structures in (3+1)D superspace. To solve the structures from (3+1)D modulated
protein crystals, software is needed that includes components from REFMAC and
JANA. The research planning visit should establish the balanced and expert
international collaboration needed to achieve this goal. After the research
plannning stage, the principal investigator intends to apply for follow-on
research support through NSF programs in Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.