* 1404218
* Nuclear Reactions to Probe Structure of Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jolie Cizewski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 444,910.00

Experimental nuclear physics helps us to understand the properties of the nuclei
at the center of atoms and how the elements are synthesized in stars and their
explosions. This project enhances our understanding of these fundamental
questions by accelerating nuclei to high energies and measuring gamma and
charged particle radiation that is emitted when they interact with other atomic
nuclei. The focus is on accelerating beams of atomic nuclei that are unstable to
beta decay, living for times as short as seconds. The interactions between
atomic nuclei informs our understanding of the properties of atomic nuclei,
especially those far from stability that are more weakly bound, as well as
helping us to understand how the parents of the stable elements were
synthesized. The project exploits state-of-the-art instruments and accelerator
facilities in the U.S. Central to this effort is enhancing the education of
students and postdoctoral scholars and preparing them for careers in education
and fundamental and applied research. The nuclear physics results from this
project are also of importance in astronomy, to understand the abundance of
elements observed in the cosmos, and for nuclear energy and national security,
to understand properties of and reactions on fragments from fission of
actinides. To expand the reach of this project, the principal investigator
presents workshops to undergraduate students on how to prepare for graduate
studies and gives lectures to the public and schools on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the frontier areas of nuclear physics is
the study of the structure of atomic nuclei far from the valley of stability. In
atomic nuclei the single-particle orbitals are expected to change as a function
of neutron and proton number, and in addition are very sensitive to the presence
of deformation. Single-particle characteristics can be probed in single-particle
transfer reactions. Light-ion transfer reactions will be studied with beam
energies near the Coulomb barrier and about 35-MeV per nucleon. Studies will
concentrate on neutron-rich nuclei near the N=50 neutron shell closure,
accelerated fragments following fission of 252Cf and light nuclei important for
understanding the synthesis of nuclei in stars and their explosions. These
studies will be carried out with accelerated beams of rare isotopes at the
National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State
University and the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System (ATLAS) at Argonne
National Laboratory. The NSCL focus is to extract spectroscopic strengths with
reduced dependence on theoretical model parameters. At ATLAS the group will
exploit Gammasphere-ORRUBA: Dual Detectors for Nuclear Structure Studies to
probe the fragmentation of single-particle strength with coincidence
measurements between charged particles (measured with ORRUBA, the Oak Ridge
Rutgers University Barrel Array of position-sensitive silicon strip detectors)
and gamma rays (measured with Gammasphere, the array of 110 Compton-suppressed
Ge gamma-ray detectors). The group will also further develop capabilities to
measure particle-gamma-ray coincidences with scintillator detectors coupled to
ORRUBA.