* 1404658
* Understanding nanoscale characteristics of protein self-assembly on polymeric surfaces with multiscale chemical heterogeneity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Angel de Dios, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

Prof. Jong-in Hahm and her students in the Department of Chemistry at Georgetown
University conducts research to advance understanding of the common but very
complex phenomenon of protein adsorption onto polymer surfaces. The process of
protein adsorption onto solid surfaces impacts essential everyday applications
in food processing/packaging, health devices, diagnostic tools, and medical
products. Specifically, Prof. Hahm's research team focuses on investigating the
nature of protein-surface interactions at the nanoscale whose size regime is
increasingly becoming crucial for the development of highly miniaturized protein
detection and diagnostic devices. The multifaceted approach of this project aims
to provide fundamental insights for protein-domain specific adsorption on
nanoscale polymeric surfaces which, in turn, will be valuable in laying the
foundation for guiding principles to create next generation protein arrays.
Through this research, graduate, undergraduate, and local high school students
learn the state-of-the-art techniques of optical imaging and materials
characterization. Students also gain experience in conducting solid-state
protein assays in a quantitative manner using newly developed polymer-based
protein nanoarrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Hahm's research team elucidates both static and dynamic
interaction preferences between individual proteins and polymeric domains at the
single- and sub-biomolecule level. Sub-biomolecular resolution structural
imaging of individual proteins is carried out by high-resolution atomic force
microscopy. In addition, kinetic measurements of protein adsorption onto various
size-scale polymeric surfaces are performed by surface plasmon resonance
spectroscopy. This research aims to narrow the nanoscale-macroscale gap and
promote our understanding of nanoscale protein adsorption through combined
experimental and theoretical approaches.