* 1404672
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Future Woodland Composition in a Changing Climate: Abiotic and Biotic Controls on Tree Regeneration
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Nichole Barger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2017
* USD 14,606.00

Around the world, woody species are experiencing extensive mortality due to
drought and insect outbreaks brought on by warmer temperatures. This has already
altered the structure of forests and woodlands and affected fluxes of water and
energy, carbon stocks, and ecosystem services. This project will evaluate the
effects of climate on the woodlands of piñon pine and juniper trees that cover
much of the southwestern U.S. Previous, intensive work on the ability of new
trees to establish themselves from seeds in one locality will be combined with
data on woodland composition, soils, and local climate across the region and
analyzed to discover relationships between climate and forest regeneration. This
will help predict how the vegetation of the southwest may shift with future
change in climate, and advance our general understanding of how changes on a
global scale affect local ecological systems.

The societal impacts of this study include increasing collaborations between
university scientists and land managers, mentoring K-12 and undergraduate
students, and incorporating the research into teaching. The study will enable
land managers to identify areas that are most vulnerable to changes in piñon-
juniper woodland structure and composition. Researchers will work with K-12
schools to teach students about the scientific process, mentor undergraduate
students on independent research projects, and incorporate results into a module
for an undergraduate course.