* 1404677
* EAGER: Mobile Application Security through Remote Sandboxing and Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/31/2013,08/31/2016
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 187,383.00

The last few years have witnessed an explosive growth in the number of personal
mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets. This growth has been followed
by an even more exceptional increase in the download of mobile applications, as
well as in the related security threats. In this context, the cloud computing
paradigm can be leveraged to improve mobile application security. The
fundamental idea is to install the mobile application on a remote server in the
cloud infrastructure rather than on the device. Then the application can be
accessed with techniques similar to remote desktop computing. This approach is
referred to as remote sandboxing.

The major advantage of this scheme is that it is very suitable to efficiently
offer advanced security features. To this end, remote sandboxing is complemented
with a framework for cloud-based security services tailored to mobile
applications. The framework supports heterogeneous mobile devices and platforms,
and provides methods to improve the resource utilization of the cloud
infrastructure. Furthermore, it provides energy-efficient and reliable support
for remote networking of mobile devices.

The remote sandboxing framework will enable a new cloud delivery model, where
security services specific to mobile applications are offered to the users. It
will also benefit cloud computing by improving efficiency in resource allocation
and management, as well as by fostering research on security. Finally, the
research will promote the awareness of security threats and privacy issues
affecting personal devices, and include activities targeted to undergraduate and
K-12 students.