* 1404639
* Degrafting of polymer brush molecules from substrates: Nuisance or opportunity?
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 504,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer brush-molecules are long molecular chains attached to surfaces. Such
structures are important in numerous technological applications, such as low-
friction coatings. Polymer brushes are typically anchored to the substrate via a
chemical bond to increase their stability. This project will be a systematic
study addressing the role of polymer length, number of polymer molecules per
unit area, and distribution of localized electrical charges along the molecules
on brush stability and attachment. It will be carried out using specimens that
feature gradual and continuous variation of the aforementioned molecular brush
attributes. A new method will be introduced that enables removal of molecular
polymer brushes from technologically important substartes such as silicon
dioxide by selectively breaking the silicon-oxygen bond that holds the
macromolecule attached to the substrate. The scientific aspect of the proposed
work will be complemented with outreach and education activities. They include
i) training graduate students, ii) conducting educational outreach activities at
an elementary school, iii) attracting women, underrepresented minorities, and
local K-12 teachers to take part in research activities in coordination with NC
State's Science House and Engineering House programs and the Triangle MRSEC
Program, and iv) organizing national and international scientific meetings in
soft materials for students and faculty in the Research Triangle region.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The principal goal of this project is to gain detailed understanding of the
stability of neutral and charged polymer brushes as a function of molecular
weight, grafting density (i.e., number of polymer grafts per unit area), and
charge density (for polyelectrolyte brushes) on solid surfaces. Degrafting of
polyelectrolyte brushes from underlying substrates will be studied
systematically, addressing the role of molecular weight, grafting density, and
spatial distribution of charges (as well as their mutual interplay) on the brush
stability using combinatorial assembly methods. Comprehending the role of charge
distribution along macromolecular grafts and its interplay with molecular weight
and density of the grafts is important for many applications utilizing charged
polymer brushes. "On-demand" chemical degrafting methods will be introduced and
employed to characterize the properties of polymeric grafts (i.e., molecular
weight, grafting density, and chemical structure of brushes prepared by post-
polymerization modification) synthesized by "grafting from" polymerization. In
combination with selective analytical methods complete information about the
graft molecular weight and chemical structure will be obtained. New patterning
methods will enable the formation of complex chemical patterns with adjustable
compositional variation across pattern boundaries. The latter strategy not only
offers the ability to characterize fully the attributes of polymers grown via
"grafting from" polymerization, but also paves the way towards generating
complex chemical patterns with tailored spatial distribution of chemical
heterogeneities on surfaces.