* 1404457
* Optical Property, Charge Carrier Relaxation and Charge Transfer Properties in Chemically-Synthesized Layered TiS2 Nanodiscs with Controlled Lateral and Transverse Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 408,757.00

Non-technical Description: This research project investigates the properties of
a new class of 2-dimensional nanomaterials, i.e., layered transition metal
dichalcogenides, where unique electronic, optical and transport properties not
observed in the bulk phase can be harvested through the control of the
dimensions in nanoscale. The research team, consisting of experts in the
spectroscopic characterization and computer simulation of the materials,
collaborates to gain an understanding on how the variations of the physical and
chemical structures can tune the material properties. The outcome of this
research will be valuable to the potential optoelectronic applications of these
nanomaterials. The principal investigator of this project also develops, in
collaboration with an industrial partner, a training program on instrumentation,
focusing on signal measurement and processing, for both undergraduate and
graduate students in multiple disciplines. This effort narrows the gap between
current curriculum on such topics and the instrumentation skills required in
many science and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The project utilizes chemically synthesized titanium disulfide
nanodiscs in solution as a model system. The nanodisc thickness can be
controlled in chemical synthesis, varying from a few to more than ten atomic
layers, and the nanodisc diameter can be varied from tens to hundreds of
nanometers, providing a significant range of dimensional control in two
perpendicular directions. Using these nanomaterials, the research focuses on the
following specific tasks: (i) understanding how the optical transition energy
and interlayer phonon of titanium disulfide nanodiscs are influenced by the
variations of both the nanodisc thickness and diameter and by the
photoexcitation of the charge carriers; and (ii) understanding the rates and
pathways of the charge carrier relaxation and charge transfer correlated with
the dimensional variation and the interfacial structure. Time-resolved pump-
probe spectroscopy and electron microscopy are the main experimental tools to
elucidate the structure-property relationship. The calculation of the electronic
and vibrational structures of the nanodiscs of different dimensions, employing
density functional theory, provides an atomistic picture of the structurally
dependent material properties of this layered material system.