* 1404671
* Electro-Optics of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Thin Films: Physics and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Robert Haddon, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 349,995.00

Abstract - Electro-Optics of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Thin Films: Physics
and Applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual semiconducting single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SC-SWNTs) constitute the ideal field effect transistor as a result of
their high mobilities, high current carrying capacity and low intrinsic
capacitance. The development of devices based on a channel composed of a single
semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotube continues to be an active area of
research due to the stringent requirements that this technology places on the
material purity of the SC-SWNTs (diameter, chirality and the necessity to
exclude metallic SWNTs), and assembly of individual devices into fully wired
very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuits. In this respect the SC-SWNT films
proposed for study in the present project form a particularly appealing target
because such films are readily prepared by simple bench top laboratory
techniques that include filtration, spraying, drop-casting and stamping and by
careful control of the preparative conditions, readily allow the reproducible
fabrication of flexible, transferrable SC-SWNT films with thicknesses that range
from 1 to 1000 nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal aims to further
this thin film technology by extending the outstanding engineering and physical
properties of single SC-SWNT devices to chemically engineered SWNT thin films by
use of suitably chosen organic dopants and ionic liquids in gated field effect
transistor devices. Among the functional optoelectronic components selected for
study are electro-optical modulators, photodetectors and light emitters. The
experimental observation of the enhanced Franz-Keldysh effect may lead to a new
generation of electro-optical modulators capable of operating at high speed,
high efficiency and low voltage. The new strategy of p-n junction formation,
based on the recent observation of strong internal electric fields in SWNT thin
film channels coated with ionic liquids, will be used to enhance the
photoconductivity in SWNTs. In past flexible electronics and smart window
applications, SWNT thin films were usually explored as passive transparent
electrodes; this proposal will explore the feasibility of utilizing SWNT thin
films as active electrochromic layers for smart windows and electrically
configurable optical media. The proposed work will stimulate the development of
a new field of optoelectronics based on SWNT thin films and thin film based
flexible electronics which will increase the technological and economic
competitiveness of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to experimentally explore the physics of
electro-optical phenomena in films of semiconducting single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SC-SWNTs) and their device applications. The SWNT thin films
constitute the ideal medium for studying electro-optical phenomena, because they
possess the same fundamental physical properties as individual SWNTs, but also
allow the application of a variety of characterization techniques and offer the
possibility of the development of a new class of SWNT thin film based electro-
optical devices. The project focuses on the application of semiconducting SWNTs
and the work builds on recent developments in this area such as the SWNT
bolometric photodetector, optocoupler, electro-optical modulator and
electrically reconfigurable optical media. Proposed new experiments include: (i)
the realization of the enhanced Franz-Keldysh effect by the application of
strong longitudinal electric fields to films of aligned SWNTs; (ii) the
fabrication of SWNT p-n junctions utilizing electrostatic doping induced by an
ionic liquid for the development of photodetectors and light emitters; (iii)
exploration of the ability of SWNT thin films to function as electrically
configurable optical media of spatially modulated infrared transparency and as
the active electrochromic layer for smart windows.