* 1404488
* Laser Cooling Ions in An Ultracold Neutral Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Scott Bergeson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 140,040.00

This project explores the possibility of using laser light to reduce the
temperature of a gas composed of electrons and charged atoms (a so-called
"neutral plasma"). The charged atoms (ions) and electrons exert electrical
forces on each other. In ordinary plasmas, the ions and electrons move quickly
and only push on each other briefly as they rapidly pass one another. When the
plasma temperature falls, the amount of time charged particles spend near each
other increases and the influence of the electrical force becomes more
pronounced. At low enough temperatures, the gaseous plasma assumes
characteristics of dense liquids. Interestingly, fusion-class plasmas (extremely
hot plasmas that are being studied for their potential as an advanced source of
electrical power production) also behave as dense liquids. This happens not
because of low temperature, but because of high density. The degree to which a
plasma behaves as a dense liquid is given by a mathematical quotient of the
plasma density divided by the temperature. In fusion plasmas, this quotient is
large because of high density. In the proposed experiments, this quotient is
large because of low temperature. This makes it possible for the proposed
experiments to study the physics of fusion-class plasmas using a model system at
low temperatures with exquisite control over experimental conditions. Activities
funded by this proposal will explore the limits of low temperatures in ultracold
plasmas. Brigham Young University, where this research will be carried out,
sponsors one of the largest undergraduate physics programs in the nation.
Because several undergraduate students will be involved in this work, NSF
funding will directly influence their scientific education and
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong coupling parameter, gamma, is
limited in ultracold neutral plasmas by the process of disorder-induced heating
(DIH). The cold ions are created by photo-ionizing laser-cooled Ca atoms in a
magneto-optical trap. Although cold, these ions have an overwhelmingly large
electrical potential energy. The ions are accelerated as they move to minimize
their potential energy. The Ca ion temperature increases from a few mK to a few
kelvin, a factor of 1000 in less than 100 ns. Kinetic and thermodynamic plasma
properties scale with gamma. Unfortunately, DIH limits gamma to be less than 2
in neutral plasmas. The goal of this research, therefore, is to reduce the ion
temperature in ultracold neutral plasmas using laser cooling, increasing the
value of gamma. This proposal builds on extensive previous work by Dr. Bergeson
in this field. Successful realization of this goal will generate a platform from
which high-gamma experiments can be performed in the future. The ions will be
cooled using a powerful frequency-broadened laser at 397 nm. The optical leak in
the cooling transition to the 3d doublet D (J=3/2) level will be plugged using
lasers at 850 and 854 nm. Repumping coherences will be avoided by alternately
switching these near-infrared laser intensities. After a specified cooling time,
the cooling light will be switched off and the ion temperature will be probed by
scanning a low-intensity laser across the 397 nm absorption line profile,
collecting the laser-induced fluorescence, and fitting the measured lineshape to
a Voigt profile. One challenge in this project is using optical forces to
overcome the electron-driven radial plasma expansion. Simulations suggest that
this is possible. Another challenge will be to scatter photons from the plasma
ions fast enough that the ions can be slowed and confined before velocity-
changing collisions redistribute the ion kinetic energy to untrapped portions of
the ensemble. Numerical estimates suggest that this should be possible at low
plasma densities.