* 1404408
* Searches for New Physics with the ATLAS Experiment at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Andrew Haas, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Meadows
* 04/30/2015
* USD 155,000.00

Overview: Fundamental goals of the experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN, the Center for Particle Physics in Europe, located in Geneva, Switzerland
are to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson, recently discovered there in
2012, and to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model of Elementary
Particle Physics. These goals are relevant to the understanding of the Universe
at its most fundamental level just in the fleeting fraction of a second just
after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. To meet the
challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new detectors and
accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and analytical
methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader impact for the
training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement of
technological benefits to society over the longer term. Over a thousand
scientists from the United States are involved with this scientific program on
several major experiments.

Intellectual Merit: Among the important outstanding questions is why the
observed mass of the Higgs boson is so low, found to be 126 billion electron
volts, or roughly 135 times the mass of the proton. In fact this low mass value
is one of the most profound conundrums in all of science and is currently
driving much of the scientific discourse in the field of particle physics.
Certain extended models of Supersymmetry, such as the Next-to-Minimal
Supersymmetric Model (NMSSM), are theoretically attractive and can accommodate
the observed low value of the Higgs Mass.

Through this award, Professor Andrew Haas and his group at New York University
will conduct analytical searches for this new physics using the data from the
ATLAS experiment, one of the major multipurpose detectors at CERN. They will
probe into the domain of Higgs physics, searching for the decays of Higgs bosons
into pairs of special, low mass particles called "a" bosons and into the domain
of extended supersymmetry such as the NMSSM. The PI has performed such searches
already at the Tevatron Collider at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,
Batavia, IL, with data from the Dzero Experiment, but the group expects the
ATLAS data to provide 10 times better sensitivity.

The NYU group will also search for long-lived "meta-stable" new particles
decaying in the inner tracker of ATLAS, in events with missing transverse
energy, using simulation and reconstruction techniques developed by Haas. This
analysis could form the basis for possible future searches for non-Standard
Model Higgs boson decays to new, long-lived particles.

Broader Impact: Exciting discoveries at the LHC have created a special
opportunity to interact with the public and students. Haas has an established
track record of incorporating undergraduates in his research program in
effective ways. Importantly, the group will work with local New York City high
schools, to attract motivated students to engage in summer research projects
using the ATLAS data.