* 1404026
* Autoignition of Primary Reference Fuels and Blends with Ethanol and Dimethly Ether
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Forman Williams, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 04/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

1404026&lt;br/&gt;Seshardri, Kalyanasundaram&lt;br/&gt;Title: Autoignition of
Primary Reference Fuels and Blends with Ethanol and Dimethly
Ether&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion is important in many industrial and
engineering applications, such as automotive engines and power plants. The goal
of this research is to provide scientific knowledge that will be useful for
developing the technology required for designing engines that make efficient use
of fossil fuels and carbon-dioxide-neutral transportation fuels. The proposed
effort involves both experiments, with whose results theoretical/mathematical
analysis of the ignition phenomena can be validated. Graduate students working
on the project contribute to the nation's STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autoignition is
an inherent property of all long-chain hydrocarbons and some oxygenated fuels as
they occur in engines. Efficient operation of engines depends crucially on this
property. A comprehensive experimental, computational and analytical study will
be carried out with the goal of obtaining a fundamental understanding of
autoignition of n-heptane, iso-octane, ethanol, dimethyl ether, in laminar non-
premixed flows. The alkanes n-heptane and iso-octane are selected because they
are designated as primary reference fuels and are considered as surrogates of
Diesel and gasoline. Critical conditions of autoignition will be measured.
Computations will be performed using detailed chemistry. A significant part of
the research will be devoted to employing rate-ratio asymptotic techniques to
obtain analytical expressions that can be used to predict autoignition. The key
outcomes are expected to be, experimental data on autoignition for the fuels,
tested chemical kinetic mechanisms, and analytical expressions for predicting
autoignition in the intermediate and high temperature regimes that can be
employed in computational fluid dynamic codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide a clear fundamental understanding of autoignition as a
chain-branching/chain-breaking process which involves the competition of the
fuels for specific radicals in different temperature regimes. The research will
provide new mathematical techniques for analyzing autoignition. These techniques
have their foundation in boundary layer theory and singular perturbation
analysis. Therefore they are expected to have a much wider use in analyzing
problems in fluid mechanics, thermal sciences and chemical sciences.