* 1404446
* Research in Novel Symmetries of Quantum Field and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Nikita Nekrasov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 344,886.00

This award funds the research of Professor Nikita Nekrasov of SUNY Stony Brook.
All known interactions of elementary particles are described by mathematical
symmetries called gauge symmetries. The Standard Model of elementary particles
is described by such a gauge symmetry. In physical systems there are often
several ground states which describe the system (ice and water at the freezing
point has two ground states, for example), and gauge symmetries are no
exception. This research will study the different ground states of various
systems, including gauge theories. It has recently been realized that the ground
states of some systems can be related closely to ground states of very different
systems. For example, phase transitions in condensed matter systems are closely
related to the possible ground states of gauge theories; ground states of
strongly correlated electron systems are related to those in quantum information
theory, etc. This synergistic research in mathematical physics offers the
possibility of connecting what appear to be very different physical systems.
Connections between apparently different systems have had great impact in the
past. The study of superconductivity by Landau and Ginzburg led to the Higgs
mechanism of the Standard Model, the purely mathematical study of the Riemann
zeta function led to a better understanding of prime numbers and this has had
major impact in cryptography, and the mathematical study of string theory has
led to a better understanding of the properties of strongly interacting
particles such as protons and pions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for
support of theoretical research and education on gauge theory in various space-
time dimensions, models of statistical physics relevant for strongly correlated
electron systems and the theory of phase transitions, and models of string
theory relevant for studies of strongly coupled phenomena and the nature of
space-time at fundamentally small scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique
nature of this project is the broad impact of the cluster of questions being
investigated. It touches upon the gauge theories describing the interactions of
fundamental particles, the kind studied at the LHC experiment at CERN and at
others machines all over the world, and the gauge theories with various degrees
of supersymmetry, theoretical laboratories for testing ideas of importance for
phenomenology; the quasi-one and two-dimensional strongly correlated electron
systems studied in different laboratories in connection with quantum information
on the one hand and superconductivity on the other hand; mathematical questions
of algebraic geometric and topological nature, functional analysis and the study
of spectra of Schroedinger operators and their non-hermitian analogues;
foundations of quantum mechanics and the very art of quantization; topological
strings and the topological quantum gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying
theme in all these problems is the reduction of the non-perturbative partition
function of gauge/string theory computed in a specific supergravity background
to a statistical mechanical model. The correlation functions of the statistical
model are related to matrix elements of generators of some infinite dimensional
algebraic structure. It is planned to use the techniques and methods of all the
fields of research mentioned above. Specifically, it is planned to generalize
the Ward and Dyson-Schwinger identities of quantum field theory to incorporate
non-perturbative phenomena. The intention is to establish, using these
identities, that the gauge theories, at least supersymmetric gauge theories,
possess a new type of symmetry, at least in the low-energy regime, which is a
deformation of conventional symmetries of two dimensional conformal field
theories. Using these symmetries it is hoped to find new geometric and algebraic
structures in the landscape of vacua of grand unified theories and possibly even
string compactifications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research lies at the
interface of several domains of theoretical physics and several domains of
mathematics and provides a good environment for training graduate students.