* 1404109
* RUI: Negative Ion Photodetachment Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Nevin Gibson, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 308,862.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Lasers and other light sources will be used
to measure the properties of negative ions, which are atoms and molecules that
have an extra electron. High-precision measurements of how tightly the extra
electron is bound will be useful for modeling chemical reactions and plasma
interactions for such practical applications as the manufacturing of
semiconductors for computers and other electronic devices. The detailed studies
of negative ions will yield insights into "dynamical many-body interactions"
which are central to understanding how collections of particles behave
differently from what one would expect from the knowledge gained by studying
single particles in isolation. These interactions are general phenomenon of
interest for a broad range of fields in physics, chemistry, and materials
science, including nanotechnology. The project will enhance the research and
teaching infrastructure of Denison University, an undergraduate college.
Students will participate in the experiments both on-campus and at the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, providing important research experiences for young
scientists including technical training in electronics, computers, lasers, and
optics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies the interactions of photons with negative ions in two related series of
experiments. The extra electron in a negative ion is bound predominantly by
electron correlation effects and therefore negative ions provide a fertile
testing ground for state-of-the-art atomic physics calculations regarding these
multi-body interactions. In the first series of experiments, complex atomic
negative ions are investigated on-campus at Denison University using tunable
infrared laser light to detach outer-shell electrons. The ground and upper state
photodetachment thresholds of several lanthanide and Group III negative ions
(gallium and possibly thallium) will be measured in order to determine the
electron affinities and energy levels. There is currently strong disagreement
between theoretical predictions and experimental photoelectron spectroscopy
results for these systems. The faculty and student researchers will also
investigate resonances and bound excited states in lanthanide ions including
bound-bound electric-dipole transitions that exist in the negative ions of
cerium and lanthanum. The second series of complementary experiments will
investigate inner-shell photodetachment from the negative ions of oxygen,
hydrogen, and carbon chains of n numbers of carbon atoms (O-, H-, C_n-) and
other atomic and molecular species using high energy (12-1000 eV) photons at the
Advanced Light Source synchrotron. These experiments continue the PIs'
investigations into the effects of the outer-shell electrons on the detaching
inner electron's wavefunction. The dynamic multi-electron interactions in the
photoexcitation of the highly correlated cores of negative ions continue to
challenge the fundamental understanding of atomic structure. Investigations into
heavy negative ions and detection of the neutral decay products will test the
latest theories describing inner-shell photodetachment.