* 1404212
* Collaborative Research: 2016-2019 Development of the Askaryan Radio Array Ultra-High Energy Neutrino Detector at the South Pole
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Albrecht Karle, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 554,296.00

Ultra-high-energy neutrinos are unique astrophysical messengers that interact
weakly with intervening matter and can therefore be used to probe the distant
universe. A small but theoretically observable flux of these ultra-high-energy
neutrinos is expected to be produced by the interaction between high-energy
"cosmic ray" charged particles and cosmic microwave background photons as the
cosmic rays travel through the Universe. Observing these cosmogenic neutrinos
would allow physicists to begin to study physics at energies beyond the standard
models. The large volume of radio transparent ice covering the geographic South
Pole in Antarctica has hosted several pioneering efforts to detect these high
energies neutrinos using a radio Cherenkov "Askaryan effect." The Askaryan
effect describes the process by which ultra-high-energy neutrinos traversing the
dense polar ice generate observable radio waves. The Askaryan Radio Array (ARA),
located at the South Pole Station, was designed to exploit this phenomenon to
first detect and ultimately study these ultra-high-energy neutrinos. This award
provides funding to deploy two more ARA stations to the existing suite of three
stations, and to continue observations. The award will support the involvement
of students, including undergraduate students, who will be engaged in on-site
activities at the South Pole. It will also support outreach efforts including
activities with QuarkNet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ARA is designed to be implemented
in phases. During the initial phase the ARA project deployed a testbed and three
full stations that used equipment designed and built for the co-located IceCube
Neutrino Observatory. With this award the project will deploy two more stations
and continue observations with all stations to demonstrate the technology,
accumulate knowledge about radio frequency properties of the upper layers of the
ice sheet at South Pole, and develop reliable hardware and software for
deployable in-ice stations in the future.