* 1404988
* Integrable difference equations and characters of affine Lie algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Rinat Kedem, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2018
* USD 181,000.00

The proposal uses insights gained from models used in mathematical physics in
order to understand algebraic structures found in pure mathematics. The models
are from a special class of models, called integrable models. This means that
due to their high degree of symmetry, they have a sufficient number of
conservation laws -- generalizing conservation of energy -- that they can be
solved exactly. Such models can be found in statistical mechanics (discrete,
possibly finite systems) and in quantum field theory (continuous, infinite-
dimensional systems). There are many structures in mathematics that can be
studied by using techniques and results from the solutions of such systems. They
appear in combinatorics, number theory, representations of non-commutative
algebras, and geometry, to name a few. The results of this project will advance
understanding in all these areas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Frequently, integrable
systems such as quantum spin chains in statistical mechanics, and conformal
field theories and their massive deformations, can be described in
representation-theoretical terms. For example, the transfer matrix of the
Heisenberg spin chains can be given a meaning as a q-character of a finite-
dimensional module of quantum affine algebras. The Hilbert space of integrable
quantum field theories can be expressed as an infinite-dimensional modules of
extensions of the (deformed) Virasoro algebra. Transfer matrices, and the
characters of the Virasoro modules, satisfy difference equations or equations
which can be shown to be discrete integrable equations. The transfer matrices
satisfy a discrete Hirota-type equation which have interpretations as cluster
algebra mutations. The following projects are proposed here: (1) The study of
the difference equations satisfied by the non-commutative generating functions
of graded conformal blocks of WZW theories (generalizations of Demazure
modules). These generating functions are expressed in terms of the cluster
variables in the quantum cluster algebra corresponding to Q-systems for
characters of Kirillov-Reshetikhin modules; (2) The explicit solutions of these
equations as fermionic character formulas; (3) The integrable structure of the
difference equations; (4) The stabilized limits of these functions which give
characters of affine algebra modules or Virasoro modules; (5) Solutions of
discrete integrable equations known as T-systems and quantum T-systems (in the
sense of quantum cluster algebras) and their relation to Nakajima's
t,q-characters; (6) Higher-dimensional integrable difference equations,
generalizing the T-systems viewed as Plucker relations, expressing the discrete
structure of the higher-dimensional analogs of the pentagram maps in algebraic
terms; and (7) Statistical path models which give explicit solutions for
Whittaker vectors, functions and quantum Toda Hamiltonians for finite, affine
and quantum algebras.