* 1404156
* Development of Atomic Theory for Tests of Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 06/30/2017
* USD 180,000.00

This project will investigate how atoms can be used to test our understanding of
the fundamental laws of nature, i.e. our understanding of elementary particles
and their interactions. While one can search for new particles directly with
large collider facilities, it is also possible to test the effects that new
particles could have on processes occurring in atoms and molecules. Such
experiments require very high precision and a very good understanding of the
systems that are being studied. Moreover, certain atoms and molecules might be
much better suited to the studies of fundamental interactions owing to their
having properties that enhance desired effects. This project will investigate
which systems are the best for future studies of this kind. The experimental
work in this field also requires theoretical analysis of the experiments, and
this work will provide such analysis and will develop methods to improve the
accuracy further. This research is at the interface of atomic physics with high-
energy physics, nuclear physics, quantum chemistry, and cosmology. While the
main goal of this project is to study fundamental symmetries, the methodologies
described in this project are applicable to the development of atomic clocks,
laser cooling and trapping, study of super-heavy elements, production and
control of ultracold molecules, study of degenerate quantum gases, astrophysics,
plasma physics, and nuclear physics. Graduate students will be directly involved
in the forefront research under this grant and will present the research at the
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this research is
to develop theoretical methods to advance fundamental symmetry tests with atomic
and molecular systems in the search of new physics beyond the Standard Model.
This project is focused on the study of parity violation and the search for a
permanent electric-dipole moment (EDM). The group will develop theoretical
methods that will allow identification of the best systems for the next
generation of experiments and provide calculations that are crucial for the
analysis of current and past experiments. Specific efforts include: (1)
introduce the Sturm basis sets and test the performance of all the group?s
existing methods using more compact and regular Sturmian basis set functions;
(2) develop an accurate method to evaluate contributions of highly-excited
states in the sum-over-state approach in order to resolve present problems with
the analysis of the most precise parity non-conservation (PNC) study in Cesium;
(3) develop a next-generation Configuration Interaction+all-order code for
accurate calculations of PNC amplitudes relevant to current experimental
research; (4) explore the addition of the effective Hamiltonian to the molecular
configuration interaction (CI) code for the study of diatomic molecules.