* 1404341
* RUI: Rapid Acquisition and Analysis of Complex Spectra with High-Speed Digitizers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Steven Shipman, New College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 244,153.00

This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award from the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry, with co-
funding from the Computer and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&E) and
Planetary Astronomy Programs, supports Professor Steven T. Shipman and his
students at New College of Florida as they develop new tools that will help
scientists analyze data from the atmospheres of planets, including our own and
large clouds of molecules in space. The new tools are based on high-speed
electronics that allow scientists to collect significantly more information
about their samples than was previously possible. Software is being developed
that takes advantage of these high-speed data-collectors and uses new computing
techniques to process the influx of data. All the work is being performed by
undergraduate students working with the principal investigator. The new software
will be publicly shared.

The investigators are using new high-speed digitizers along with grid computing
techniques to rapidly acquire and analyze rotational spectra of molecules of
relevance to interstellar and atmospheric chemistry at temperatures ranging from
roughly 250 to 325 K. In this temperature range, rotational spectra are
extremely complex due to contributions from large amplitude motion and
thermally-populated excited vibrational and conformational states. A new
digitizer with a nearly 8000x speed advantage over current instrumentation is
being used in conjunction with temperature-dependent and microwave-microwave
double resonance measurements to automatically determine lower state energies
and energy level connectivities of a large number of peaks in observed spectra.
Software that is being developed, based on genetic algorithms and other
approaches, will use this information to greatly ease the spectral assignment
process. These algorithms will be ported to a grid computing platform to take
maximum advantage of their parallelism and to further reduce the spectral
analysis time.