* 1404627
* Healing and Reprocessing of Epoxy with Dynamic Covalent Bonds and Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 375,316.00

This grant provides funding for the study of the relationship between processing
conditions and the healing and reprocessing of polymers and polymer composites
containing dynamic covalent bonds. A significant feature of these polymers is
that the backbone of the macromolecular chain can break and reconnect through
bond exchange reactions. While such dynamic covalent reactions do not change the
overall topology and properties of the polymer network, macroscopically they
result in stress relaxation and material welding. The proposed work will examine
the bond exchange reaction kinetics and welding kinetics and their dependence on
processing conditions. Epoxy samples containing dynamic covalent bonds will be
prepared in the lab and tested under different thermo-mechanical loading
conditions to understand the effects of temperature on the bond exchange
reaction kinetics. These samples will be broken then joined together under
different thermo-mechanical loading conditions. Special dyes will be
incorporated into polymer samples to facilitate monitoring the bond breaking and
reforming process, as well as the migration of species due to bond exchange
reactions. From these experiments, the relationships between bond exchange
reaction kinetics, welding kinetics, and processing conditions will be
established. The re-processibility of the dynamic covalent bond epoxy and its
composites will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results from this work will lead to the development of new ?green? epoxy and
composites that can be reshaped and recycled. The primary goal of this research
is to establish fundamental principles for bond exchange reaction kinetics and
welding kinetics. These principles may include how processing parameters, such
as temperature, hold time, applied pressure, and surface roughness, can affect
reshaping, welding, and re-processibility of the epoxy. Determining these
processing parameters will enable robust processing and recycling of the epoxy,
reduction in processing cost, and improvement on product quality. The
established principles can also be used for polymers containing other types of
dynamic covalent bonds.