* 1404159
* Computational Nuclear Many-Body Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Scott Bogner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Nuclear physics plays a key role in our quest to understand the Universe,
addressing fundamental scientific questions like: 1) How did matter come into
being and how does it evolve? 2) How does subatomic matter organize itself and
what phenomena emerge? 3) Are the fundamental interactions that are basic to the
structure of matter fully understood?, and 4) How can the knowledge and
technological progress provided by nuclear physics best be used to benefit
society? In recent years, researchers have made remarkable progress in our
fundamental understanding of the complex and fascinating system that is the
nucleus. This progress has been driven by new theoretical insights and increased
computational power, as well as by experimental access to new isotopes with a
large excess of neutrons or protons. The latter involves large societal
investments in scientific forefront experimental facilities like the Facility of
Radioactive Ion Beams, which is being built at Michigan State University in the
U.S.A. The mentoring of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows is an
integral part of the project. Their professional development toward independence
as original and productive scientists is a central objective of the project and
will continue to prepare them for industry or academic institutions.

While much has been learned so far about nuclear systems and associated
phenomena, much remains to be understood. This project aims to advance our basic
understanding of subatomic matter by addressing many of the above fundamental
questions. For nuclear theorists, the challenge is to develop a comprehensive
and unified description of nuclei and their reactions, grounded in the
fundamental interactions between the constituent nucleons with quantifiable
uncertainties to maximize predictive power. To model such systems according to
the laws of motion and the underlying nuclear forces, requires the development
of sophisticated physical and mathematical algorithms. To address this
challenge, this group will develop a toolbox of methods for dealing with many
strongly-interacting particles (protons and neutrons) capable of treating a wide
variety of nuclear systems, ranging from stable closed-shell nuclei and nuclear
matter as seen in for example neutron stars to exotic loosely-bound neutron and
proton rich nuclei far from shell closures. The toolbox will make use of state-
of-the-art microscopic inputs and will be built around modern many-particle
methods. A premium will be placed on developing reliable theoretical error bars,
which stem in part from truncation errors used to derive nuclear forces,
uncertainties in the fitted parameters of the input interactions, truncated
approximations intended to "soften" the input Hamiltonian, basis-set truncation
errors, and truncation errors in the particular level of many-body
approximation. By developing powerful many-body methods capable of treating a
wide range of nuclear systems with controlled uncertainties, this project will
bring us one step closer to being able to answer the above fundamental questions
of nuclear physics.