* 1404011
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ARWED - AUGMENTED PERCEPTION FOR UPPER-LIMB REHABILITATION
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Nina Robson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 83,212.00

PI: Banerjee, Amarnath/Perez Gracia, Alba/Robson, Nina&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1403502/1403688/1404011&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: ARWED -
Augmented Perception for Upper-Limb Rehabilitation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance &amp; Importance&lt;br/&gt; Training and retraining the movement of
individuals suffering loss of motor ability due to stroke is a challenging task.
In many cases, only partial success is accomplished after long training
sessions. Given the limitations of recovery for post-stroke patients, it is
imperative that better tools and methods for retraining be developed. Even
though several training hypotheses exist, such as need for an exact repetition
of the training pattern, the solutions are still to be found. Overcoming some of
these obstacles is the goal of this proposal. Recent studies show a direct link
between human action perception and action execution. There is some evidence
that the visual observation of human actions has an effect on the movement of
the observer. This priming effect is reduced, or not present, when the motion is
executed by a non-human device, such as a robot. This proposal aims to develop
and test a novel wearable system for the training of the human arm. The system
will allow the user to perceive the device as part of their upper limb (hence
closing the perception/action loop). Training protocols based on observational
learning findings will be implemented with the ARWED in order to develop it as
rehabilitation training device for motor recovery in post-stroke
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual
merit centers on exploiting the link between action-observation and action
execution in order to develop training protocols to facilitate rehabilitation
following stroke. Currently, there are limited systems that utilize virtual
reality in the relearning of biological movements. The proposed development of
augmented wearable system (ARWED) requires solving several challenges in
computer vision/modeling, and robot kinematic mapping. Testing the effectiveness
of the device on priming the perception-action effect will require combined
expertise from the areas of human kinematics, signal analysis, virtual reality,
robotic fault recovery theory and rehabilitation. Therefore, the theoretical
contributions emerging from this multidisciplinary collaborative research team
will advance knowledge and understanding not only within the medical field, but
also across the above-mentioned research areas. The broader impact is based on
the characteristics of the device to be developed, with an expanded ability in
the training and re-training of patients with motor disabilities. Efficient
design and manipulation will make the proposed ARWED system a reliable solution,
which will be broadly utilized by medical professionals working in
rehabilitation, sports therapy and convalescence. The proposed research will
provide effective tools for the training and physical rehabilitation of patients
with limb limitations at any scale, ranging from individuals suffering partial
loss of motor ability to those with severe limitations in mobility due to
strokes, birth defects or accidents. Motor learning theory shows that reducing
feedback during practice benefits long term retention of motor skill training.
Observational learning may offer greater benefits regarding transfer to ADLs, in
comparison to robotic-based stroke training. Thus, a success indicator for these
patients would be the beneficial transfer of training from the un-affected to
affected limb or vice-versa. The ARWED system is expected to advance
significantly the fundamentals of engineering and scientific knowledge, by
implementing the device in experimental and educational work on cognition,
telemanipulation and virtual reality. The medical community would also benefit
from the development of the ARWED by furthering the understanding of how
training using technology may enhance the recovery of motor control in diverse
populations while providing a novel intervention that may prove more effective
than what is currently available. The collaborative nature of the research team
will lead to the education of undergraduate and graduate students in the areas
of Engineering and Kinesiology. In the long run, the outcomes of the proposal
will facilitate the communication between students that want to enter Physical
and Occupational Therapy professions and those that want to design and develop
mechanical devices that can aid in human recovery following neurological injury.