* 1404621
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Laminated Elastomeric Composites with Anisotropic Shape Memory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 260,734.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
provides funding for the development of a robust manufacturing approach for a
novel group of active polymers, anisotropic shape memory elastomeric composites
(ASMEC) and laminates, by the guidance of advanced theoretical and computational
modeling. This approach involves manufacturing of ASMEC and laminates by
embedding a crystallizable thermoplastic fiber network into an elastomeric
matrix with a preferred orientation. The melting and crystallization of the co-
continuous fiber phase provides mechanical switching, enabling active behavior
such as shape memory. The structure-function relationship of the ASMEC will be
investigated using a computational micromechanics approach. Such a relationship
will be used to establish robust design and manufacturing processes for ASMEC.
The ASMECs will then be assembled into elastomeric laminates and their
characterization data will be used to validate the computational and theoretical
models which will in turn be used to guide the design of future ASMECs.
Theoretical studies and material developments will be conducted simultaneously
and in an iterative manner, with computation and theory guiding experiments,
experiments informing theory and computation, with possible discoveries emerging
across all approaches.

If successful, the results from this work will lead to the establishment of a
new paradigm for the construction of a wide range of active polymers, along with
new insights into the mechanics of composite materials. The primary goal of this
work is to establish a relationship between the active behavior of ASMEC and its
microscopic structural parameters, such as fiber orientation, fiber phase
behavior, and volume fraction. The development of ASMEC represents a new
approach to the development of active polymers, quite distinct from the
conventional approach of using highly specialized chemistry. Instead, active
polymers are manufactured using a plug-and-play process where two conventional
polymers are combined to form new active materials/composites. The manufacturing
approach for ASMEC will be highly scalable so that it can be readily
commercialized for large scale production at a low cost. The proposed
theoretical development will also advance current understanding on how polymer
crystallization can be used as a ?switching phase? for active behavior and the
current knowledge on mechanics of composite materials.