* 1404003
* P2C2:  Western Pacific Warm Pool Hydroclimate during the Last Glacial Maximum and the Deglaciation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Yuko Okumura, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2017
* USD 530,005.00

The West Pacific Warm Pool (WPWP) plays an important role in the global
hydrological cycle, and its variability has significant socioeconomic
consequences around the world. Understanding past climate conditions can improve
predictions of future climate changes in this key region and beyond. This study
will extend both the spatial and temporal resolution of paleoclimate data for
the WPWP by studying cave formations (stalagmites) for two key periods: the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM; 19,000-21,000 years ago), when the mean climate was much
colder than today, and the deglaciation (11,000-19,000 years ago), during which
the global climate went through abrupt changes. Comparison between the cave data
from a network of sites and model outputs will strengthen the climate
interpretations made, and will improve the fidelity of both the reconstructions
and the climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate time
series of stalagmite d18O, an established proxy for rainfall amount in the
tropics, from the Philippines (eastern, central, and western sites), the Solomon
Islands, and Vanuatu. These sites cover a wide range of precipitation
variability, as seen during the modern era, and will provide information about
past climate variability at sites that currently have little to no data. This
study will sample the full range of the WPWP hydrologic response to climate
change by reconstructing rainfall from the LGM to the Holocene. The end members
of the cold LGM and the warm Holocene provide a measure of how sensitive WPWP
rainfall is to global mean temperature. The temporal evolution during the
deglaciation reveals the magnitude and spatial pattern of WPWP rainfall changes
associated with abrupt climate events, and how much of a role the tropics
participate in these events. The proxy data will be compared with various
climate model simulations from the CMIP5 and PMIP2/PMIP3 archives and other
sources, focusing on the spatial pattern and seasonality of climate changes, as
well as the commonalities and diversity of different models. To investigate the
teleconnection mechanisms of past abrupt climate changes, additional experiments
will also be conducted with an atmospheric model. The proxy-model comparison
will help validate climate models, which are being used for future climate
projections, and the detailed model analysis and additional experiments will
elucidate the mechanism of past abrupt climate changes. The research team will
work closely with local scientists in the developing countries of Vanuatu and
the Philippines, exchanging knowledge about climate issues and water
availability, issues that have societal and security implications for small
island nations. The project will provide a research experience an undergraduate
student recruited through the GEOFORCE program, which is a selective outreach
program of the Jackson School of Geosciences that trains high school students,
mainly from demographic underrepresented in the geosciences, and involves them
in fieldwork.