* 1404947
* Holonomic D-modules on abelian varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Christian Schnell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2019
* USD 252,062.00

Abelian varieties are at the same time algebraic varieties (spaces described by
polynomial equations) and abelian groups (sets with an operation that obeys the
same laws as addition on the set of whole numbers), and what makes them
interesting to a mathematician is the interplay between those two structures.
They have been intensively studied since the 19th century, especially in the
field of algebraic geometry, but many important questions remain unsolved. This
project will take a new approach to some of those questions, by investigating
the properties of D-modules on abelian varieties. D-modules are basically
systems of partial differential equations, in an abstract form that is useful
for studying geometric questions. For example, whenever one has a mapping from
another algebraic variety to an abelian variety, one gets a certain number of
D-modules on the abelian variety that contain information about the original
mapping. The main new idea is that interesting properties of these (and other)
D-modules on abelian varieties can be revealed with the help of Fourier
analysis, in the same way that interesting properties of signals (such as sound
waves) can be revealed by looking at their frequency spectrum. The hope is that
a good understanding of the "spectrum" of D-modules on abelian varieties will
lead to new results about their geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical
language, the research objective of the project is to give a complete
characterization of Fourier-Mukai transforms of holonomic D-modules on complex
abelian varieties. These transforms are complexes of coherent sheaves on the
moduli space of line bundles with connection (which is a hyperkaehler manifold),
and in many ways, they look remarkably similar to perverse sheaves. This
suggests that Fourier-Mukai transforms of holonomic D-modules should make up an
as-yet conjectural category of "hyperkaehler perverse sheaves"; the project will
make this idea precise and test some of its implications. This question is also
of practical interest, because it provides a new tool for solving problems about
abelian varieties and irregular varieties, similar to the generic vanishing
theorem of Green and Lazarsfeld. A second objective is to make the theory of
mixed Hodge modules more widely known. Building on a recent Clay Mathematics
Institute workshop, the PI and others plan to write a book about mixed Hodge
modules and their applications that will try to make this powerful theory
accessible to non-experts.