* 1404991
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E Decision Framework for Predictive Simulation of Highly Non-Equilibrium Thermal Transport in Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2017
* Jayathi Murthy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 10/31/2017
* USD 190,626.00

CBET 1404991/1404823/1404919&lt;br/&gt;Murthy (U Texas at Austin), Mahadevan
(Vanderbilt), Strachan (Purdue)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last
few years, the ability to experimentally probe physical phenomena at the
nanoscale has improved dramatically. Experimental techniques are producing
detailed nanoscale data on heat transport in materials such as graphene and
silicon, but there are significant questions about whether these data are being
interpreted correctly. One issue is that the theory used to interpret these data
is too simplistic for the highly non-equilibrium regimes involved. Another issue
is that there is significant variability in nanoscale measurements because of
the extremely small length and time scales involved. In order to use
experimental data to improve theory, one must fully account for measurement
uncertainty, statistical variability in nanoscale fabrication techniques, and
variability in material properties, and develop a systematic way to identify
knowledge gaps in current models using these uncertain data. In this project, we
propose to merge two hitherto distinct fields, decision science and phonon
transport simulation, to create the first-ever decision framework for the
systematic development and improvement of nanoscale thermal transport theory.
The work will impact a wide variety of consumer applications including
microelectronics, energy conversion and energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The research and simulation tools developed in the project will be disseminated
to the research community and to the graduate and undergraduate programs at UT
Austin, Purdue and Vanderbilt through Purdue's nanoHUB, along with educational
modules and tutorials to help broaden use. All three schools will actively
engage their existing and highly-effective programs to recruit women and
underrepresented minorities into their research programs. UT Austin will draw
undergraduate research projects from this work to integrate into their
innovative 35-in-5 Women in ME initiative which aims to increase the percentage
of women in their freshman Mechanical Engineering batch to 35% by
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is to develop
a deeper understanding of highly non-equilibrium phonon transport in
nanomaterials. During the last few years, as our ability to probe nanoscale
thermal and electronic transport has improved, it has come to be recognized that
non-equilibrium transport dominates the performance of many emerging
nanotechnologies and measurement systems. Experimental techniques such as micro-
Raman and micro Brillouin Light Scattering are producing detailed wave-vector
resolved phonon transport data which must be interpreted correctly if their true
potential is to be unleashed. Though theory and computational predictions are
also being developed simultaneously, few direct comparisons of measurements and
theory have been made at this granularity and there is little confidence that
existing theories are adequate. The project will combine detailed models and
experiments for optically-excited phonon transport in graphene, bulk and thin
film silicon and other materials with a Bayesian decision framework to develop
better theories, interpret emerging experiments correctly, design better
experiments and simulations and to quantify the uncertainty in our predictions.
A unique feature of the project is the use of classical molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations to evaluate model form uncertainty in phonon transport simulations
based on the semi-classical phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE).
Furthermore, by exploiting unique micro-Raman and micro Brillouin Light
Scattering measurements being performed UT Austin in a parallel NSF project, we
will have a one-of-a-kind opportunity to obtain spatially and mode-resolved
phonon transport data that can significantly improve the quality of our
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan includes the use of a Bayesian
framework to (i) quantify model form uncertainties due small-perturbation
assumptions in the modeling of phonon scattering through calibration with
molecular dynamics (ii) calibrate interatomic potentials to spatially and
spectrally-