* 1404285
* Nanoparticle-directed synthesis of organic nanorods
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,311.00

Guangzhao Mao from Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate organic nanorod growth on an inorganic nanoparticle,
the "seed" which is several nanometers (billionths of a meter) across. The long-
range goal is to learn to build tiny devices that combine the functions of
organic and inorganic nanomaterials. The specific objectives are: 1) to
investigate growth of these organic structures using gold nanoparticles seeds,
2) to show what effects on the nanorods depend on the seed size and shape, and
3) to make conductive organic nanorods by crystallizing charged organic
molecules using electric current at the nanoparticles. The research contributes
knowledge of nucleation and crystallization at the nanoscale, which is critical
in nanomaterials synthesis and applications. The proposed real-time measurements
are challenging because of the time and length scales of nucleation and growth
processes and their inherent transient nature. To date, very few reliable
measurements of the microscopic mechanisms and kinetics of molecular nucleation
have been made. The synthesis of nanorods and nanowires from small organic
molecule electrochemistry is transformative because most nanorods synthesized
before have been of inorganic materials. The seed-mediated process is applicable
to the manufacturing of inexpensive and field-ready electrochemical sensors. The
educational plan focuses on three areas: 1) integration of research and teaching
infrastructure by utilizing NSF MRI resources, 2) mentoring underrepresented
students by working with the Wayne State University GO-GIRLS program, and 3)
providing research experiences for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles as nucleation seeds inhibit
nucleation below a critical seed size and promote nucleation of crystals with
different morphology than bulk in a size range above the critical size. The
primary hypothesis is that the small size of nanoparticles imposes an
unsustainable strain in the nucleated crystal and leads to the nanorod shape. An
alternative hypothesis is the crystallographic confinement imposed by
crystalline facets, edges, or corners of the nanoparticle seed. Two different
systems, carboxylic acid crystals in evaporative crystallization and
tetrathiafulvalene charge-transfer salt crystals in electrocrystallization allow
a rigorous test of the primary and alternative hypotheses.
Electrocrystallization affords a precise control of the nucleation and
crystallization process, which is critical for understanding the seed-mediated
process. Unlike work by others using seeds of similar building blocks as the
nuclei, the work investigates the formation of the nanoparticle/nanorod
architecture using heterogeneous and non-epitaxial seed-mediated nucleation. The
hypotheses are examined by real-time electrochemical AFM experiments of the
charge-transfer salt crystallization on gold nanoparticle-decorated electrodes.
The proposed study explores an alternative strategy to integrate molecular and
supramolecular components into nanodevices. In order for organic species to be
used in nanodevices, the effect of area or shape confinement on molecular self-
assembly must be addressed. The proposed research is significant because 1) the
method incorporates organic species to make truly hybrid nanostructures; 2) the
modular approach facilitates divergent combinatorial electrochemistry; and 3)
the solution-based room-temperature process is potentially scalable for the
manufacturing of molecular conductors, connectors, switches, and networks.