* 1404535
* Accelerator-Based Experimental Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* David Schmitz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 04/30/2017
* USD 310,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary areas to
search for answers to these and other open questions about the universe, how it
came to be and why it is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties
of neutrinos and to use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of
science beyond the Standard Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that
interact with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric
charge and were once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles,
they were believed to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino.
Moreover, the Standard Model predicted that there were actually three different
kinds of neutrinos that were distinguishable through the different interactions
that they did undergo whenever there was an interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But recent measurements have totally changed our picture
of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because they do,
they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed measurements of
these changes, along with other current neutrino experiments, form one of the
most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard Model. There
have also been hints in various experiments of new types of neutrinos and
clarifying these "hints" is one of the main thrusts of the work in this project.
The work proposed here will be to further analyze data from the MINERvA
experiment and contribute to the development of the Liquid Argon Time Projection
Chamber (LArTPC) technology for use in neutrino physics as part of the LArIAT
test beam program and the MicroBooNE experiment. These three neutrino
experiments are all located at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL).
The main focus for the period of this project will be on the development of the
LArTPC detector for MicroBooNE. MicroBooNE is currently under construction and
will begin collecting neutrino data in 2014, so a large focus of the group over
the next three years will be on detector commissioning, calibration, and
analysis of MicroBooNE data. This experiment should significantly increase the
physics reach toward answering the important question of whether predicted
"sterile" neutrinos exist and resolving the anomalies in recent neutrino
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the contribution to the
fundamental neutrino physics mentioned above, this research will serve as an
invaluable proving ground for the calibration, reconstruction and analysis
techniques that will be needed to make future experiments a
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact in this proposal involves
bringing current techniques in high energy physics to the broader local
community. The south side neighborhoods surrounding the UChicago campus are
largely populated with underrepresented groups in STEM fields, and this project
aims to build a program within the Department of Physics that connects
university students with local elementary and middle school children to
introduce them to concepts in physics with the aid of fun, interactive
demonstrations.