* 1404442
* Nuclear Structure, Mesoscopic Physics and Double-Beta Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Mihai Horoi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 11/30/2017
* USD 874,999.00

The elements observed on the earth and in our sun contain the most stable
isotopes of nuclei. However, there are a great many other forms of these
isotopes with greater or lesser numbers of neutrons that only exist for a short
time. The formation of these unstable nuclei is essential for understanding the
origin of the observed elements during astrophysics events such as supernovae
explosions. This project in nuclear theory will contribute significantly to our
understanding of the observed properties of stable and unstable nuclei and
predicts properties that are not yet observed. This research quantifies the
limits of nuclear stability and chains of formations and decays that are needed
for understanding the formation of elements during the evolution of the
universe. Nuclear decays are determined by the properties of the fundamental
particles. The investigators will also study a form of double-beta decay in
which no neutrinos are emitted and in which the mass of the neutrino may be
determined. Furthermore, this project will advance computational and analytical
methods in nuclear physics, and will add to an already rich computational
program for nuclear structure that is being used worldwide.

Nuclear physics is at the heart of our understanding of the universe and the
types of elementary particles with which it is composed. This project will have
a significant impact on new developments in the field of nuclear theory,
fundamental symmetries, nuclear astrophysics and the general field of mesoscopic
physics. Topics to be studied include: (1) development of new analytical and
computational tools for the description of nuclear structure (2) detailed
theoretical studies of nuclear processes affecting unstable nuclei; (iii)
calculations and modeling of structural and dynamical aspects of nuclear
processes, including reactions of astrophysical interest; (iv) calculations of
nuclear properties related to fundamental symmetries and double-beta decay; (v)
development of the unified description of structure and reactions in open and
marginally stable mesoscopic systems and quantum transport in problems of
interest to quantum informatics; (vi) studies of the nucleus as a mesoscopic
system, including many-body quantum chaos and its coexistence with collective
and regular features. Many of these research topics are connected to the
experimental programs at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL) and other laboratories worldwide. This work is also closely coupled with
the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA), and some projects bridge
nuclear structure theory with other areas, such as condensed matter physics and
quantum information. Strong educational and outreach component are integral
components of this effort, as the nuclear physics program at MSU is widely
recognized worldwide as a top program in this discipline.