* 1404633
* Collaborative Research: Toward a unified model for ferrihydrite nanoparticles behavior in the environment: a multipronged investigation of surface structure and reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2019
* Michael Machesky, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 215,000.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, Professors Nadine
Kabengi, James D Kubicki and Michael L Machesky all at Georgia State University
and Professor Maria Chrysochoou at University of Connecticut (UCONN) are
exploring the modeling of interfacial chemical reactions in order to determine
the fate and transport of contaminants in the environment. The project will
support two graduate students who will experience highly interdisciplinary
collaborative experimental and theoretical training at the respective
institutions. It will also create several opportunities for undergraduate
student involvement in research with mentors who are not only excellent role
models for women and underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines, but also
consistently strive to increase participation of these groups in STEM research.
The project's impact is enhanced by the inclusion of its intellectual approaches
in many courses taught by faculty in the Chemistry, Geoscience, and
Environmental Engineering departments at the institutions, which exposes a
larger number of students to important environmental geochemical concepts and
techniques. Furthermore, they will integrate project concepts into their
established K-12 outreach activities and web-based modules dissemination in
addition to their presentations at scientific meetings. Through these
activities, an effective integration of research collaborations will develop
across several geochemical disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative
research groups are investigating the interplay between the bulk structure,
surface properties, and environmental reactivity of ferrihydrite, a ubiquitous
complex iron oxide. To meet this challenge, the groups are integrating
experimental thermodynamics obtained through flow adsorption microcalorimetry
with computational chemistry, spectroscopy, and surface complexation modeling.
This framework utilizes, for the first time, a recently proposed ferrihydrite
structure to model its surface reactivity. The ultimate goal of the surface
studies is to develop a predictive-mechanistic understanding of the interplay
between a surface structure and its environmental reactivity, which will
demonstrate the strength and applicability of incorporating directly measured
thermodynamics data into environmental studies of mineral-solution interfaces.