* 1404281
* Studies of the Quark-Gluon Plasma with STAR and CMS at UC Davis
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Daniel Cebra, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,020,000.00

The study of the strong nuclear force under extremely high temperature and
energy density is one of the key areas of investigation in nuclear physics. The
theoretical framework of the strong force is Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), whose
fundamental particles are the quarks and gluons. These in turn build up protons
and neutrons, which are understood to be the low-energy phase of quarks, bound
by the strong nuclear force. At the very high temperatures reached in
relativistic heavy ion collisions, the aim of this project to study how protons
and neutrons melt into constituent quarks and gluons, which are no longer bound.
This high-temperature phase of nuclear matter is called the Quark-Gluon Plasma
(QGP). Heavy-ion experiments at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider and the
Large Hadron Collider have produced striking evidence for QGP formation. The
field is moving towards a quantitative understanding of the thermodynamic
properties of the QGP.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Given this background, the project
focuses on the experimental measurement of three distinct thermodynamic
properties of this novel state of nuclear matter with the STAR detector at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider and the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider at CERN. The first property to be measured is the temperature produced
in the hottest stages of the collision. This is done via the study of Upsilon
mesons, a bound state of heavy "bottom" quarks. In the hot, early stage of the
collision even heavy-quark bound states, like the Upsilon, are expected to melt
in the collision. The group will study the melting pattern of Upsilons and their
excited states with STAR and with CMS in proton-proton, proton-nucleus, and
nucleus-nucleus collisions. This measurement will provide crucial information to
test models of the deconfinement of quarks in the high-temperature QGP. The
second goal is to study the thermodynamic phase structure of the strong force.
In particular, testing the existence of a predicted QCD critical point is a key
component of this goal. This study is done with STAR by varying the collision
energy, and thereby exploring the transition between normal nuclear matter and
QGP matter. The third goal is to study the density of the medium using events in
which a neutral electroweak boson, the Z0, is produced in coincidence with a
quark jet. The Z0 is unaffected by the QGP, providing a clean estimate of the
transverse momentum of the quark jet. As the partner jet traverses the dense QGP
medium and loses energy, these Z0 + quark jet events are one of the best ways to
study the energy loss of quarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this work are aimed at underrepresented minorities and women. The first is to
communicate the excitement of high-energy nuclear physics to Latino students at
the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science
(SACNAS), through mentoring activities at the conference and support of the UC
Davis SACNAS chapter. The second component is promotion of science and physics
to elementary and high-school students through visits to elementary schools with
large Latino populations, and via participation in the Adopt-A-Physicist program
for high schools. Finally, the PIs in the project will mentor undergraduates,
including NSF REU students, every year. A key part of these goals is the
mentoring of our own graduate students to become leaders in these activities,
since many are women and underrepresented minorities, and are therefore
excellent role models.