* 1404644
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation from the Reactive Uptake of Isoprene-derived Epoxides to Submicron Aerosol Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Avram Gold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Joel A. Thornton of the University of
Washington (UW) and Professors Jason D. Surratt and Avram Gold from the
University of North Carolina (UNC) are studying a process by which emissions
from terrestrial vegetation (e.g., deciduous trees) are converted to particulate
matter (PM) mass in the atmosphere. PM is a major cause of reduced air quality,
with negative impacts on human health, and also affects climate by scattering or
absorbing sunlight or by altering the properties of clouds. Terrestrial
vegetation emits large quantities (~500 teragrams C) of isoprene to the
atmosphere each year. Once in the atmosphere, photochemical oxidation of
isoprene leads to gas-phase epoxide intermediates. These epoxide byproducts are
reactive in acidic solutions, and therefore uptake and reaction in atmospheric
particles can produce soluble low-volatility organic compounds that remain in
the particle phase thereby increasing PM. The broader impacts of this project
include more accurate interpretations of PM source-apportionment and improved
studies of aerosol-climate effects and air quality assessments. In addition, a
key element of the project involves the training of highly skilled young
scientists and engineers by involving undergraduate students, graduate students,
and postdoctoral research fellows, and engaging the general public through a
range of outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor
Joel A. Thornton will lead a collaboration between UW and UNC to measure the key
physico-chemical parameters governing reactivity, diffusion, and product
formation of synthesized authentic standards of the predominant isoprene-derived
epoxides in atmospherically realistic particles. The 100-500 nanometer sized
particles will be mixtures of inorganic salts, liquid water, and organic matter,
providing an advance over studies using bulk macroscopic solutions which cannot
simulate the non-ideal, often super-saturated compositions of atmospheric
particles, nor the morphologies of the reaction medium.