* 1404362
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Mark Oreglia, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,716,885.00

Overview: The principal goal of experiments in modern particle physics is to
uncover new physics that underlies the Standard Model. Possible approaches
include the study of physics processes at the highest available collision
energies at accelerators or through studies of the very rare interactions of
neutrinos. The Chicago Particle Physics group has been active in both domains.
Additionally the group is making significant technological contributions to the
development of very fast timing detectors and is advancing a graduate program of
accelerator research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The Chicago group
has made major contributions to the development of fast timing detectors for
particle physics through the LAPPD (Large Area Picosecond Photodetector)
collaboration. Such instrumentation is critical for neutrino and collider
experiments described below, and is also important in other fields including
applications in medicine and homeland security. The developed technology is now
in a phase of transfer to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally the
Chicago group has had a very strong program of outreach to the broader community
through its major contributions to programs that encourage the participation of
underserved students and minorities in science such as the Enrico Fermi Summer
Interns Program and their Expanding Your Horizon
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A goal of experiments at the
highest available collision energies at the Large Hadron Collider (the LHC) at
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson,
recently discovered there in 2012, and to discover new physics beyond the
Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals are relevant to the
understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting
fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as
we do now. To meet the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new
detectors and accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and
analytical methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader
impact for the training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement
of technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years represent a transition of the LHC
physics program from a collision energy of 8 TeV data-taking and operation, to
extended operations and data taking at nearly double the energy, 13-14 TeV. Over
a thousand scientists from the United States are involved with this scientific
program on several major experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chicago group is
one of the important groups participating in the ATLAS experiment at CERN. Their
contributions include extensive involvement in the technical advancement of the
experiment, leading the development of the Fast Track Trigger (the FTK) and the
upgrade of the hadron Calorimetry (the TileCAL). The group's principal
analytical focus will be Higgs physics, with the Higgs decay mode into b and
anti-b quarks. This topology will enable important studies of Higgs properties
and searches for new physics using this b - anti b decay as a tool, dark matter
searches with heavy quarks, and searches for new physics using di-jet events.
These studies will be greatly facilitated by the FTK and/or the TileCAL and by a
jet substructure tool which has been developed by the Chicago group for the
analysis of the data from first major run of the LHC, and which will be
exploited in the upcoming run which begins in 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Neutrino Physics the Chicago group will be completing its contributions to the
reactor-based neutrino experiment called Double Chooz, which will measure the
neutrino mixing angle, theta13, with both near and far detectors. Until now, the
measurements from Double Chooz were from a single detector only.