* 1404739
* CNIC: US-France-Israel Planning Visit for a Theory-Experiment Collaboration on Electron and Exciton Transfer from Molecular to Nanoscale
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Michele Pavanello, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2015
* USD 48,652.00

Technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Catalyzing New International
Collaborations(CNIC):US-France-Israel Planning Visit for a Theory-Experiment
Collaboration on Electron and Exciton Transfer from Molecular to Nanoscale will
initiate two new collaborations with Prof. Damien Riedel of the Institut des
Sciences Moleculaires d'Orsay,Orsay,France and with Dr. Iris Visoly-Fisher of
Ben Gurion University of the Negev,Be'er Sheva,Israel. The PI's goal is to
submit a follow-on NSF-CAREER proposal to the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program (CTMC)for continued funding of the research
initiated under CNIC. The CNIC funding will be used to carry
out&lt;br/&gt;visits by the PI and two of his students at the international
collaborators' laboratories. Initial data gathering and research planning
activities in France will involve low-temperature Ultra-High Vacuum STM
measurements of single donor-acceptor pairs deposited on surfaces. The
activities in Israel will involve carrying out Kelvin scan probe microscopy of
self-assembled mono- and multilayers on semiconducting metal oxide
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gathering of preliminary data is needed for
establishing a proof-of-concept of the collaborative&lt;br/&gt;research. Once
the collaborations are started, a strong research program on the understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;the underlying interactions influencing charge transport in
molecular and nanoscale systems&lt;br/&gt;will be established. The PI's vision
is to approach this by looking at two different lengths&lt;br/&gt;scales: the
molecular/atomic scale (with Prof. Riedel) and the nanoscale (with Dr. Visoly-
Fisher). The PI will benefit from the collaborations because they will provide
measurements of charge transfer events in systems and materials that the PI will
subsequently simulate with his novel quantum-chemistry molecular/periodic DFT
codes. As the PI is a theoretical chemist whose research focuses on electronic
structure methods development, a close interaction with experimental groups is
essential for him to attack real chemical problems. These collaborations will
provide the PI with invaluable insight regarding the underlying physics as well
as the experimental limitations so that a mature analysis of the experimental
data and an ad-hoc development of chemistry software can be achieved. The
subsystem DFT method that the PI will develop helped by the international
collaborations will have a strong impact on quantum-chemistry, as it will
provide a reliable and computationally inexpensive first-principles method for
determining charge and nuclear dynamics in the condensed
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader description&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental knowledge
will be generated by starting two new international collaborations. The
international visits and the close contact with the experimental groups in
France and Israel will guide the PI in understanding the most relevant
interactions and timescales when a charge is transferred from a donor to an
acceptor molecule, and between an organic self-assembled mono- and multilayer
and a metal oxide surface. Understanding of these interactions is still an open
problem, partly because there are no ab-initio methods that can approach
realistic model system sizes. The proposed collaboration will initiate efforts
to fill this gap. The resulting knowledge will be an important ingredient for
the PI's electronic structure theoretical method development agenda that will be
presented in the follow-up CAREER proposal. In addition, this CNIC proposal
places a substantial emphasis on training of one graduate and one undergraduate
student by offering them the opportunity to travel internationally and spend a
summer carrying out academic research at the collaborators'
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;