* 1404940
* Theory of Polymer Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Most of the materials today are made from
polymers constituting a multi-billion-dollar industry. Whether we think about
plastic cups, packaging materials, high-performance nano- and micro-devices,
clothing materials, or aircraft parts, these are fabricated through polymeric
chains. An understanding of how to control organization of polymers into
desirable structures under a variety of externally imposed conditions is
currently missing. However, such an understanding is vital to promulgate design
rules for making new materials as well as for improving the performance of the
materials available today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
contribute to the understanding of polymer crystallization in terms of both
kinetic pathways and the emergence of the ordered structures. This proposal is
aimed at building new conceptual models and discovering new laws of polymer
crystallization. In addition, the proposed theoretical work complements many
experimental efforts being actively pursued worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the proposed research will have impact in numerous applied areas such
as polymer processing, and fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials. Training of
graduate students in this challenging research area is the strong educational
component of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization of polymers is full of intrigue and a
fundamental understanding of how polymer chains organize into hierarchical
structures continues to be elusive. Using advanced theoretical and computational
tools to account for the unique attribute of the conformational entropy and
topological defects in cooperation with enthalpic driving forces for assembly
this proposal addresses (a) single crystal morphology and relative stabilities
of flat lamellae, hollow pyramids, bowls, scrolls, and twisted lamellae, (b)
kinetics of melting, and (c) origin of melt-memory. This proposal is aimed at
building new conceptual models and discovering new laws of polymer
crystallization. In addition, the proposed theoretical work complements many
experimental efforts being actively pursued worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the proposed research will have impact in numerous applied areas such
as polymer processing, and fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials. Most of the
materials today are made by processing semicrystalline polymers. These materials
constitute a multi-billion-dollar industry. A fundamental understanding of the
behavior of this important class of polymeric materials will help to design and
process novel polymeric materials with enhanced benefits to our society.
Training of graduate students in this challenging research area is strong
educational component of this proposal.