* 1404371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing the Intrinsic Benefit Model of Cultural Signaling
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2017
* USD 6,457.00

SES-1404371&lt;br/&gt;Joseph Galaskiewicz&lt;br/&gt;Sosuke
Okada&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many
social interactions, it is important to determine qualities of others, such as
competence, loyalty, or trustworthiness. Signaling theory focuses on these
situations. The senders possess an internal characteristic which they aware of,
but is unobservable to others. There is a conflict of interest between the
sender and the receiver, as the sender benefits from being perceived in a better
light, whereas the receiver wants to accurately determine the sender's internal
characteristic. Under this condition, a signal will be reliable only when the
cost of producing the signal is lower for those with higher quality than for
those with lower quality. The co-PI proposes the model of cultural signaling
where the sender can enjoy intrinsic benefits from engaging in a cultural act.
The intrinsic benefit reduces the net cost of practicing the cultural act for
the sender, which will result in the inverse association between quality and
signaling cost. For example, if someone is more committed to a social cause,
s/he can gain more intrinsic benefit (feeling good, for example) from
contributing to the cause. This intrinsic benefit can make up for the actual
cost of the contribution; therefore the contribution is effectively less
expensive for those who are more committed to it. This way, cultural acts can
function as signals of desirable internal qualities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intrinsic benefit model makes the following predictions. First, senders are more
willing to pay higher cost to perform a cultural act when they have a high level
of the corresponding characteristic. Second, a cultural act will be perceived as
a signal of intrinsic quality when it appears to be costly for the sender to
perform the cultural act, and there are no salient extrinsic benefits from
signaling that are potentially motivating the cultural act. Third, the
visibility of a cultural act should affect how well the cultural act can
function as a signal. For the sender, high visibility of a cultural act can make
it more attractive, but for the receiver, high visibility can make the sender's
extrinsic motivation more salient. The project will conduct three experiments to
test the predictions. The first two experiments will focus on purchase of an
electronic vehicle as the signal of environmental commitment. The third
experiment will focus on charitable giving as a signal of social preference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main advantage of
the intrinsic benefit model is that it provides a general, easy-to-use framework
which will allow applying signaling theory across diverse phenomena of
sociological interest while using an assumption which is widely accepted among
laypersons. The proposal argues that applications in organizational studies (in
particular, the interactions between organizations and their audience),
intragroup dynamics (both cooperation and competition), and research on cultural
capital can potentially greatly benefit from the intrinsic benefit model. This
model can provide a parsimonious rational-choice based explanation for many
behaviors that are seemingly irrational or culturally determined. In addition,
it can also help develop techniques for promoting socially beneficial behaviors
through manipulating signaling benefits. For example, the investigators argue
that many seemingly maladaptive behaviors are motivated by the need for
signaling -- not only can our research shed new insight into such behaviors, but
it can also help reduce such behaviors by reducing signaling benefits.