* 1404314
* Exploiting The Heterogeneous Composition Of Tumor Tissue And The Altered  Metabolism Of Tumor Cells For Cancer Therapy Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Aniruddha Datta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 477,713.00

Title: Exploiting the heterogeneous composition of tumor tissue and the altered
metabolism of tumor cells for cancer therapy design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
number of cells in an adult multicellular organism such as a human being is
under very tight control and, under normal circumstances; there is some kind of
a balance between new cell production and cell death. Roughly speaking, cancer
results when there is excessive cell division or reduced cell death due to some
malfunctioning in the cell number control system. What makes cancer therapy so
difficult is that this malfunctioning can happen in many different ways and at
many different locations and would, therefore, require different tailored
treatments. Furthermore, cancer tissue is usually heterogeneous in the sense
that it is a mixture of cells with different malfunctions. As a result,
directing treatment at one type of malfunctioning cells may lead to the dominant
emergence of other types of malfunctioning cells, manifesting itself in the
phenomenon of acquired drug resistance usually observed in cancer therapy. Thus,
to achieve better therapeutic outcome, the dominant cell subpopulation needs to
be identified so that the therapy can be targeted towards it. The first goal of
this project is to experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of such an
approach using a heterogeneous mixture of cancer cell lines. The second goal of
this project is to exploit metabolic alteration in cancer cells to design
therapies that differentially target cancer cells. More specifically, the
project seeks to experimentally validate via cancer cell lines the benefits of
including the anti-diabetic (metabolism targeting) drug Metformin as part of a
combination cocktail therapy for cancer. Since both the goals are directed
towards improving cancer treatment, the potential societal benefits of this
project could be enormous. In addition, the project will be carried out at the
newly formed Center for Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering (CBGSE)
at Texas A &amp; M University, where widespread dissemination of the research
results, imparting truly interdisciplinary hands-on education to graduate
students, and beneficially targeting minorities and minority institutions, are
top priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is an umbrella term for a large
number of diseases that are associated with loss of cell-cycle control, leading
to uncontrolled cell proliferation and/or reduced apoptosis (programmed cell
death). This loss of cell-cycle control usually results from different
malfunction(s) in the cellular signaling pathways. Since cancer tissue is
usually heterogeneous, it is appropriate to first identify the dominant
subpopulation and then accordingly tailor the targeted treatment, hopefully
achieving a better therapeutic outcome. The first goal of this project is to
utilize such an approach, developed using hierarchical Bayesian methods, and
experimentally validate it using a mixture of cancer cell lines, harboring known
mutations. To introduce the second goal, we note that the traditional approach
to cancer therapy is to induce cancer cell death by using therapeutic drugs,
radiation, etc. Most of these treatments are toxic to normal cells and carry
significant side effects. On the other hand, cancer cells are known to be
addicted to glucose while normal adult cells are not. This brings up the natural
question as to whether the preferential killing of cancer cells could be
achieved by targeting the supply of glucose. Indeed, epidemiological studies
have shown that the commonly used anti-diabetic drug Metformin has beneficial
effects in preventing or slowing the onset of breast and certain other cancers.
Motivated by this, the second goal of this project is to experimentally study
the role of Metformin in cancer therapy when used as part of a combination
therapy design. Since most chemotherapeutic drugs have toxic side effects while
Metformin does not, including the latter as part of a combination therapy for
cancer certainly has the potential to enhance the quality of life for cancer
patients.