* 1404056
* Intergratable Quantum Field Theories:New Methods And Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sergei Lukyanov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

There is large and expanding array of problems in fundamental physics (ranging
from sub-nuclear structure of matter through astrophysics and cosmology) which
deal with systems whose theoretical description involves continuously many
variables with strong interconnection between them. Quantum field theory is a
unifying mathematical language for such systems. Appropriately, this language is
difficult, and in general its "grammatical rules" are not even yet established.
In this situation, any instances, or "models", of quantum field theory whose
equations can be worked out all the way through are especially valuable. Such
models are known as "integrable quantum field theories". Mainly, they serve as
the testing ground for verification and development of ideas and mathematical
methods, but remarkably many integrable "models" directly apply to theoretical
understanding of properties of complex materials. That is why today the
integrable quantum field theories constitute one of the most important and
actively developed area of mathematical physics. Moreover, since the discovery
of "gauge/string duality" and the role of integrability in this relation, this
field of research has found itself at the cutting edge of theoretical high-
energy physics. Unfortunately, the integrable models emerging in this context
still resist full solution. This research project proposes further development
of integrable quantum field theories, with emphasis on the so-called integrable
sigma models. This is exactly the general class of models which emerge in the
context of the gauge/string duality. Also, similar models are believed to
provide theoretical understanding of particularly complicated disordered systems
in physics of materials. It is proposed to develop a certain new class of
integrable sigma-models, with novel mathematical structure, and find full
solutions. This is an intermediate step in the approach to the systems of direct
application in the gauge/string dualities. Interestingly, mathematical methods
developed for integrable quantum field theories turn out to have broader
significance in mathematical physics, and often help to investigate a wider
class of non-integrable systems. This area will be explored as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity consists of three projects. (1) Analysis
of a new class of integrable sigma models whose target spaces are deformed group
manifolds. With the most general known deformations, quantum integrability of
such models require significant modifications of standard tools such as the Lax
representations, the Yang-Baxter algebras, and Baxter's Q operators and their
relations. The project's goal is to develop all such modifications, and use that
as the basis for finding full solutions. The key to our approach will be the so-
called ODE/IQFT correspondence, the new mathematical tool of integrable quantum
field theories ("IQFT side") which allows to "encode" its algebraic structures
into a system of ordinary differential equations ("ODE" side). This project lays
in the mainstream of the current research in mathematical physics; its
significance is in the relation to the gauge/string dualities, and possibly to
physics of disordered systems. The other two parts the research is to explore
applications of the methods of integrability in non-integrable systems. (2) The
relation between the 't Hooft's equation in 1+1 QCD and the Baxter's T-Q
equation will be used to analyze the meson decays and scattering amplitudes in
the large-N expansion, with the ultimate goal of gaining universal tools for
analysis of decays and amplitudes in generic 1+1 systems with confining
interactions, which are very common in condensed matter physics. (3) The third
part addresses possibility of emergence of near-integrable subsystems in
otherwise non-integrable quantum field theories, the possibility which was not
previously explored.