* 1404075
* Contrast Interferometry with Quantum Degenerate Ytterbium Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 408,259.00

This grant will support a project to sensitively measure the interaction between
light and matter. The experiments will be performed on an atomic gas cooled to
very low temperatures in the laboratory, at which point it transforms into an
exotic state called a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). Like a laser beam, the BEC
can be split into multiple parts and then recombined. If the different parts
interact differently with light, then this shows up in the properties of the
recombined BEC. By using light pulses to split, recombine, and then observe
BECs, the group will precisely measure the strength of the light-matter
interaction. Their results will provide information regarding possible
refinements of the underlying theory of this fundamental process. The atom they
are studying (Ytterbium) has potential applications in the development of
improved time standards for the global positioning system (GPS) and in the
development of quantum computers; both of these efforts involve the sorts of
laser-atom control techniques that the group is helping to advance in this
project. The students working on the project will gain experience in
experimental methods involving atoms, lasers, and electronics, and also be
involved in data analysis, modeling, and connecting experimental results with
theory. This will form good preparation for them to join the work force in
academics and industry as part of the next generation of scientists and
engineers. The kinetic energy of an atom recoiling due to absorption of a single
photon will be precisely measured as a frequency, by further development of the
group's demonstrated contrast interferometry technique with ytterbium BECs. This
recoil frequency, combined with other measurements, will accurately determine
the fine structure constant alpha, and test the theory of quantum
electrodynamics (QED). The fine structure constant is ubiquitous in nature, and
QED theory extends across various physics sub-fields. Continued refinement is of
fundamental importance. The contrast interferometer utilizes pulsed optical
standing waves to split and recombine BECs. The interferometer signal is
obtained by monitoring the contrast of the resultant interference pattern via
reflection of an optical traveling wave. In addition to testing QED, the group's
interferometry technique will advance BEC manipulation methods, and will be used
to study many-body phenomena, such as the BEC phase transition.