* 1404495
* Baseline Support for the University of Utah Cosmic Ray Physics Group including Telescope Array Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,231,294.00

The nature of cosmic ray sources and the mechanisms that accelerate cosmic rays
to ultrahigh energies are among the most important questions in astrophysics.
Answering these questions involves measurements of the energy spectrum and
composition of cosmic rays as well as searches for anisotropy in their arrival
directions as a direct way of identifying sources. The University of Utah Cosmic
Ray Physics Group has primary responsibility for the Telescope Array (TA), which
is the largest detector for ultrahigh energy cosmic rays in the northern
hemisphere. With this award the University of Utah Cosmic Ray Group will
continue to collect and analyze the data from TA and the TA Low Energy Extension
(TALE) with the goal of addressing these astrophysics questions. Their main
education and outreach activity is the ASPIRE Project, which creates and
maintains interactive science lessons and labs on the web. ASPIRE also provides
direct outreach to area teachers, runs summer workshops for students, and makes
visits to rural schools. The Lon and Mary Watson Cosmic Ray Center in Delta,
Utah, is the center of TA outreach work, and of field operations. The building
includes a visitor's center, with TA exhibits, including a real-time detector
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Utah Cosmic Ray Physics Group
has a long history of studying the spectrum, composition, and sources of the
highest energy particles in the universe. The coming three-year award period
should see important developments with increased statistics, access to lower
energy data, and improved analysis and coordination. The Utah group is studying
the ultrahigh energy cosmic ray spectrum in detail to the low energies available
through TALE, pursuing possible correlations with the large scale structure to
refine TA composition measurements, and studying evidence of anisotropy to
search for the sources of cosmic rays. In addition, the group is working with
the Pierre Auger collaboration to understand differences in composition
measurements between the two experiments.