* 1404263
* Extreme Optical Coherence in Cavity-based Atomic and Molecular Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Murray Holland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This research program will study a new approach to lasers that promises to
produce light with coherence and wavelength control that is two factors of ten
better than any system available today. The idea is based on superradiant
emission, where an ensemble of atoms with an extremely narrow atomic transition
can undergo quantum synchronization. This is like a laser except the coherence
is stored in the atoms rather than the light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past
decade has seen remarkable progress in the development of atomic clocks that
utilize ultranarrow optical transitions. These systems are now reaching
precision and accuracy thresholds that open up many potential future
applications, including advanced optical communications, gravitational mapping
and geodesy, next-generation time and frequency standards, and advanced
navigation and global positioning. The best atomic clocks today and the lasers
that probe them are the highest quality coherent oscillators that have ever
existed, with intrinsic frequencies in the optical domain and coherence times
that can now exceed minutes. The challenge going forward is to continue this
impressive technology development and pursue the broad spectrum of practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultranarrow intercombination lines of
group-II-like atoms confined in optical cavities provide a platform for a
revolutionary technology based on the steady-state superradiance from
macroscopic atomic ensembles. Such systems promise to dramatically improve
atomic clocks since the coherence time could be orders of magnitude longer than
the best reference-cavity stabilized lasers achieved to date. Storing the
coherence in the atoms rather than the light overcomes the intrinsic sensitivity
of reference-cavity stabilized lasers to cavity length noise, which otherwise
translates directly into frequency noise on the emitted
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program explores this idea to
contribute to the general theory of quantum optics systems and more explicitly
to the understanding of the quantum theory of the optical laser in the extreme
bad-cavity limit. Collaboration with experiment is a key aspect allowing the
results to impact directly in the development of applications and devices. The
specific goal is to quantitatively layout the landscape that bridges steady-
state superradiance and lasing and to thereby explore the variety of potential
implementations. A major challenge will be to identify and mitigate quantum
noise sources that adversely affect the spectral coherence of the output field.