* 1404922
* Functional, Atomically-Defined Nanowires and Nanoribbons of Silicon
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* James Leighton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 817,071.00

Colin Nuckolls, James Leighton and Latha Venkataraman, all of Columbia
University, are funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry for research to develop methods to design,
create, and study single molecule chains and ribbons of silicon atoms. Pure
silicon is, of course, widely used in the electronics and information technology
industry and is highly valued for its properties as a semiconductor. Its
semiconductor nature is the result of molecular and electronic properties that
arise at the atomic level. Changes in silicon's electrical properties have been
noted as the size of silicon-based devices, such as computer chips and
information storage media, become smaller. The investigators are using precise
molecular construction techniques to create highly electrically conductive forms
of silicon with specific shapes and properties that have never before been
studied. In particular, they are looking at tiny ribbons and wires of silicon
that hold promise for the development of future electronic devices. This
collaborative project is making an explicit connection between the properties of
bulk silicon, the bedrock of information technology, and molecular forms of
silicon, and is, thus, having a broad impact on the semiconductor industry. This
project is having a further broad impact through a coordinated effort that spans
K-8 outreach, curriculum development, and research training for undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
are creating and studying atomically precise nanowires and nanoribbons of
silicon that have been functionalized so they can be studied in unimolecular
electrical devices. The design and synthesis of rigid, strained, and functional
nanowires and nanoribbons of silicon is being used to test the impact of strain
on single molecule conductance. Nanoscopic probes developed in this project are
allowing the assembly and integration of these new nanomaterials into electrical
devices. The combination of expertise among team members working in concert is
allowing advanced molecules to be designed, synthesized, and studied in a
feedback loop. This approach to research fosters a holistic understanding of
these unique one-dimensional chains of silicon atoms and enhances the
probability that new properties and devices will be discovered.