* 1404291
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Importance of leaf defenses to leaf economics spectrum evolution in wild and cultivated sunflower (Helianthus)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Lisa Donovan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 18,913.00

Leaf defenses are traits that protect leaves from herbivory, like toughness or
toxins. While individual leaf defenses have long been studied, there has been
little research on the relationship between leaf defenses and the important leaf
physiological traits that define plant growth rate and environmental stress
tolerance. This research explores the relationship between leaf physiology and
defense across 28 species of wild sunflower, as well as across 288 varieties of
cultivated sunflower. Both wild and cultivated sunflowers will be assessed for
leaf physiology and defenses in greenhouse studies. Wild species data will be
used to understand how trait interactions allow persistence in native habitat.
Cultivated sunflower data will be used to understand the covariation of these
traits in crop varieties, and will be used to determine the genetic basis of
both leaf physiology and defense traits. Wild sunflower species thrive in
habitats as diverse as deserts, wetlands, prairies, forests, and even rock
outcrops. By understanding how leaf physiology and defenses have changed
together during adaptation to different environments, we can understand the
interplay of these important ecological traits, uncover agriculturally valuable
trait combinations, and predict changes in wild ecosystems under climate and
land-use change. Cultivated sunflower is an important oilseed crop, and
understanding the genetic basis of leaf traits will provide resources for crop
research.