* 1404459
* Collaborative Research: Organic Cation Interactions with Soil Aluminosilicates:  Structure-Sorption Relationships
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Dharni Vasudevan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 106,000.00

This project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, addresses the need for
more robust predictors of organic cation interactions with aluminosilicate
minerals. Professors Allison MacKay and Jos√© Gascon (University of Connecticut)
and Dharni Vasudevan (Bowdoin College) in their collaboration will work closely
with high school students and teachers to introduce cutting-edge chemistry
concepts into public education. Their research activities provide two exciting
and coupled avenues to facilitate increased K-12 chemistry literacy:
Environmental issues, which are hot topics, and computer-based tools, which
permeate our daily lives. The PIs will mentor post-doctoral, graduate and
undergraduate researchers through the processes of experimental design,
manuscript preparation, and presentations at national professional societies.
The PIs will continue their committed record of engaging student researchers
from groups underrepresented in the sciences and engineering. The integrated
team expertise in engineering (MacKay), chemistry (Vasudevan), molecular
modeling (Gascon) and geochemistry (Collaborator Bourg) will enable research
team members to develop broader perspectives of their individual research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators will adapt computational
biochemistry tools to the prediction of charged organic compound sorption, an
important determinant of mobility, reactivity, and bioavailability of pesticides
and pharmaceuticals following environmental release to soils. The application of
computational tools to environmental chemistry will advance our understanding of
structure-sorption effects that are difficult to extract solely from
experimental observations. This project examines application of the Linear
Interaction Energy (LIE) approximation, a molecular dynamics approach with
significant computational cost reductions, to identify contributions of van der
Waals and electrostatic energies to overall sorption free energies for test
sorbates on the representative soil aluminosilicate, montmorillonite. Results
from this research will include mechanistic insights into sorption of
environmental contaminants categorized as cationic amines to aluminosilicate
minerals. This will advance the development of sorption models, allow the
evaluation of LIE approximation methods for environmental chemistry
applications, and provide integrated training for a research team of students
from Primarily Undergraduate and Research 1 institutions.