* 1404586
* Conduction and Mechanical Properties of Single-Ion Conducting Ionomers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 579,800.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ionomers based on polar monomers are an important class of
energy materials for applications that require single-ion conduction. In this
research, three novel types of materials are being made: (1) High molecular
weight Reversible Addition-Fragmentation chain Transfer (RAFT) ionomers that are
random copolymers of an anionic monomer and a polar solvating monomer, (2) RAFT
diblock copolymers with one ionomeric random copolymer conducting block and one
structural block and (3) polar low-Tg (glass transition temperature) non-
volatile plasticizers. By fully understanding the dielectric and viscoelastic
response of the RAFT copolymer ionomers, the optimal compositions for conduction
of Li counterions will be identified and then RAFT diblock copolymers will be
prepared with identical composition of the soft block. In this way, the effects
of confinement to lamellar or cylinder phases can be identified, using also
X-ray scattering to detail morphology. The linear viscoelastic response of these
polymers will be understood using simple extensions of Rouse and reptation
models to include the effects of ion association lifetimes. Polar low-Tg non-
volatile plasticizers will be added to those materials to boost ion conductivity
and dielectric constant of the soft domains, while lowering Tg. Thus far,
siloxane oligomers with polar solvating side chains seem best, owing to their
very low T (between -80 C and -60 C). By exploring the parameter space of ion
content, polarity and specific solvation ability of both the comonomer and the
plasticizer, the goal is to guide future materials design in the energy
materials arena. For the diblock copolymers the modulus near room temperature is
also crucial and the effects of these parameter variations on modulus will be
measured to understand the tradeoff between ion conduction and mechanical
properties, and their link to morphology and the amount of plasticizer in each
microphase.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Applications that will be enabled by new materials in the energy arena
simultaneously require high conductivity of one (and only one) type of ion and
good mechanical strength. This research on ion conduction and mechanical
properties of polymeric energy materials aims to understand the structure-
property relations in polymers that conduct only one type of ion, such as
lithium for advanced batteries. One strong advantage of developing materials for
lithium ion transport that only conduct lithium (single-ion conductors as
opposed to the lithium salts used in batteries today that also must conduct a
negatively charged ion) is that both battery charging and access to the power of
the battery could be as much as 100 times faster. If successful, the fundamental
knowledge generated from this research will result in the understanding needed
to design polymeric materials for a variety of specific energy applications,
including advanced batteries, fuel cells, solar cells, ionic actuators,
supercapacitors and energy harvesting devices; each of which require ion
transport and mechanical strength. These applications offer societal benefits
that may improve the lives of humans across the globe. Additionally, the project
will involve education and training of graduate and undergraduate students.