* 1404634
* Spin Response in Organic Semiconductors with Tuned Spin-Orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 539,997.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
and Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Programs, both in the Division of Materials
Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This project is on
the physical properties of newly synthesized organic polymers that contain
platinum (Pt) atoms at different intervals along the polymer chain. The
intrachain Pt atoms substantially enhance the coupling between the spin and the
orbital angular momentum of electrons in the polymer chain. This leads to a
strong red phosphorescence emission, in addition to the blue fluorescence
emission known from more common polymer chains without spin-orbit coupling. The
combination of both types of emission mechanisms creates white light that can
serve in newly developed white organic light emitting diodes, which may replace
regular bulbs in the future. Through optical, electrical and magnetic studies of
these polymers, a number of fundamental scientific questions are explored that
can have important ramifications on potential applications of these materials.
In addition, the integration of the large arsenal of experimental techniques
within the research groups of the principal investigators serves to efficiently
educate graduate and undergraduate students involved in this highly
interdisciplinary research project. The educational aspects of this project are
in particular open to collaboration with the ACESS program at College of Science
of the University of Utah, which aims to enhance the involvement of women in
natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research
project is to study the spin-aligned carrier response as revealed by spin-
pumping, spin-injection and spin-manipulation in newly synthesized pi-conjugated
polymers with large spin-orbit coupling. In these polymers, Pt atoms are
inserted into the organic building blocks at different intervals along the
chain, which effectively tune the polymer spin-orbit coupling. The research uses
a variety of novel optical, magneto-optical and electrical measurement
techniques. The spin aligned carriers in Pt-polymers are polarized using the
three effective techniques of spin polarization that include: spin injection by
ferromagnetic electrodes, spin pumping by spin-waves in ferromagnetic
substrates, and optical spin alignment by circularly polarized light absorption.
The following processes are investigated: spin aligned carrier injection and
transport in these polymers using the magneto-optic Kerr effect and magneto-
electroluminescence; spin-current induced by spin-wave pumping in various
ferromagnetic spin injectors; and photo-induced spin aligned triplet excitons.
These studies contribute to the understanding of the physical processes that
govern the spin response in organic spin devices, and have the potential to
revolutionize their performance.