* 1404653
* Stretchable, Tough, Water-Retaining Hydrogels for Non-Traditional Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Zhigang Suo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

A three-dimensional polymer network may absorb a large quantity of water and
form a hydrogel. Familiar examples include jello and superabsorbent diapers.
Hydrogels are under intense development for biomedical applications such as
scaffolds in tissue engineering and carriers for drug delivery. Most existing
hydrogels, however, are weak, brittle, and not very stretchable. They also dry
out as water evaporates. These issues have severely limited the scope of
applications of hydrogels. This project will develop stretchable, tough, and
water-retaining hydrogels. Hydrogels of enhanced mechanical properties and
environmental stability will open new applications. Examples include
stretchable, transparent, ionic conductors; fire-retarding blankets; swellable
seals; and environmentally responsive actuators and sensors. Large-scale use of
hydrogels is attractive for a number of reasons. Many kinds of polymers can form
hydrogels; this diversity enables suitable polymers to be selected to achieve
specific functions. Hydrogels consist mostly of water, and can be formed by
naturally occurring polymers; many hydrogels are inexpensive and environmentally
friendly. The mechanical behavior of hydrogels will also serve as a vehicle to
bridge the gap between research and education: Fresh insights that arise from
this project will be incorporated into graduate courses; the project will offer
research opportunities to high-school students, and will use Internet sites such
as iMechanica and YouTube to bring recent developments in the mechanics of
materials to readers worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent findings highlight a
significant opportunity: hydrogels of enhanced properties may achieve much
broader applications, well beyond those envisaged so far. This opportunity poses
new scientific questions concerning the development of stretchable, tough,
water-retaining hydrogels. The project will draw upon concepts of nonlinear
fracture mechanics, as well as polymer science, to investigate the mechanisms
that control multiple mechanical properties of hydrogels, including
stretchability, stiffness, strength and toughness. The project will examine
approaches that enhance the mechanical properties and environmental stability of
hydrogels, by introducing energy dissipation mechanisms to toughen hydrogels, by
embedding fibers to stiffen and strengthen hydrogels, by modifying weak bonds to
enable healing after deformation, and by adding hygroscopic components to alter
the chemical potential of water inside the gels. Energy-dissipation mechanisms
of two broad types will be investigated: recoverable dissociation of weak
crosslinks such as ionic bonds and crystallites, and frictional sliding between
hydrogels and embedded fibers.