* 1404070
* Experimental Challenges in Probing Dark Energy with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Patricia Burchat, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

The standard models of particle physics and cosmology are incomplete. The
particle content does not contain a viable candidate for the dark matter in the
Universe and there is no well-motivated explanation of the nature of dark
energy. The fields of particle physics and cosmology are inextricably
intertwined. Accelerator-based experiments, detectors in deep underground mines,
and telescopes in space and on the ground are all needed and used to explore
fundamental questions such as the nature of dark matter. Gravitational lensing
is a cosmological probe that has the advantage of being sensitive to all matter
in the Universe: baryonic and dark matter. The growth of dark matter structure
is a sensitive probe of the physics of dark energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, the Stanford group will play a leadership role in a high-priority
effort in observational cosmology through the proposed Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST) and the LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration. The LSST is the
first ground-based telescope being designed from scratch to address the severe
demands on systematic uncertainties needed to fully exploit weak gravitational
lensing as a cosmological probe. The LSST will also address cosmological
questions through studies of the growth of large scale structure, baryon
acoustic oscillations and Type Ia supernovae. The group will study the
experimental challenges to achieving the maximum sensitivity to dark energy
through several observational probes, with a focus on gravitational lensing.
This effort will be based on analytical and computational techniques, and on
detailed simulations of the LSST system. They will contribute to the development
of high fidelity simulations and, where appropriate, use existing imaging data
to develop and test the understanding of systematic effects that will impact
LSST. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work with LSST simulations and astronomical data
provides opportunities for students and postdocs to gain skills in statistics,
data analysis, and handling large data sets that are in high demand in the
private and public sectors. The PI brings her strong targeted efforts in
education and advising, aimed at increasing and diversifying the cohort of
students who pursue degrees in physics and engineering, and broadening career
paths for physicists.