* 1404767
* CDS&amp;E: A Next-Generation Computation Framework for Predicting Optimal Walking Motion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Anil Rao, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,994.00

CBET-1404767&lt;br/&gt;Fregly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common clinical
examples of neuromusculoskeletal impairments include osteoarthritis, stroke, and
Parkinson's disease, which together affect roughly 15% of the U.S. adult
population. Such impairments result in reduced mobility, an increased risk of
associated health conditions (e.g., heart disease, diabetes, high blood
pressure, obesity), and a decreased quality of life. Because extent and
characteristics of impairment vary from individual to individual, customized
approaches are needed to address this important societal problem. However,
current approaches tend to be highly subjective and follow a "one size fits all"
approach, resulting in limited restoration of walking function for individuals
afflicted with these impairments.The long-term goal of this research is to use
computer models to design novel walking function approaches for individuals
affected by neuromusculoskeletal disorders. The objective of this project is to
develop and distribute fast and easy-to-use computer simulation technology that
can predict individual walking changes resulting from a proposed treatment. If
successful, the project could have wide-reaching benefits to the field, society,
and education. For the field, neuromusculoskeletal modeling researchers who are
not familiar with the proposed technology or do not possess strong programming
skills will be able to develop predictive walking simulations with relative
ease. In addition, researchers will be exposed to and have the chance to
interact with the new technology through planned workshops at national and
international conferences, as well as through broad distribution via the web.
For society, researchers will be able to generate customized rehabilitation
strategies. For example, customized walking predictions could be used to
identify new ways to minimize knee contact forces for individuals with knee
osteoarthritis or maximize walking speed and symmetry for individuals who have
had a stroke or have Parkinson's disease. For education, "at risk" high school
students from underrepresented groups will be exposed to ways that technology is
being used to improve human health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
to develop novel optimal control technology tailored to the unique needs of
predictive human walking simulations. Optimal control is a branch of engineering
theory that predicts a control strategy that will produce the best-possible
performance of a specified dynamical system (for example, determine how to fire
rocket thrusters such that a rocket reaches a desired orbit with minimum fuel
expenditure). Although optimal control theory has been used extensively to solve
aerospace problems, its capabilities have not been exploited for human movement
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate the two
traditionally unrelated fields of neuromusculoskeletal modeling and optimal
control. The integrated technology will make it easy to perform complex three-
dimensional walking simulations that reproduce and predict heterogeneous walking
data sets. The technology will be custom tailored to the unique challenges of
walking simulations (e.g., intermittent contact between the feet and the ground)
and will be able to solve three-dimensional walking problems that are currently
intractable or extremely time consuming. The primary development challenge will
be to use the known structure of the optimal control problem formulation to
improve dramatically the computational speed and robustness of the solution
process for walking problems. The primary utilization challenge will be to
integrate neuromusculoskeletal models with diverse types of walking data so that
models and data are consistent with one another. The technology will use the
Matlab programming environment and will be based on the freely-available OpenSim
musculoskeletal modeling software developed by researchers at Stanford
University. A suite of three benchmark problems involving complex three-
dimensional walking problems will be used to evaluate the technology. The
technology and benchmark problems will be broadly distributed to the research
community via the web and conferences to help advance the entire field. The
ability to calibrate individual-specific neuromusculoskeletal walking models and
predict the corresponding walking motions in minutes rather than hours or days
of CPU time would be an engineering breakthrough that has the potential to
transform the way musculoskeletal modeling researchers perform large-scale human
moment simulations.