* 1404548
* Collaborative Research: DNP-Enhanced Nuclear-Spin Optical-Rotation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Christian Hilty, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,554.00

CHE-1404529 and CHE-1404548: Collaborative Research: DNP-Enhanced Nuclear-Spin
Optical-Rotation Spectroscopy

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Igor Savukov of the New Mexico Consortium and Professor
Christian B. Hilty of Texas A & M University are collaboratively developing
nuclear-spin optical rotation methodology for enhancing the information content
in optical and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The technique correlates
nuclear spin states and electronic structure through dynamic vector
polarizability. The severe obstacle for meaningful application is that the
measured effect is normally extremely small, requiring substantial time for
detection, even in water with very large concentration of protons. Progress in
the application of nuclear-spin optical rotation to chemistry critically depends
on strategies for signal enhancement. Compared to current methods, large
improvements are needed for spectroscopy applications in dilute samples or
samples with multiple peaks. Here, dynamic nuclear polarization is used to
generate non-equilibrium nuclear spin states. Hyperpolarized samples can
increase the nuclear-spin optical rotation signal 100-100,000 times, depending
on the nuclei and experimental conditions and enable application of the method
for the characterization of various chemical compounds. This new spectroscopic
technique is being developed in three steps. First, nuclear-spin optical
rotation of samples hyperpolarized by dynamic nuclear polarization is
demonstrated. Second, the enhancement effect is characterized for various
previously inaccessible nuclei and molecules, and results are compared with
theory. Third, the technique is applied to the characterization of electronic
structure in dye molecules. In the long term, the realization of this new
spectroscopy offers a powerful analytical method for fundamental studies of
light-matter interaction in liquids.

The electronic structure of a molecule, both in ground and excited states,
determines its basic molecular properties and reactivity. Measurements of
electronic structure are necessary to understand the behavior of molecules in
chemical reactions and other interactions. In this project, a new type of
spectroscopy is being developed that is uniquely suited to probe spatially
localized excited-state configurations of electrons. This spectroscopy is based
on the measurement of an optical signal that is correlated to specific atoms in
the molecule via the recently discovered nuclear-spin optical rotation effect.
The project includes educational activities through a partnership between the
New Mexico Consortium and Texas A&M University. Early-career scientists,
including graduate an undergraduate students are being mentored, and the results
from this research are incorporated into lecture classes.