* 1404974
* US-Mexico planning visit and workshop to assess the genomic basis of local adaptation in maize
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Ross-Ibarra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 34,650.00

This project brings together an international team of U.S. and Mexican
researchers to investigate the prevalence of local adaption of maize to high
elevations. Collaborators have expertise in evolutionary genetics, theoretical
population genetics, quantitative trait mapping, and Mexican agro-ecosystems.
U.S. students and researchers will travel to Mexico to join an international
collaborative team and gain experience in phenotypic data collection and
analysis as well as seed genetic mapping. The expected outcomes of the project
include both mapping seed populations and analytical software. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Maize (Zea mays ssp. mays) was domesticated approximately 9000 BP in
the lowlands of southwest Mexico from a wild grass known as teosinte (Zea mays
ssp. parviglumis). Subsequent to domestication maize was brought to multiple,
independent highland regions. These migration events required adaptation to
drastically different environmental conditions. In the long-term, collaborators
will assess the genomic basis of adaptation to these separate highland regions
through population genetic and quantitative trait mapping approaches. These data
will provide insight regarding the process of repeated evolution and will
potentially identify loci relevant to the tolerance of temperature extremes, an
important consideration in the face of climate change.