* 1404665
* CDS&E:Collaborative Research: Multiscale Modeling, Simulation and Optimization for Designing Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Xiaoping Qian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 182,049.00

CBET 1404591/1404655 Li/Qian

Solar energy supply is renewable, abundant, and environmentally benign. It is
relatively free of problems associated with fossil fuels or nuclear energy, such
as increasing fuel costs, waste disposal, heat dissipation, safety concerns, and
the release of greenhouse gases. The solar cell is the key component of
photovoltaic systems, which can directly convert the solar energy into
electricity. While solar electricity generation technologies of today are
dominated by silicon based materials, organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted
growing attention due to their low cost in fabrication, and their potential to
be deployed in flexible structures. However, the energy efficiency of OSCs has
thus far been impeded due to limited understanding of charge transport behaviors
across length scales of OSCs; yet, such transport is crucial for device
efficiency. The current try-and-error approach for optimization of OSC often
fails due to nearly-infinite number of material combinations and processing
conditions. The objective of this collaborative research is thus to develop a
multiscale simulation and optimization methodology for OSCs that directly links
the basic materials properties(electronic and optical), nanoscale morphology and
their dependency on processing conditions (e.g. temperature and time), bulk
material properties (e.g. bulk mobility), and device designs, to device
efficiency. Successful completion of this research will pave a viable pathway
for commercializing organic electronics in energy conversion, which can generate
both green electricity and jobs throughout the United States.

The proposed research aims to merge simulation tools across multiple time and
length scales using successive integration steps. The resulting tools would
enable a holistic design approach where the design space will be systematically
explored to dramatically improve the performance of OSC devices. Such a holistic
approach integrates experimental validations to refine the simulations at each
scale (micro, meso, and macro) and ultimately to verify the optimization
results. More specifically, the research will verify the multiscale simulation
by characterizing nanoscale morphology, measuring bulk mobility, and testing the
devices. The PIs will then optimize the designs and fabrication processes of
OSCs for high efficiency through surrogate modeling and sensitivity analysis of
the multiscale models. Successful completion of this research will fill a
critical knowledge gap in organic electronics research and will form a new
simulation paradigm for organic electronics by accounting for multiscale
coupling in charge transport and material properties and by experimental
validation at each scale. The scheme to bridge the micro and macro scales in
this project will set an example for multiscale simulation and optimization of
other type of solar cells and energy devices such as super-capacitors and
batteries. The results of these models and simulations will lead to more
rational designs and greater potential for significant technological advances in
OSCs.