* 1404836
* Control of Protein Dimerization through Light-Regulated Rapamycin
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alexander Deiters, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Alexander Deiters of the University of Pittsburgh to develop
a new type of molecular "glue" that can be used to bind together two molecules
of protein and, thus, control a variety of biological functions. The new type of
"glue" being developed in this research project is similar to a naturally
occurring substance known as rapamycin that has been extensively used to bind
pairs of proteins. The new substance differs from rapamycin since it has a
light-sensitive switch. This switch allows the investigators to turn on and off
the protein-binding process at will, producing a powerful new tool. This
research is opening up a wide variety of possible new applications that would
potentially have a broad impact on a number of biological and medical fields of
study. The investigators are further broadening the impact of their work by
partnering with a children's museum to develop demonstrations and exhibits that
bring basic biological events, especially those involving the interaction of
ultraviolet light with tissues, to life for young children and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators are developing
light-responsive rapamycin analogs for the optical control of protein
dimerization and other cellular processes. Rapamycin is a commonly applied
biomolecular tool that has been used to control a wide range of physiological
processes. An extensive number of cellular functions have been brought under its
control, including transcription, signal transduction, protein localization,
enzyme activation, protein splicing, protein secretion, and protein post-
translational modification in cells. Rapamycin functions as a small molecule
inducer of protein dimerization by recruiting FKBP and FRB to form a stable
ternary complex. A versatile and generally applicable light-regulation
methodology that is adaptable to numerous biological applications is being
developed by designing and synthesizing light-sensitive analogs of rapamycin.
Light represents an innovative external control element, since a) it is
orthogonal to the vast majority of cellular processes, b) it is minimally
invasive, and c) it can be controlled with very high spatial and temporal
resolution. Light-activated analogs of rapamycin, in conjunction with different
proteins fused to FKBP and FRB, will enable the optical regulation of a wide
range of cellular processes, including protein function, protein localization,
and protein association. Completion of the research objectives will lead to 1)
the development of orthogonal caged rapamycin-FKBP pairs for the multi-
wavelength activation of multiple cellular processes, and 2) the reversible
light-switching of biological processes through rapamycin analogs modified with
photo-switchable motifs. Expected outcomes of the proposed research are a
unifying approach for the spatio-temporal control of various cellular processes.