* 1404372
* Dynamics and Control of Atomic, Molecular and Macroscopic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John Delos, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,575.00

This research project will lead to understanding and control of the dynamics of
quantum systems, including but not limited to electrons escaping from atoms,
trapped atoms, ultracold gases, and molecules. Control of quantum systems --
electrons, atoms and molecules is one of the 'grand challenges' of modern
physics. This research cuts across many disciplines in physics, mathematics and
chemistry. Microscopic quantum systems can be understood and controlled by
understanding and controlling the analogous macroscopic classical systems. New
discoveries in classical mechanics can be used to show how to obtain similar
control over quantum systems. For example, the theory of chaotic transport was
first introduced to study systems of three bodies interacting under gravity, and
has more recently been used to design spacecraft trajectories, examine orbits of
comets, study transport of meteors from Mars to the Earth, and learn about
mixing in fluids. It will be used to study escape of atoms from cavities, escape
of electrons from highly excited atoms, and transport of atoms through
nanojunctions. These are systems which have only a few degrees of freedom, for
which the interparticle forces are known and controllable, and on which precise
measurements can be made. This research is also connected to technology. The
mechanisms of escape of electrons from atoms is similar to the mechanisms of
escape of electrons from nanojunctions ('designer atoms') and similar to the
mechanisms of escape of photons from optical resonators. In addition, highly
excited states of atoms can be used as infrared detectors, and chaotic
ionization processes have been used to make a streak camera. The field of
nonlinear dynamics is excellent for introducing students to research. As soon as
students learn elementary aspects of Newton's Laws, they can begin computing
trajectories, and analyzing their structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
phenomenon in classical and quantum integrable systems called monodromy will be
studied. Also new phenomena associated with pumping ultracold atoms from one
reservoir to another, 'Ballistic Atom Pumps', has been discovered and will be
further explored. Computations predicting future observations of the 'tennis-
racket flip' in isolated molecules will be carried out. Finally dynamical
control theory will be applied to understand respiration in premature infants.
For example, it is believed that periodic apneas occur when time-delays in a
control loop throw the system into oscillation; this theory will be compared
with data provided by University of Virginia.