* 1404841
* Experiments on fluids and grains
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2019
* USD 796,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a set of
far-from-equilibrium phenomena in fluids that seemingly defy our intuition.
There are six specific goals: (i) to understand the mechanism of how a liquid
drop splashes when it hits a dry solid substrate. It was found that the removal
of the ambient air can completely suppress a drop's ability to splash; (ii) to
study how the viscous-fingering instability, which occurs as a less viscous
fluid displaces a more viscous one in a thin gap between two flat plates,
changes its fundamental nature when the stabilizing force, the surface tension,
is removed. It was found that, instead of becoming more unstable, it can stop
fingering completely; (iii) to understand how fluid drops coalesce when they
merge inside an outer fluid. It was found that the viscosity of the outer fluid
often plays an insignificant role in the dynamics; (iv) to measure the dynamics
of a Leidenfrost drop. Such drops float on a layer of their own vapor; (v) to
study how energy is dissipated in the collision between two clusters of
particles. The energy is rapidly lost as jamming fronts sweep across the
clusters; (vi) to investigate a new form of memory that is stored in the
transient behavior of a fluid before it reaches its final steady state. Such
memories initially remember all inputs but then lose the ability to remember
them even as they are continually applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
distinct aspects of broader impacts that will be addressed: (i) The phenomena
addressed have important implications for technological processes; (ii) Bringing
young scientists, from high-school students to postdocs, into research will
remain a high priority; (iii) Bringing the fascination with cutting-edge science
to the general public, including working with museums, will continue to be
pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to investigate fluids that are in states far-from-equilibrium. The
first topic is to understand the mechanism whereby removing the ambient air can
completely suppress a drop's ability to splash. A second topic is to study how
the viscous-fingering instability in the Hele-Shaw geometry becomes more stable
when the stabilizing force, the surface tension, is removed. A third project
will be to understand how fluid drops coalesce when they merge inside an outer
fluid. In a fourth experiment, the dynamics of a Leidenfrost drop will be
investigated. A fifth experiment studies how energy is dissipated in the
collision between two clusters of particles. Finally, a new form of memory that
can be stored in the transient behavior of a fluid before it reaches its final
steady state will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three distinct
aspects of broader impacts that will be addressed: (i) Applications: the
phenomena addressed have important implications for technological processes;
(ii) Education and Training: bringing young scientists, from high-school
students to postdocs, into research will remain a high priority; (iii) Outreach:
bringing the fascination with cutting-edge science to the general public,
including working with museums, will continue to be pursued.