* 1404744
* Coupled Transport and Reactions in Low-Dimensional Nanofluidic Structures for Enhanced Chemical Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 02/29/2020
* USD 823,891.00

This project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Paul Bohn and his research group at the
University of Notre Dame will seek to exploit new physical phenomena that emerge
when chemistry is carried out in nanostructures whose dimensions are less than
100 nanometers. In particular, confining chemical reactions to these small
volumes under conditions where the delivery of reactants and the extraction of
products is controlled, is expected to yield significant improvements in the
sensitivity of molecular sensing and the efficiency of chemical processing. The
Bohn group will fabricate nanometer scale reactor vessels using various
deposition and lithographic techniques. The reactor structures will allow for
both optical and electrical measurements to be made on the chemical systems
contained within them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a new class
of nanostructures in which transport is intimately coupled with reactivity and
measurement in zero-dimensional, 0-D, and one-dimensional, 1-D, architectures.
Specifically, the experiments enable the coupling of chemical measurements with
multiple sequential reactions/manipulations by addressing two broad objectives:
(1) the high efficiency coupling of electrokinetic flow to Faradaic
electrochemistry in 1-D nanoscale architectures; and (2) the development of high
sensitivity (single molecule) spectroelectrochemistry to characterize single
electron transfer events in 0-D nanostructures. New nanoscale architectures are
being developed that couple electrokinetic flow to heterogeneous electron
transfer and access new routes to high sensitivity redox cycling to amplify
electrochemical measurements. Additionally, nanostructures are being developed
to couple electron transfer events to modulation of light emission, thereby
providing access to single electron transfer events in single molecules. The
project is coupled to the development of a new type of graduate program in
chemical measurement sciences, termed Analytical Sciences and Engineering at
Notre Dame (ASEND), that spans disciplines across traditional engineering and
natural sciences departments.