* 1404687
* US-Chile Planning Visit to Establish a Collaborative Study on the Role of Ecological Gradients in Shaping Mutualistic and Antagonistic Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Sergio Rasmann, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 69,470.00

US-CHILE PLANNING VISIT TO ESTABLISH A COLLABORATIVE STUDY ON THE ROLE OF
ECOLOGICAL GRADIENTS IN SHAPING MUTUALISTIC AND ANTAGONISTIC
INTERACTIONS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to create a new
intellectual partnership between US and Chilean researchers to explore the
dynamics of interactions between plants and animals along steep elevation
gradients. The Chilean collaborators are the entomologist Dr. Cristian Villagra
(Universidad Metropolitana de Ciencias de la Educacion), and the chemical
ecologist Dr. Alejandro Urzua (Universitad de Santiago), while the US-based
collaborator is Dr. Sergio Rasmann (University of California, Irvine), an
evolutionary ecologist who studies the chemical make-up of plant-insect
interaction. This study will investigate the origin of the diversity of
interactions between plants, the insects that pollinate their flowers, and the
insects that consume them (herbivores). The central focus of this project is to
determine how these interactions are shaped by ecological gradients, plant
chemistry, and/or evolutionary history. By understanding the forces that shape
species interaction, the researchers will shade light on the mechanisms that
generate and maintain biodiversity on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
communities are maintained and have evolved along complex webs of mutualistic
and antagonistic interactions. How these interactions, between plants, their
pollinators, and their antagonistic herbivores, are shaped by natural selection
and maintained within particular habitats remains a dominant question in
community ecology. The international collaboration will take advantage of the
plant genus Haplopappus (Asteraceae), which includes &gt;60 species scattered
from the Pacific coast up to 5000 m above sea level in the Chilean cordillera.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the true functionality of Haplopappus
spp. flower and leaf morphology and chemical make-up diversity along steep
elevation gradients, and to dissect how biotic or abiotic factors, or
evolutionary constraints interact to maintain community variation across
contrasting habitats. This proposed project will specifically ask: 1) How do
animal community and plant traits change along elevation gradients in Chile? 2)
What are the biotic and abiotic constraints in maintaining the faunal diversity
of pollinators? And 3) how does plant chemistry influences plant-animal species
interactions?