* 1404017
* Fundamental Investigation of Particle-Driven Sweep Convection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Ali Beskok, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 303,219.00

CBET-1404017&lt;br/&gt;Lage (Southern Methodist
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological advances in small
scale devices are hindered by the need for more efficient heat exchanging
mechanisms. The design, characterization and control operation of potentially
ultra-efficient, particle-driven micro-convection devices, the objective of this
study, will have strong economic impact in several industries, e.g. electronics,
aerospace, automotive, and energy. Recent technological advances for building
small flow channels and particles, which are explored in this project, points
toward the potential scalability of the proposed approach from macro- down to
micro- and nano-scale applications, making this study relevant to heat and mass
transfer equipment not only in mature but also in many emerging industries, such
as fuel-cells, micro-engines, micro-chemical reactors, and bio- and space-
sensors. Analytical, numerical and experimental efforts will be combined to
provide insight and knowledge of this new approach, critical in determining its
suitability for diverse applications. This is an essential study for gaining
fundamental insight of new thermo-hydraulic effects resulting from the proposed
use of small particles in convection. This project will also boost the awareness
of young under-represented and under-served girls, many of Latino origin, about
STEM careers. The development of a new Micro-Thermal Devices course with a
collaborative, research-driven international study abroad program is planned, as
well as a new web portal for disseminating the work on micro-thermo-
fluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard modern approach to using small
(micro- and nano-scale) solid particles in convection equipment begins by mixing
the particles with a base fluid to form fluid-solid (slurry) mixtures. The
present project aims at transforming this standard approach by investigating the
use of these mixtures in channels with flow passage similar to the particle
size. This new approach has been bio-inspired by the study of gas transfer in
alveolar capillaries, where red blood cell particles (RBCs) flow through
capillaries having flow passage similar to the RBC size. In this case, each
particle becomes a discrete component of the mixture, possibly sweeping the
convection boundary layers as they flow through a channel. The proposed work on
parallel-plates and capillary channels, with particles of different sizes
(different particle-channel gaps), provides a drawing board for developing a
fundamental design tool for microdevices, where high heat transfer coefficient
must be weighed against potential pressure-drop penalty. Another advantageous
effect of the new approach is the possibility of controlling the particle's
thermo-hydraulic effects by simply varying the number of particles flowing
through the channel, which can be done easily on-the-fly. This aspect, which
would be fundamental for devices with time-varying thermo-hydraulic loads, will
also be investigated in this study. Analytical, numerical and experimental
efforts will be combined to provide insight and knowledge of the convection and
rheological behaviors of this new approach, critical in determining its
suitability for diverse applications. This is a foundational study, essential
also for building experimental and numerical data-banks for validating and
optimizing predictive analytical models.