* 1404714
* Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michael Filaseta, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,360.00

The 22nd Palmetto Number Theory Series (PANTS) will be held at South Carolina
State University in Orangeburg, SC in September 2014, and the 23rd PANTS meeting
will be held at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, SC in December
2014. The 28th Southeast Regional Meeting on Numbers (SERMON) will be held in
the spring of 2015. These conferences will be open and free to all participants.
More details, including exact dates, a list of speakers, the location for the
28th SERMON meeting, and registration information will be decided upon soon, and
all information will be posted on the conference websites as it becomes availabl
e:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html&l
t;br/&gt;http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
meeting will feature several invited talks, given by number theorists outside
the region, ranging from prominent researchers to up-and-coming graduate
students. Speakers will be chosen so as to represent a broad range of active
research interests within number theory. Each meeting will also feature
contributed talks given by participants from within the region. The primary goal
of these meetings is to provide the number theory community in the Southeast the
opportunity to hear about recent research in number theory. The meetings attract
prominent number theorists outside the region, and provide regional
mathematicians, particularly graduate students and junior faculty, with an
opportunity to speak about their research. The meetings inspire collaboration
and broaden the scope of existing research interests within the general subject
of number theory. Meeting participants include mathematicians of all levels:
undergraduates, graduate students, post-docs, and junior and senior faculty. In
particular, the meeting provides a valuable opportunity to regional graduate
students and to faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions, who may have
few or no other opportunities for professional travel. The organizers will also
continue to attract a demographically diverse participant base, including women
and other underrepresented groups. To this end, in September 2014 PANTS will be
held at a HBCU (South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;State) for the first time in the
conference's history.