* 1404357
* Rydberg Interactions and Quantum Control of Cold Trapped Holmium Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 416,966.00

This research project will study the properties of Holmium atoms. The Holmium
atom has one of the most complex internal structures of any element and our
knowledge of its properties is incomplete. Detailed measurements will be made of
the atomic structure of Holmium. Experimental methods using lasers and
electromagnetic fields will be developed to prepare different internal states
and to measure interactions between Holmium atoms. These measurements and
methods will provide a foundation for future applications of Holmium to
information processing. In addition the project will train scientists in modern
techniques of atomic physics and prepare them for careers in academia and
industry. The results of this research will be disseminated to the local public
in the Madison, Wisconsin area through open houses in the Physics department,
through visits to local schools, and by providing internships for local high
school students.

The rare earth element Holmium (Ho) has a 128 dimensional ground state manifold,
the largest of any stable atomic isotope. Experiments will use a Magneto-Optical
Trap of Ho atoms, recently demonstrated in the Saffman laboratories. Optical
control techniques using rf and microwave fields will be developed to prepare
specific Zeeman substates in the 128 dimensional ground manifold. Rydberg states
will be probed using two-photon excitation and the hitherto unknown quantum
defects of the Ho Rydberg states will be measured. The quantum defects will be
used to develop models for effective Rydberg wavefunctions which will then be
used to calculate Rydberg-Rydberg interaction strengths. The Rydberg state
measurements will form the basis for Rydberg blockade experiments with Ho atoms,
and the demonstration of entanglement. These studies of the ground and Rydberg
state properties of Ho atoms, as well as the development of control techniques,
will establish a knowledge basis for collective encoding of quantum registers in
small Ho ensembles.