* 1404676
* Structure-Enhanced Photoluminescence and Lasing in Aggregated Silver Films Coupled to Optically Amplifying Media
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Benjamin McMorran, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Description: This study provides a scientific basis for the
development of novel light emitting materials which are implemented to attain
nanoscale lasers. The project utilizes a variety of microscopy and optical
techniques to investigate the structural characteristics of these materials and
their light emitting properties. The overarching goal of this study is to
achieve cost efficient materials which may be readily fabricated on large
scales, to yield new types of ultra-compact lasers. Students participating in
this project are receiving broad interdisciplinary training in optical and
materials sciences. Undergraduate students conduct research, working alongside
graduate students, while learning a variety of materials fabrication and
characterization techniques, computational methods and digital image analysis.
The PI is leading efforts to improve undergraduate science literacy through the
instruction of a newly developed course on the topic of Nanoscience and Society.
The PI's commitment to increasing the representation of women in the scientific
disciplines further leverages research activities to help broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The project aims to develop active plasmonic materials comprising
disordered silver films and amplifying media. A main challenge to implementation
of random materials in device applications remains attaining materials in which
nanoscale structural irregularities and local morphological variations do not
impede desired device functionality. This research project addresses this
challenge by aiming to develop active plasmonic materials whose optical
properties are reproducibly controlled through the materials' statistical
attributes. The structures under investigation comprise chemically grown
aggregated silver films coupled to several model amplifying media. The approach
utilizes a variety of spectroscopic, structural and numerical characterization
techniques, and it intends to delineate fundamental relations between enhanced
light emission and statistical structural characteristics in the fabricated
materials. A set of studies aims to examine variations in light emission as the
metal films evolve morphologically, and delineate scaling relations between
light intensity and statistical characteristics. This part also addresses lasing
phenomena in aggregated silver films coupled to amplifying media. A second set
of studies addresses temperature controlled structure-enhanced plasmonic lasers,
achieved in different gain systems, including plasmonic Si Raman lasers and
Ag2O/Ag chromophore complexes, with the aim of developing robust control
mechanisms to reliably tune amplified optical output.