* 1404967
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research:  Genetic Algorithm Driven Hybrid Computational/Experimental Engineering of Defects in Designer Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 168,000.00

The goal of this collaborative research is to build a computational framework
with experimental validation to systematically engineer designer materials that
provide targeted properties. Defects in materials significantly influence their
properties, for instance in energy transfer. The current state-of-the-art
techniques allow one to induce defects in materials controllably and
subsequently predict and correlate relevant properties to the defect
concentration. In this research, computational and experimental approaches will
be integrated to construct designer defect-engineered materials that will
provide desired properties. In this approach, first a targeted property will be
ascertained, and then the defect concentration and distribution will be
predicted to synthesize novel material structures that provide the predetermined
property. The hybrid computational framework will motivate the general
scientific community to leverage advanced computing infrastructures. The efforts
will establish new research and learning communities for computational-
experimental data-enabled science and engineering through promotion of diversity
and undergraduate research experience, outreach to community college students
and work-force development, outreach to the general public (through education
about the power of simulation-based engineering with an online gaming tool and
hands-on activities at science centers) and integration of research with
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a comprehensive effort to
rigorously integrate developments in high throughput synthesis and
characterization with improving access and availability to high performance
computing resources towards solving an inverse design of materials problem. A
computational framework that sweeps through millions of possible structural
permutations and combinations for property prediction will be developed and
validated against experiments. The framework will (1) employ massively parallel
molecular dynamics simulations to predict transport properties of nanomaterials,
(2) synthesize defect engineered nanostructures and measure the corresponding
transport properties, (3) integrate the above nanoscale computations and
experiments through a genetic algorithm based hybrid optimization scheme to
predict the optimal material structure for specified transport properties and
formulate a hierarchy of increasingly complex duals of cost-functionals and
design parameters, and finally (4) close the loop by validating the inverse
design results experimentally.