* 1404673
* SHB: Medium: Collaborative Research: Crafting a Human-Centric Environment to Support Human Health Needs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2013,08/31/2017
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 251,919.00

Researchers and providers alike are recognizing that human-centric smart
environments can provide health monitoring services and support aging in place
through adaptive interventions. The need for the development of such
technologies is underscored by the aging of the population, the cost of formal
health care, and the importance that individuals place on remaining independent
in their own homes. The goal of this project is to design, implement, and
evaluate in-home techniques for generating reports of activities and social
interactions that are useful for monitoring well being and for automating
intervention strategies for persons with dementia. The plan is to design machine
learning techniques that make effective use of sensor data to perform automated
activity monitoring and prompting-based interventions that are beneficial for
the residents as well as for their caregivers and family. The environment is
human-centric because it learns information about its human residents and uses
this information to provide activity-aware monitoring and intervention services.
By transforming everyday environments into smart environments, many older adults
with cognitive and physical impairment can lead independent lives in their own
homes. A key component of this project is an evaluation of the technologies in
actual homes with volunteer older adults and thus will assess the technologies
for acceptance with the target population.

This project addresses NSF?s Smart Health and Wellbeing goal of leveraging
computational expertise leading to fundamental advances in the development of
algorithms to create improvements in safe, effective, and patient-centered
health and wellness services. Through design of a Gerontechnology class we are
training students to design and use these technologies. This effort includes REU
and IGERT students in the research project, which involves students from
underrepresented groups in this multidisciplinary, collaborative effort. To
facility community-wide use, comparison and collaboration, all of our datasets,
tools, and course materials will be disseminated from our project web page.