* 1404668
* RUI: Fractal Structure Formation from Poly(vinyl alcohol) Adsorption on Silicone Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Wei Chen, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 192,573.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVOH), a
nontoxic and water-soluble polymer, spontaneously attaches itself to silicone
substrates from water solution and forms "fractal" (tree-branch like) structures
from nanoscopic to macroscopic scales. The objectives of the proposed work are
to explore the formation mechanism of PVOH fractals on silicone substrates and
to probe the material and experimental factors controlling the structural
features of PVOH fractals. The polymer fractal formation dynamics will be imaged
during their actual generation using optical microscopy; the fractal structures
from the nanometer to micrometer scales will be characterized by various
microscopy techniques. Wettability and other surface characteristics of the
silicone substrates, before and after PVOH adsorption, will also be analyzed to
assess the effect of the fractal polymers on substrate properties. The funds
requested will support the proposed scientific research involving a number of
undergraduate students at Mount Holyoke College and local female high school
students over the next three years. With the proper training, mentoring, and
encouragement, the students will gain competency and confidence in scientific
research and will be better prepared for the next phase of their educational
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVOH) spontaneously adsorbs
from aqueous solution to silicone substrates and forms unusual fractal
structures at multiple length scales. The crystalline nature of PVOH and the
unique properties of silicone thin films (molecular flexibility, low surface
tension but high water compatibility) will be probed in exploring the conditions
for fractal formation. The dependence of fractal features (size, density, and
dimensionality) on experimental variants (silicone thickness and composition,
PVOH molecular weight and degree of hydrolysis, and adsorption parameters) will
also be the focus of the proposed work. Atomic force and optical microscopy will
be used to image dynamically PVOH fractal formation on various silicone
substrates in-situ and to analyze the fractal features from nanoscopic to
macroscopic scales. Contact angle goniometry and ellipsometry, in addition to
various other surface techniques, will be utilized to characterize the silicone
substrates, before and after PVOH adsorption, to assess the effect of the
fractal adsorbed polymers on substrate surface chemistry and properties. The
proposed research will not only establish a new system to prepare fractally
branched polymers with controlled structural features, but will also provide
insights on material and experimental requirements for fractal polymer
formation. The funds requested will support research involving a number of
undergraduate students at Mount Holyoke College and local female high school
students over the next three years.