* 1404325
* Precision Measurements with Nuclear Spins
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Michael Romalis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 02/28/2019
* USD 480,303.00

In this project scientists will search for new, very weak forces between atoms.
The current understanding of physics and cosmology allows for the possibility
that in addition to the four known fundamental forces there may be additional
weak forces due to the existence of new particles. To search for such forces the
group supported by the present grant will perform very sensitive experiments on
atoms using a variant of the technique that underlies MRI medical scanners
(nuclear magnetic resonance). In the proposed experiments the group will orient
the nuclear spins of atoms using lasers and watch how the spin orientation
changes with time. They expect to improve the sensitivity by several orders of
magnitude compared with earlier experiments. In addition to allowing the
scientists to search for new forces between atoms, the proposed experiments will
also have practical applications for very sensitive measurements of magnetic
fields and for precision navigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal describes
a program of precision measurements based on high-sensitivity nuclear spin
magnetometers. In one part of the program an existing alkali-metal noble-gas co-
magnetometer will be used to set new limits on several hypothetical spin
interactions. A possible interaction between spin and mass can be mediated by
axions or other light pseudo-scalar particles. However, existing laboratory
experiments searching for this effect have not yet reached a sensitivity that is
competitive with astrophysical limits. One of the proposed experiments will
improve these limits by more than 3 orders of magnitude and reach, for the first
time, an unexplored range of parameter space. Another type of interaction that
can be mediated by hypothetical light particles is a non-magnetic spin-spin
interaction. Recent limits on such electron spin interactions can be improved by
1 or 2 orders of magnitude using already existing experimental apparatus.
Another part of the program is focused on development of a new type of spin co-
magnetometer, using two noble gas nuclear spin species and an alkali-metal
readout with a Ramsey pulse interrogation. It is designed to have a higher
accuracy as well as better precision compared with existing approaches. The
sensitivity of the new co-magnetometer is already sufficient to realize a search
for spin-gravity interaction with energy sensitivity at the Planck scale. The
group's efforts will focus on the control of systematic effects in this
experiment.