* 1404449
* Non-Equilibrium Turbulent Processes in Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Snezhana Abarzhi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 185,492.00

Rayleigh-Taylor instability and turbulent mixing governs a wide variety of
plasma phenomena in nature and technology, spanning astrophysical to microscopic
scales and low to high energy density regimes. It influences the formation of
the 'hot spot' in inertial confinement fusion, limits radial compression of
imploding Z-pinches, drives penetration of stellar ejecta into pulsar wind
nebula, dominates energy transport in core-collapse supernova, provides
conditions for synthesis of heavy mass elements in thermonuclear stellar
flashes, controls material transformation under high strain rates, and strongly
affects the dynamics of shocks and blast waves. Rayleigh-Taylor instability
develops when matters (plasmas) of different densities are accelerated against
the density gradients. The induced material mixing is a complex (anisotropic,
inhomogeneous and statistically unsteady) turbulent process, whose theoretical
description requires novel approaches that go well beyond the domain of
idealized canonical considerations. The tremendous successes achieved recently
in high energy density plasma experiments and in large-scale numerical
simulations, and the striking similarity of behavior of Rayleigh-Taylor mixing
in vastly different physical regimes make this moment right for a theory to
appear and to advance knowledge of fundamental aspects of the non-equilibrium
turbulent processes in plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of this
theoretical approach is a new concept, the invariance of the rate of momentum
loss. This concept will be applied to capture the transports of mass, momentum
and energy in Rayleigh-Taylor mixing plasmas and to study invariants, scale
coupling, scaling, and statistics of the turbulent process. Group theory and
stochastic analysis considerations will be employed, and coherence and
randomness of the dynamics will be analyzed and related to space-time symmetries
of the conservation laws. Incorporating the high energy density conditions, the
dependencies of integral characteristics of plasma mixing will be investigated
and their connection will be established to the control parameters of
simulations and experiments (e.g. target non-uniformities in high-power laser
experiments). The developed theoretical foundations will be further applied to
analyze existing datasets and to advance the design of experiments and
simulations. The project will impact a broad range of disciplines in science,
mathematics and engineering, including plasmas, high energy density physics,
astrophysics, mathematical physics, stochastic processes, fluid dynamics, and
material science, as well as technology in the areas of nuclear energy and
communications. It will also initiate a new program for graduate education on
modern methods of theoretical modeling and advanced data analysis techniques.
The theoretical tools will be communicated through and contribute to the
development of a newly emerging international research community 'Turbulent
mixing and beyond.'