* 1404596
* Degenerate Partial Differential Equations in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Qing Han, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 176,217.00

Degenerate partial differential equations arise naturally in many subjects in
mathematics, physics and engineering. However, the theory for degenerate partial
differential equations is not well developed due to the complexity of the
degeneracy. It is a common phenomenon that degeneracy causes a loss of
derivatives for solutions. One of the central tasks is to identify optimal
conditions under which classical solutions exist and possess nice properties.
Such a task is reflected in all proposed problems. Our goal is to search for
techniques to establish a priori estimates for perspective solutions under these
optimal conditions. Breakthrough in this direction will have broad impacts to
the whole field of degenerate partial differential equations and their
applications.

The investigator will carry out several research projects studying degenerate
differential equations from Riemannian and complex geometry and general
relativity. These include the study of Abreu's equations and extremal metrics on
toric varieties, study of the generalized Jang equation and the Penrose
inequality, investigation of the isometric embedding of closed surfaces in the
3-dimensional Euclidean space, and investigation of boundary behavior of minimal
surfaces in the hyperbolic space. The main objectives are to understand the
impact of the degeneracy on properties of solutions and to investigate the
behavior of solutions near the sets of degeneracy. The discussion of the
proposed mathematical problems will improve our understanding of more
complicated degenerate partial differential equations in various applications.