* 1404915
* Diagnosing the origin of isotopically light carbon in the South Atlantic during the last deglaciation: An oceanic or geologic source?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2017
* USD 313,060.00

The largest increase in atmospheric CO2 in the recent geologic past occurred
during the last deglaciation (from 20,000 to 10,000 years ago). As the large
Northern Hemisphere ice sheets melted, atmospheric CO2 levels rose by ~30%.
Despite extensive research, the underlying cause of the CO2 change has yet to be
fully explained. Recent ice core results show that the CO2 rise coincided with a
negative carbon isotopic excursion. Similar although larger carbon isotope
anomalies occurred at surface and intermediate depths in multiple ocean basins,
pointing to an oceanic source. The largest documented changes occurred from ~1
to 2 km in the Atlantic, suggesting that processes at mid-depth in this basin
played a key role in the CO2 rise. Identifying the origin of the carbon isotope
signal is essential to unraveling the mechanisms that drove atmospheric CO2
variability in the recent geologic past.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this project is to use data from the Southwest Atlantic to diagnose the
source of the carbon isotope anomalies during the deglaciation. The researcher
team will use a depth transect of high resolution sediment cores from the Brazil
Margin to evaluate the relative timing of surface and deep water signals. The
team will also use radiocarbon and other chemical analyses of microfossils to
infer the origin of the carbon isotope anomaly. Work will focus on testing two
competing hypotheses, one that calls for carbon originating from the abyssal
ocean and the other that invokes carbon from a geological reservoir. The results
could transform our understanding of the climate system by constraining the
source of carbon isotopic minima and therefore the driver of atmospheric CO2
variability on glacial-interglacial timescales. The educational broader impacts
of the proposed work include the participation of a graduate student and two
undergraduates who will pursue independent research projects that complement the
overall goals of the project.