* 1404430
* Stanford Program in Support of LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Robert Byer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2017
* USD 3,300,000.00

Gravitational waves were predicted almost 100 years ago in Einstein's General
Theory of Relativity, but they have not yet been detected due to the extreme
sensitivity required. Examples of potential sources include interacting black
holes, coalescing compact binary stellar systems, stellar collapses, and
pulsars. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) was
built to measure strains in the fabric of space-time that are produced by
gravitational waves. However, the initial version was sensitive enough to see
only a short way into the Cosmos. With completion of a recent upgrade, Advanced
LIGO will soon become operational with ten times the sensitivity of LIGO. When
it reaches design sensitivity, it should be able to detect gravity wave sources
as far away as the Virgo cluster of galaxies and launch gravitational wave
astronomy as a new window on the Universe. Stanford has a strong,
multidisciplinary program in developing the technology for detectors such as
LIGO. Participants include mechanical, electrical and control engineers,
physicists and materials researchers. The program provides training for future
scientists and engineers at both the undergraduate and graduate levels; it
integrates basic scientific research with scientific education; and it develops
and funds outreach programs that inform and educate the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford is engaged in research and development
on gravitational wave detection for the LIGO program. Improved seismic isolation
and alignment system platforms will be developed to enable higher sensitivity at
low frequencies where ground vibrations currently limit sensitivity. Studies of
the optics will remain an active area of research to reduce noise from
thermally-driven mechanical fluctuations in their amorphous optical coatings,
which is now predicted to limit the sensitivity of Advanced LIGO in its most
sensitive frequency band around 1000 Hz. Investigations of the atomic structure
of the amorphous coatings will focus on a better understanding of the
microscopic mechanisms that cause mechanical loss, which results in excess
thermal noise. The thrust of the proposed research is to reduce risk and
facilitate the success of Advanced LIGO, and to enable an opening of
gravitational wave astronomy.