* 1404419
* Interactions With and Between Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Francis Robicheaux, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 11/30/2018
* USD 269,944.00

Typical atoms and molecules in a gas are compact and nearly impervious to all
but the strongest electric and magnetic fields that can be applied in a
laboratory, and they hardly interact with each other except for the rare cases
when they pass within tiny distances of each other. Using simple lasers, one of
the electrons in an atom or molecule can acquire so much energy that it is only
barely bound to the atom or molecule. An atom with such a weakly bound electron
is called a Rydberg atom after Johannes Rydberg who gave a mathematical
description of the allowed energies. Because the electron is weakly attached to
the atom or molecule, its properties can be controlled using modest fields that
are easily accessible. Also, the interaction between two or more Rydberg atoms
is millions of times larger than is usual which gives interesting atom-atom
effects even for a dilute gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical goal of
this project is to calculate the properties of a single Rydberg atom in static
electric or magnetic fields or in laser fields and to calculate the properties
of many interacting Rydberg atoms. Within the past decade, there have been an
increasing number of experimental groups investigating different arrangements of
Rydberg atoms or molecules and fields. One of the general goals of this project
is to provide understanding of the experimental results and/or to propose new
arrangements worth studying. The reason for investigating a Rydberg atom in
different fields is that there is nearly full external control of this quantum
system so that it is possible to learn what properties of the interaction
control how energy and/or particles move within a closed system. There is a
similar reason for studying many interacting Rydberg atoms: the flow of energy
through a purely quantum is a fundamental question and is worth studying in
different situations. Lastly, there have been several proposals to use Rydberg
atoms as components in quantum computers and/or as non-linear optical devices.
Thus, studies which use state-of-the-art computational techniques could aid in
the understanding of the feasibility of these
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate several situations
where the exaggerated electronic properties of Rydberg atoms are the main common
feature. Calculations for systems that consist of a single Rydberg atom exposed
to strong fields as well as many Rydberg atoms that interact through their large
electric dipole moments will be performed. For all of the systems, the group
will use either fully quantum or a mixture of quantum and classical methods in
the calculations. The main long term goal of this project is to develop
theoretical and computational tools that allow the quantitative description of
complex quantum phenomena. The calculations proposed involve highly excited
states where the many nodes of the wave function allow for complex phenomena or
involve many body systems where the correlations between particles lead to
nontrivial dynamics. At a basic level, this goal is a fundamental goal of nearly
all atomic theory proposals. Thus, the lessons learned in these studies could be
of wide interest. Also, understanding these systems could allow for experimental
control of complex states and many body systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
a couple of projects that investigate how a single Rydberg atom behaves when
exposed to strong fields. The first situation is when an atom is exposed to the
structured potential that arises in a bottle-beam trap; when the nucleus is off-
center, this potential has little symmetry with respect to the nucleus so that
nearly all states are mixed together. The second situation is to understand the
role that quantum friction (in the form of spontaneous emission) plays in a
driven quantum system; this system is interesting because the classical dynamics
leads to the oscillator locking to the drive. The classical motion does not
decay out of the O-point and, thus, can remain forever with high energy even
though 'friction' is present. The projects involving two or more interacting
Rydberg atoms focus on separate aspects of this system but invoke similar
computational tools and theoretical ideas. One project is to study the kick an
atom receives due to Rydberg-Rydberg interactions, especially for blockaded
systems. This kick arises due to the finite interaction energy between the atoms
and could have implications for quantum computation schemes. Another project is
to study Anderson localization in a Rydberg gas: the randomness in the placement
of atoms translates into a randomness in the hopping amplitude of an excitation.
A goal is to understand how the 1/R3 dependence in the hopping amplitude affects
the basic properties of Anderson localization. Another project is to understand
the role that near-field versus far-field dipole-dipole interactions play within
a Rydberg gas. By systematically varying the types of states participating in
the dipole-dipole interaction, one can tune the system from predominantly near-
field (states with large principle quantum number) to far-field (states with
small principle quantum number). Lastly, calculations of the interaction between
two Rydberg atoms with large electric dipole moments aligned along an external
electric field and how it affects the relative motion of the atoms will be
performed. This will investigate whether it is possible to vary the direction of
the electric field in a rapid, time dependent manner so that the atoms form a
dynamically stable molecule.