* 1404994
* Disorder and Superconductivity: the relation of crystal structure and magnetism to superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Despina Louca, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 456,149.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research to the University of Virginia
supports neutron scattering studies of novel superconductors to investigate the
intricate interaction of disorder and superconductivity, and to probe the nature
of the microscopic interactions at the smallest scale possible.
Superconductivity is the state of matter characterized by zero electrical
resistance. Materials carrying this property can potentially mitigate some of
the world's energy challenges and transportation demands in the future. Since
its initial discovery about 100 years ago, many superconductors have been
synthesized in the laboratory leading to discoveries of very complex phenomena.
In 1957, Bardeen Cooper and Schrieffer developed a theory that explains
adequately the mechanism that leads to superconductivity in simple metals.
Nowadays, superconductivity has been found in materials that are far from simple
metals and the objective of this project is to provide data to help with
theoretical understanding of their unconventional properties and mechanisms. The
broader impact is to train future generation of scientists who, using
sophisticated characterization techniques, will contribute to important areas of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Condensed Matter Physics Program of the Division of Materials Research supports
the University of Virginia on a collaborative study of new classes of
superconductors, based on BiS2 building blocks. These materials exhibit strong
coupling of the structure to superconducting transition temperature. The
investigators manipulate the crystal chemistry of the materials to tune the
ground state between insulating, semiconducting or metallic, non-magnetic or
magnetic states. Scattering techniques (neutrons) including pair density
function (PDF) techniques are used to study the structural and magnetic
properties. The investigators have complementary expertise in local atomic
structure, phonon and magnetic dynamics characterization. The objective of this
comprehensive approach is to shed light on pairing mechanisms, and generate
phonon/magnetic excitations data for theoretical simulations.