* 1404542
* Modeling of Ultrafast Magnetization Dynamics at High temperatures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2018
* USD 308,000.00

Technological advances today for smaller and faster information storage devices
such as hard disk drives and magnetic random access memory have encountered
unavoidable challenges due to fundamental limitations placed on the current
read/write schemes. One of the most exciting ideas to meet this challenge is to
utilize an ultrafast laser or an ultra-short pulsed electric current to
manipulate magnetic states. Indeed, it has been experimentally discovered that
it is possible to control the magnetic states in less than one picosecond (ps)
by these methods. Inevitably, one enters a new area of science and technology
involving ultrafast dynamics at high temperatures, as oppose to the present-day
magnetic technology which is 1000 times slower (nanoseconds) at room
temperatures. In this research proposal, one focuses on the detailed
understanding of the physical processes, determines key factors that control the
magnetic states and develops quantitative modeling tools which can simulate
magnetization dynamics with desired accuracy. It is anticipated that the
research outcome can be broadly applied to explain and predict novel
magnetization dynamic phenomena observed experimentally, and more importantly,
to provide essential computational tools for application of future magnetic
technologies based on ultrafast and high temperature magnetization dynamics such
as heat-assisted magnetic recording technology. The other proposed activities
include strong collaboration with industry previously established, training of
graduate students via extensive mentoring and industry laboratories visiting. A
new spintronics course with the emphasis on the recent progresses in spintronics
physics and devices has been initiated and will be taught in the Fall semester
of 2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This scientific program aims at developing an
effective equation that can be broadly used for quantitatively modeling of
magnetization dynamics at a wide range of temperatures and at ultrafast time
scales. At present, the reliable and powerful simulation tool for room-
temperature nanosecond magnetization dynamics is based on the Landau-Lifshitz
(LL) equation, which is deemed to fail at the temperature close or above the
Curie temperature. What is needed, from the view point of theory and simulation,
is a better simulation tool to replace the LL equation so that the magnetization
dynamics at high temperature and at ultrafast timescales can be quantitatively
addressed. Built on the preliminary study of the microscopic origins of fast
relaxations, the quantum kinetic approach will be used to establish a self-
consistent dynamic equation. After the proposed dynamic equation for the
magnetization vector is validated, extensive numerical simulations will be
carried out for the element-specific dynamics in magnetic multilayers and
alloys. Two particular device-relevant dynamics processes, laser induced
demagnetization and heat-assisted magnetic writing, will be extensively studied
and optimized.