* 1404614
* Molecular mobility during polymer glass deformation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 416,712.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The deformation properties of polymer glasses are critical for applications but
are poorly understood at a fundamental level. Polymer glass deformation is
almost always non-linear and is complicated by the non-equilibrium nature of the
initial state of the material. Changes in molecular mobility during the
deformation of a polymer glass are intimately connected with the nonlinearity of
the mechanical response; to a first approximation, the flow of a polymer glass
is made possible by the increased mobility of polymer segments. Researchers from
the University of Wisconsin-Madison will use an optical technique to directly
measure segmental mobility during the deformation of poly(methyl methacrylate)
and polystyrene glasses. The role of temperature in deformation-induced mobility
will be investigated. In addition, using reversing strain deformations, the
competition between deformation and aging in adjusting the position of the
polymer glass on the potential energy landscape will be investigated. The
validity of purely mechanical estimates of segmental mobility during deformation
will be evaluated. The overall objectives of the proposed research are to
enhance the fundamental understanding of polymer glass deformation and to test
current theoretical approaches and computer simulations. A better understanding
of polymer glass deformation will also influence research on the deformation of
other glassy materials including metallic glasses.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer glasses play an important role in society due to their low density,
their useful mechanical properties, and the low energy input required for
molding. They are encountered in everyday life as safety glasses, bulletproof
glass, automobile headlamp covers, and as major structural components in modern
aircraft (e.g., the Boeing 787). In all these applications, the polymer glass
must be stiff but also should not break in response to large forces. This
project at the University of Wisconsin-Madison seeks a fundamental understanding
of this behavior and will likely lead to an improved ability to predict the
response of polymer glasses to various forces. Better predictions are expected
to lead to new applications for these materials particularly where lightweight
materials are important (e.g., transportation). In addition, the funding of this
proposal will advance the training of graduate students and high school
students, through the integration of materials research and education
activities. Each summer a polymer materials curriculum, developed for
educational outreach, will be presented as a thirty-hour course for 15 high
school juniors, most of whom will be from groups that have been underrepresented
in engineering and science. The goal of this outreach program is to develop
interest in science/engineering and to develop skills required for success in
college.