* 1404131
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Interactions between microbial mutualists and coninfecting pathogens
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,930.00

Plants and animals are constantly in contact with microbes (microscopic
organisms) that live on and inside them. This research will be an important
first step in determining how competition between viruses is altered by the
presence of beneficial bacteria and whether infection by viruses can reduce
benefits from beneficial bacteria to their host plant, the common bean
(Phaseolus vulgaris). This work benefits the public both directly by providing
data that is relevant to agricultural crop production and indirectly through
scientific education and outreach. Beans and other legumes are important, highly
sustainable sources of dietary protein worldwide. A better understanding of
microbial interactions in common beans can be used to inform strategies that
could alter disease prevalence and increase crop yields. The pursuit of this
knowledge will also provide a variety of hands-on research experiences for
undergraduate students. Finally, the results of the research will be widely
disseminated to the public through presentations to the community and the
development of hands-on learning experiences and mini-courses for 6-12 grade
students. The researchers will examine how the presence of additional mutualist
microbial species in a host plant changes the outcome of virus competition and
disease severity in coinfections and 2) whether infection by pathogens reduces
the benefit that the host receives from mutualists. The ecological and
evolutionary interactions between multiple pathogens which occupy the same host
will be studied, using a system of viruses infecting the common bean. Mutualists
have the potential to alter competitive outcomes between coinfecting pathogens
by influencing host resources for growth and defense. At the same time,
pathogens can induce a full immune response by the host that can be damaging to
microbial mutualists. If pathogen infection reduces the benefit that the host
receives from mutualists, this might destabilize the association. Common beans
infected with pathogenic viruses and mutualistic nitrogen-fixing bacteria
(rhizobia) offer a highly tractable system for studying the interactions between
coinfecting pathogens and mutualists. Two measures of pathogen competitive
ability, within host concentration and transmission between hosts, will be
compared in plants with and without rhizobia to evaluate whether the presence of
a mutualist is differentially beneficial to one pathogen species. The impact of
pathogen infection on the viability of the mutualism will be quantified by
measuring plant immune response hormones as well as rhizobial root colonization
and nitrogen fixation.