* 1404389
* U.S.-France Collaborative Study of the Alteration of Ancient Stromatolites: New Insights through Coupled Petrology and Isotope Geochemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Russell Shapiro, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 35,005.00

a non-technical explanation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stromatolites, the macrofossil
evidence of microbial activity, are an important biosignature in the search for
life on early Earth and in extraterrestrial missions. Although it has become
increasingly important to place value on organic biomarkers to define a record
of past life, stromatolites remain the most readily visible microbial
macrofossil. Yet, the taphonomic effect of diagenesis and metamorphism on
stromatolites is poorly known, hampering their utility as a faithful recorder of
past life.&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to develop a new collaboration to
describe and quantify the effects of contact and regional metamorphism and
fluid-induced diagenetic changes on biogenic stromatolite beds of the 1,878 Ma
Biwabik-Gunflint iron formations of the Lake Superior region. This target has
been chosen because it offers a phenomenal natural laboratory setting that is
accessible, samples can be carefully and accurately plotted in a three-
dimensional framework, and the geologic history is complex and covers several
divergent taphonomic pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full study will be
significant to researchers studying paleontological and biogeochemical patterns
in other altered sediments both on early Earth and extraterrestrial targets. The
research will provide critical primary research experience for two undergraduate
students at a primarily undergraduate institution, enhancing their careers with
opportunities not available at their host institution. The teaching methods of
the PI will be enhanced with a greater understanding of coupled petrologic and
geochemical information. Most critically, by creating a new collaboration, there
will develop additional opportunities for interdisciplinary project-based
learning which forms an integral component of the PI?s
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a technical description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this CNIC proposal is to work in a world-class laboratory at the
Université of Brest, France. During this visit, the new collaborative team will
analyze samples for iron isotope and trace element geochemical proxies that will
integrate with the PI?s extensive database on mineralogic and petrographic
changes throughout the metamorphic gradient of a biogenic stromatolite layer.
This specific collaboration will both complement and challenge previous research
on the geochemical imprint of iron formations and the preservation of original
geobiochemical signatures in ancient fossil deposits. The implications will be
of major importance to researchers in fields as diverse as astrobiology,
geochemistry, mineralogy, economic geology, and paleobiology.