* 1404185
* RUI:  Image-Based Strong-Field Adaptive Control of Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Eric Wells, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 129,399.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Traditional chemical synthesis methods
resemble cooking in the sense that the ingredients, mixing methods, temperature,
and pressure all may be varied to produce a desired result. Despite control over
all of these macroscopic variables there are some chemical processes that remain
elusive. Since the invention of the laser in the 1960s, the field of coherent
control has sought to use the laser to manipulate chemical dynamics by applying
energy of suitable color and duration directly to individual molecules. In this
sense, the laser can be thought of as a new type of reagent that drives a
chemical reaction. While easily stated, this task has proved challenging.
Molecules are complicated and dynamic, making it difficult to determine the
correct laser characteristics to drive a particular process. A proven method for
approaching this problem is to use experimental feedback to guide an adaptive
search of the possible laser pulses. In a physics version of natural selection,
laser pulses that provide a better outcome are given an increased chance to
survive and have their characteristics contribute to the tailored pulse that
ultimately produces the desired outcome. Such a method, however, is only as good
as the feedback that drives it. The goal of these studies is to develop enhanced
image-based feedback techniques that enable this adaptive approach to coherent
control of chemical dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently developed the ability to use three-
dimensional momentum imaging of the laser-molecule reaction products to define
the control objective described in the non-technical description above. Using
three-dimensional imaging to target a specific final state has led to better
understanding of the mechanisms that undergird the laser-based control,
especially in situations in which obtaining precise optical spectroscopic
feedback is impractical. Increased mechanistic understanding can subsequently
lead to better search parameterization, enhancing the adaptive control process.
Current efforts are focused on applying image-based adaptive control to study
and influence photoisomerization processes in small molecules such as ethylene.
By studying photoionization, it is possible to probe how electronic excitation
is rapidly converted to nuclear motion, an essential step in many ultrafast
chemical processes. Ethylene is particularly interesting as a benchmark molecule
for examining the role of conical intersections in these electronic to nuclear
energy conversions. These studies will be advanced by using two-pulse
experiments, which allow the separation of the ionization step from the
subsequent evolution of the molecular ion, which the group hopes to control.
Strong-field tunneling ionization of polyatomic molecules often involves
multiple molecular orbitals, and studies of these relationships help link the
image-based feedback to more specific target states, again with the objective of
refining adaptive control methods. A goal of this project will be extending this
work to explore the control of laser driven electron rescattering via feedback
derived from angle resolved photoelectron distributions. Electron rescattering
is an essential part of many ultrasfast laser-based processes, such as high-
harmonic generation and the production of attosecond pulses, and therefore
control of this sort has a number of potential applications. Finally, as an
undergraduate institution, this project helps identify and develop talented
students by immersing them in forefront research.