* 1404956
* US-UK Planning Visit: Techno-Ecological Synergy for Sustainable Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 46,645.00

1404956 (Bakshi). The goal of this effort is to develop a new approach for
analyzing and designing sustainable systems that accounts for the interaction
and dependence between technological and ecological systems. Existing methods
tend to ignore the critical role of ecosystems in sustaining all human
activities, and could lead to perverse decisions. The framework of techno-
ecological synergy is proposed as a way of accounting for the demand and supply
of ecosystem services at multiple spatial scales. This approach will also be
useful for designing new and innovative networks of technological and ecological
systems that may be economically and environmentally superior to systems
designed by conventional methods. The project involves highly multidisciplinary
research that connects across engineering, ecology, spatial and geographical
modeling, and optimization. Collaboration with Dr. Ziv and his group in the UK
will greatly enhance the research due to the complementary nature of Dr. Ziv's
research and background with that of Dr. Bakshi and his group at Ohio State
University. Dr. Ziv and his group will contribute their expertise in modeling
the supply of specific ecosystem services in selected regions at various spatial
scales. This information will be integrated with knowledge about relevant
technological systems. Through visits to Dr. Ziv's group, the PI and graduate
students will gain greater insight into modeling and software for ecosystem
services and spatial analysis. This will allow research to progress more quickly
and explore new directions that would be difficult to study without the
collaboration. Both groups will develop the proposed Techo-Ecological Synergy
framework together and apply it to various case studies, including the campuses
of Ohio State University (OSU) and the University of Leeds.

The collaboration across disciplines will help in extending the reach of
ecosystem service modeling into industrial supply chains and life cycles, and of
tools for modeling technological systems into ecological systems. These
contributions will help bridge gaps between research in ecosystem services and
sustainable engineering. This will have broad implications beyond the proposed
research, and across disciplines by creating unique opportunities for society to
learn about the direct and indirect role and capacity of ecosystems in
supporting human activities. The proposed application to assessing and enhancing
campus sustainability at OSU and Leeds will permit education and outreach to
minorities across disciplines and age-groups. Dissemination of the results will
be enabled by courses, websites, and outreach through both campuses. The
collaboration will also enhance the ability of the research team to secure funds
from other US-UK programs such as the global innovation initiative. This grant
is co-funded by the Western Europe Program of NSF's International Science and
Engineering Section, and the Environmental Sustainability Program in the CBET
Division of NSF's Engineering Directorate.