* 1404343
* Spin-Isospin Response of Exotic Nuclei: Fine Structure, Quenching and Beta-Decay Properties
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Elena Litvinova, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 284,233.00

The development of novel methods in nuclear many-body theory is critical for the
study of phenomena at the frontiers of astrophysics, mesoscopic science,
fundamental physics and technology. As a mesoscopic system, the atomic nucleus
reveals the transition from the macroscopic world, with pronounced statistical
regularities, to the microscopic world, where individual quantum states can be
identified and studied. In this project, using the atomic nucleus as a research
laboratory, powerful theoretical methods will be developed for the study of
generic properties of many-body systems, such as shell structure, superfluidity
and superconductivity, particle decay and radiation, the onset of chaotic
dynamics and its interplay with collective motion. The project puts a strong
emphasis on the development of cross-disciplinary theoretical methods with
applicability to various strongly-correlated many-body systems. Applications of
these methods provide insights in a variety of nuclear physics phenomena, such
as beta decay, charge-exchange reactions, electron capture, two-neutrino and
neutrino-less double beta decay, and the weak interaction processes. The work
pursued here will support in part the experimental programs concerning the
physics of stable and exotic nuclei at radioactive beam
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work is to find
self-consistent high-precision solutions of the nuclear many-body problem, where
masses, matter and charge distributions, spectra, decay and reaction rates can
be calculated within the same framework at zero and finite temperatures. The
mathematical apparatus for the generalized covariant response theory will be
advanced beyond the existing formulation by means of Green's function
techniques, involving extra dimensions accounting for nuclear superfluidity
effects. The effects of coupling between single-particle and emergent collective
degrees of freedom, coupling to the continuum and the formation of bubbles,
skins and other exotic geometries will be included on equal footing. The project
helps to answer fundamental questions, such as: What is the origin of chemical
elements? Where are the limits of nuclear stability? What are the masses of
neutrinos? The developed approach will allow for the consistent astrophysical
modeling of such competing processes as beta-decay and neutron capture, and
thereby remove the ambiguities arising from the nuclear physics input. This
project will provide students with an intensive training of their analytical and
numerical skills, serving as a basis for their future careers in industry and
academia.