* 1404491
* Gravitational Physics via Lunar Laser Ranging: Optimizing Data Quality
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Thomas Murphy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Gravity, the most evident force of nature, is in fact the weakest of the
fundamental forces, and consequently the most poorly tested. Einstein's general
relativity, which is currently our best description of gravity, is fundamentally
incompatible with quantum mechanics and is likely to be replaced by a more
complete theory in the future. A modified theory would predict small deviations
in the solar system that could have profound consequences for our understanding
of the Universe as a whole. Lunar laser ranging (LLR), in which short laser
pulses launched from a telescope are bounced off of reflectors placed on the
moon by U.S. astronauts and Soviet landers, has for decades produced various
leading tests of gravity by mapping the shape of the lunar orbit to high
precision. The group proposes to continue conducting leading-edge observations
with the Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Operation (APOLLO), in an
effort to subject gravity to the most stringent tests yet. APOLLO, situated atop
a 9,200 ft summit in Southern New Mexico, introduces a new regime of millimeter-
precision in measuring the lunar orbit. However, incomplete models are thus far
unable to confirm the accuracy. The group will therefore seek to build a
calibration system to ensure that APOLLO meets its millimeter measurement goal,
in addition to continuing the observation campaign. The proposed work will
benefit the broader community in a number of ways. On the intellectual front,
improving our knowledge of gravity informs a diverse range of cosmologists,
astrophysicists, particle physicists, and string theorists. The effort would
also contribute to Earth and planetary science, especially via measurements
produced by the superconducting gravimeter. The APOLLO team will continue a
track record of engagement in education and outreach activities, and will no
doubt continue to attract public interest through print, web, radio, and
television media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among other attributes that contribute to
APOLLO's superior observations, routine ranging to all five lunar reflectors on
timescales of minutes dramatically improves our ability to gauge lunar
orientation and body distortion. This information allows a more precise
determination of the path for the Moon's center of mass, thereby facilitating
tests of fundamental gravity. Simultaneously, higher precision range
measurements, together with data from a superconducting gravimeter at the Apache
Point Observatory and from a high-quality Global Positioning System (GPS)
station 2.5 km away, will greatly improve our understanding of the instantaneous
location of the Observatory with respect to the Earth's center of mass (needed
for the gravitational tests) by exposing subtle Earth dynamics that must be
incorporated into the model. LLR measurements provide the best available tests
of the strong equivalence principle, the time-rate-of-change of Newton's
gravitational constant, gravitomagnetism, the inverse-square law, and preferred
frame effects. In addition to these classical gravitational tests, APOLLO will
permit testing of new ideas in physics relating to dark energy, extra
dimensions, and violations of Lorentz Invariance. A large part of the effort
proposed here is the construction of an absolute calibration system based on a
cesium clock standard, a low-jitter short-pulse laser, and a precision interval
counter. This system will provide an independent check of APOLLO's fundamental
measurement, potentially identifying faults and confirming their pursuant
remediation.