* 1404120
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking phenotypic variation in plant anti-herbivore defense to spatial variation in soil nutrient pools
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,645.00

The cycling of nutrients such as nitrogen through ecosystems is a critical
process that maintains biodiversity and environmental services of agricultural,
urban, and natural lands. There is increasing evidence that the way plant and
animal species interact with each other could control the rate of nutrient
cycling. For instance, many plants respond to herbivore damage by producing
defensive anti-herbivore chemicals in their tissues to ward off further damage.
These defensive compounds could also slow down the nitrogen cycling rate when
dead plant material enters the soil by impairing microbial decomposition.
Understanding how the soil nutrient environment changes plant growth and the
production of plant defenses is of critical importance to agronomists interested
in lowering pesticide and fertilizer use while maximizing yield. Results of the
study will be communicated to local stakeholders and small-scale farmers near
the study site through a workshop and seminar designed to integrate knowledge of
ecosystem dynamics into sustainable land management strategies. In addition,
continuing engagement with a local township conservation commission will
incorporate study results directly into land management strategies. Results will
be shared through presentations at professional meetings and funding will
support the mentoring of undergraduates on projects with the potential for co-
authorship on publications that arise from the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking genes to ecosystem function is a recent focus
in ecosystem ecology, because a plant's genotype determines how it functions and
thus has the potential to impact ecosystem processes. Plant genotypes are also
shaped by their growing environment, however, resulting in differential trait
expression across environmental conditions. Knowing how such trait plasticity
connects to ecosystem functioning is fundamental to prediction of how
environmental change will influence ecosystem processes like nitrogen (N)
cycling. Interactions among rates of herbivory, structural anti-herbivore
defensive compounds, and site fertility can all affect trait plasticity and thus
can affect the connections between genes and ecosystems. These interactions will
be examined manipulating the growing environment in caged raised bed garden
plantings of several different genotypes of a common meadow plant, goldenrod
(Solidago altissima), which innately express anti-herbivore defenses differently
under different conditions. The experiment will exclude or add Melanoplus
femurrubrum grasshopper herbivores and exclude or add fertilizer. The study will
measure how rapidly soil microbes decompose plant leaf litter from the genotypes
grown in the different herbivory and fertilizer conditions. Subsequent
experiments will measure how this processing changes soil microbial communities,
soil nitrogen availability, and subsequent plant growth and traits. Finally, a
15N tracer experiment will allow measurement of nitrogen cycling by tracking the
amount of nitrogen in the soil and in plants after it is released by microbial
decomposition. Taken together these experiments will determine whether plant
genotype, the expression of plant anti-herbivore traits, or soil N level best
predicts N cycling within ecosystems.