* 1404177
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A mechanistic test of the keystone mutualism hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Robert Clark, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,824.00

This project will investigate how ecological interactions among caterpillars,
treehoppers, and ants determine the health trees. Caterpillars damage forest
trees by eating leaves and treehoppers feed on trees by sucking sap. An
important consequence of sap-feeding by treehoppers is their excretion of a
sugary solution called honeydew. Some forest-dwelling ants depend on the
honeydew for food. This relationship is called a food-for-protection mutualism
because ants receive carbohydrate-rich food, while treehoppers receive
protection from predators by the ants. In this project, investigators will study
how this interaction between ants and treehoppers affects all participants, and
how the outcome impacts forest health.

Societal benefits of this project are several-fold. First, results from the
research will contribute to the scientific understanding of pest control in
forests. Second, the project will contribute to education about forest ecology
and entomology through the training of undergraduate research assistants, as
well as through broader educational benefits to college students, public school
teachers, and members of the public. Third, the investigators will partner with
the Connecticut Forest and Park Association (CFPA), which offers outdoor
education programs for teachers and members of the public.

More specifically, this research will experimentally test several hypothesized
mechanisms for top-down trophic effects of ant-sap-feeder mutualisms in a
temperate forest community. This system contains multiple species of predatory
ants interacting with sap-feeding insects (mainly Membracidae). Ant-sap-feeder
mutualisms may trigger top-down trophic effects on caterpillars and plants via
increases in total ant abundance (the "density increase hypothesis"), changes in
the behavior of individual ants (the "behavioral modification hypothesis"), or
changes in ant community structure (the "community shift hypothesis").
Experiments will be used to distinguish among these hypotheses. The community
scope of this study system, which currently lacks an invasive ant species, is
novel and important because it offers an opportunity to test ant-community
mechanisms for keystone mutualism effects as well as ant density- and ant trait-
related mechanisms in a relatively intact ecosystem.