* 1404698
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Intelligent Context-Aware Peer-to-Peer Transaction Brokering
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Anind Dey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2018
* USD 489,083.00

Peer-to-peer exchange is transforming economic activity, through unprecedented
integration of social and practical action. This project will produce a full-
scale implementation of a more efficient model of it that can be emulated across
many social and economic domains. Peer-to-peer exchange is the direct exchange
of goods and services by citizens, mediated by a brokering entity, typically
embodied as an information system. It is an emerging paradigm that integrates
economic and social interaction, creating many possibilities for innovation. It
encompasses diverse services such as ride sharing, everyday tasks, textbook
sharing, accommodation sharing , car sharing , sharing parking, local food
exchange, sharing household items, exchanging home-cooked meals, sharing
workspace and expertise, timebanking, and municipal development . Many of these
applications make use of otherwise wasted resources such as parked cars, empty
bedrooms, and idle time, increasing the efficiency and sustainability of
economic activity. Their number and size have mushroomed; they are now referred
to collectively as the "collaborative economy."&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many peer-
to-peer exchanges involve sharing goods and services "just in time," that is,
sharing precisely when someone needs something and someone else is prepared to
provide it. Thus, one key to the success of peer-to-peer exchanges is close
coordination of providers/offerers and recipients/requesters. In a recent NSF
project, members of the current research team investigated mobile timebanking
using smartphone clients, a system in which members of a community can volunteer
specific hours of labor they are well prepared to perform, in exchange for hours
of labor from other community members, counting each hour equally. A key
challenge was a lack of coordination in arranging "just in time" service
exchanges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This new research will investigate
computational approaches to coordinating collaborative interactions mediated by
contextual intelligence. Also studied will be what sorts of user, task, and
interaction information facilitate effective "just in time" service exchanges,
and how users appropriate and experience these exchanges. A large field trial
will investigate the adoption, usability, and utilization of context-aware peer-
to-peer transaction brokering and will provide early reports of results and help
a variety of organizations implement techniques that have been shown to
work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will extend current understanding of
motivations for engaging in helpful economic transactions, the formation of
social connections through such transactions, and of how to enhance subjective
wellbeing by fostering practical helping behaviors through context-aware
technology. A prime objective is to identify strategies for contextually
facilitated peer-to-peer exchange that can energize economic exchange activity,
and support new kinds of exchange, while enhancing social consequences and
concomitants of exchange interactions.