* 1404367
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH::  Genetic sources of novel jaw morphology among Bahamian pupfish (genus Cyprinodon)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Richard Harrison, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,150.00

Understanding the origins of evolutionary novelty is fundamental to the study of
biological diversity. Many studies have focused on the role of selection in
driving change. However, a complete picture of the evolutionary process must
also account for the mechanisms that create variation. This project investigates
genetic changes that produce variation in the jaws of a recently diverged group
of fish, and will provide insight into the nature of genetic changes associated
with evolution in wild populations. The work will train a graduate in genomic
research, and provide research opportunities for undergraduate students
interested in careers in science. The researchers will create materials designed
for use in K-12 classrooms about fish evolution that highlight how evolutionary
novelties arise.

The researchers will investigate the genetic and developmental basis of cranial
modifications in recently diverged incipient species of Bahamian pupfish
(Cyprinodon). The work addresses the role of gene regulation and sequence
divergence in producing novel phenotypic change associated with speciation in
three closely-related species that specialize on eating either the scales of
other fish or hard-shelled prey or detritus. The project will identify whether
the genes and regulatory changes producing pupfish jaw diversity are homologous
to those identified in other classic radiations, thus informing our
understanding of the extent to which similar genetic mechanisms underlie
phenotypic change in disparate lineages. Importantly, the project also aims to
identify previously unknown genes associated with evolutionary changes to jaw
morphology. The researchers will use high throughput sequencing (RNA-seq) to
characterize the extent of regulatory divergence and sequence divergence among
the Bahamian forms and the widespread marine outgroup. They will investigate how
patterns of transcriptional regulation have diverged among Bahamian forms and
identify gene regulatory changes associated with the diversification of jaw
morphology. These data will, furthermore, be used to identify sequence variation
(SNPs) associated with phenotypic divergence and reproductive isolation in the
system. This project will thus provide insight into the genetic changes
associated with speciation and the evolution of morphological novelties during
the early stages of diversification.