* 1404814
* Drift Counteraction Control: Theory and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Ilya Kolmanovsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Drift Counteraction Control: Theory and Applications&lt;br/&gt;In many existing
and emerging engineering systems there is an inherent tendency of process
variables to drift. In some systems this drift is caused by large, persistent
disturbances due to interactions with the external environment. In other
systems, similar drift is caused by finite resources (fuel, energy, component
life etc.) being continuously depleted. The operating objectives for such
systems with drift are reflected in a set of constraints that must be satisfied
for as long as possible by countering the drift, rather than in terms of usual
set-point command tracking requirements. This research project advances theory
and methods for designing control algorithms that perform drift counteraction
thereby establishing a foundation for addressing practical drift counteraction
applications, and for incorporating drift counteraction technology into
industrial products. These advances will represent contributions to several
areas of control theory including stochastic control, set-theoretic control,
game-theoretic control, constrained control, and nonlinear control. The
developments in theory will proceed in close synergy with the demonstration of
their benefits in several engineering applications to automotive and aerospace
systems and dynamic motion simulators. The research results will be integrated
into university courses for graduate students, short courses for industrial and
academic audiences, and into the computational software package implementing
drift counteraction control design techniques. &lt;br/&gt;The drift
counteraction control is based primarily on constraints and does not use
conventional set-points, differently from most of the traditional control
theory. The development of effective techniques for drift counteraction will be
based on treating external disturbances causing drift and constraint violation
first in the stochastic and then in the deterministic setting. In the stochastic
setting, advances in Stochastic Drift Counteraction Optimal Control (SDCOC) that
maximizes the expected cost before the imposed constraints are violated will be
pursued. Stability and boundness conditions for closed-loop trajectories of
systems operating under SDCOC control laws when disturbances settle to constant
values or vary within a subset of the full range will be derived. Sub-optimality
and convergence properties of receding horizon and reinforcement learning
variants of SDCOC will be studied. Advances in SDCOC computational procedures
will be made, firstly, by exploiting decomposition of the system dynamics into
slow and fast subsystems and, secondly, based on Markov Chain models that use
Fuzzy Encoding (MCFE). By combining SDCOC and MCFE, evidence based control
framework for drift counteraction in uncertain systems will be defined and
complemented with estimation algorithms. In the deterministic setting, set-
theoretic, game-theoretic and disturbance estimation/cancellation based
approaches to drift counteraction problems will be pursued. The advances will
focus on formulation and derivation of algorithms, the improvements in their
off-board and on-board computations, and characterization of closed-loop
properties (constraint violation time, ability to prevent constraint violation
over an infinite time interval, trajectory bounds, etc.). Synergistically with
the theoretical advances, several practical applications of drift counteraction
control will be considered. These applications will include increasing comfort
and fuel efficiency of adaptive cruise control systems for conventional and
hybrid passenger vehicles, extending range and life of electric and hybrid
electric vehicles and their batteries, improving the ability to replicate
motions in small scale dynamic motion simulators, and improving the capability
and efficiency of spacecraft attitude control using momentum exchange devices.
For each application, its requirements will be reflected in a drift
counteraction problem formulation, appropriate models will be established, drift
counteraction control algorithms will be designed, and performance benefits will
be quantified. To ensure practical relevance of the results and facilitate their
experimental validation in the vehicle adaptive cruise control case,
interactions and collaborations with industry partners will be leveraged.