* 1404985
* Preparation and Properties of Lipid Vesicles With Highly Controlled Lipid Asymmetry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Erwin London, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2017
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to State University of New York at Stony Brook is to study
membranes of living cells composed of lipids (specialized fat molecules) and
proteins. Membranes control the uptake of food stuffs into cells and the
communication between cells and their environment. Cell membranes are very
complex, consisting of thousands of types of different proteins and lipids.
Artificial membrane vesicles, composed of membrane lipids and proteins which are
forming an envelope similar to a cell membrane, are important tools in
understanding how membranes function. Natural membranes have two layers of
membrane lipids, and they are asymmetric with different types of lipids in each
layer. A key limitation in the utility of artificial membranes has been their
lack of lipid asymmetry. Investigators of this award earlier discovered a method
to prepare asymmetric artificial membranes. The proposed research on artificial
membranes is expected to greatly expand the scientific knowledge on membranes.
Additionally, this project will also have a broad impact on career development
of future scientists, including minority students, by training both graduate and
undergraduate students (including via contacts with other local institutions) in
the conduct of research, experimental principles, and experimental techniques
used in membrane research. Students will also be trained in proper conduct of
scientific studies, scientific writing and speaking, which will prepare them for
careers in research, teaching, or allied fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
Lipid asymmetry, a difference in the lipid composition in the inner and outer
leaflets (monolayers) of a biological membrane, is a crucial property of the
lipid bilayer in many cell membranes. Artificial vesicles (liposomes) containing
lipid bilayers are biomaterials that have proven invaluable models of biological
membranes, but the lack of methods to prepare asymmetric vesicles has limited
their utility. With this grant, the first goal will be to prepare vesicles with
inside-out asymmetry (cytosolic lipids facing outwards); to prepare vesicles
containing a wide variety of outer leaflet lipids; and to prepare artificial
asymmetric fungal membranes and bacterial outer membranes. The second goal will
be to incorporate membrane proteins into asymmetric vesicles. The third goal
will be to use asymmetric vesicles to tackle the biologically important issue of
coupling between inner and outer leaflet physical properties. Such coupling has
been proposed to contribute to signal transduction across biomembranes. To
better understand the coupling between the outer and inner layers and signal
transactions between them, fluorescent and neutron scattering studies will be
carried out in collaboration with scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Additionally, this project will have a broad educational impact on career
development of future scientists, including minority students, by training both
graduate and undergraduate students (including via contacts with other local
institutions). Students will receive specialized training in a variety of
biochemical and spectroscopic techniques used in this study of membrane proteins
and lipids, including unique methods developed in this investigator's
laboratory. Students will also be trained in proper conduct of scientific
studies, and writing and speaking skills, preparing them for careers in field of
biological/biophysical sciences and/or teaching. Finally, by developing improved
model for membrane systems, this project should broadly impact the field of
membrane biology, including drug delivery and nanomaterial applications.