* 1404333
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: THink - Inferring Cognitive State From Subtle Behaviors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Catherine Price, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 222,121.00

Cognitive disorders are a key health problem affecting millions of individuals,
a problem that is increasing in importance as America's population ages. Just a
single dementia, Alzheimer's disease, is estimated to afflict some 5.4 million
Americans in 2012, projected to rise to 11-16 million by 2050, with the
potential for staggering cost both in dollars and human costs for the afflicted
and their caregivers. Yet cognitive health is not monitored effectively in the
way that physical conditions and wellness are: physician visits routinely
include screens for heart disease, diabetes, etc., but there is far less
consistent screening for cognitive status. This project seeks to develop rapid,
precise, and objective cognitive assessment tools that will provide
operationally defined, quantitative metrics with sufficient sensitivity and
specificity to aid in early detection and diagnosis of neurodegenerative
disorders, as well as monitoring disease process and treatment efficacy. Its
evidence-based approach offers the possibility of earlier treatment, which can
slow the progress of cognitive disease, resulting in better quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research objective is to develop two new
digital versions of two traditional tests. The digital Maze Completion (dMC)
assesses frontal brain system associated cognitive functions by providing
measures of tiered decision making and executive planning, and calibration of
memory function by measuring the effect of priming. The digital Symbol-Digit
Test (dSDT) assesses executive function by measuring information processing
speed, and calibrates planning and cognitive shifting by detecting and measuring
subtle behaviors. Both tests provide new measures of learning, assessing
reaction time changes and short term memory retention. The second objective is
to develop the algorithms required to detect subtle behaviors during the dMC and
dSDT tests, which can serve as a platform to which additional tests can easily
be added. The third objective is to make all the tests as self-scoring as
possible, through advances in signal interpretation. The fourth objective
involves administering the dCDT, dMC and dSDT to both healthy adults and
subjects with known cognitive impairments, permitting the calibration of the
power and value of the tests. The final objective is to establish the validity
of selected measures provided by the tests, by comparing the measures to
standard cognitive test results, to specific neuroanatomical structures, and to
external and subcortical gray matter integrity relative to white matter
integrity. These research activities are integrated with education through
projects in courses, engagement of graduate and undergraduate students in the
research, and annual workshops for students.