* 1404510
* RUI: Edge States and Vortices in Photonic Graphene-Like Structures
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Zhigang Chen, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 241,488.00

Ordinary optical materials (like eyeglasses) are manufactured to be highly
uniform in their optical properties--irregularities are taken to be a sign of
inferior quality. By precisely controlling the irregularites, however, and
making them conform to a particular pattern, one can create intriguing and
potentially useful effects that go beyond what is normal in uniform systems.
This project will explore some such effects which may mimic the behavior of
graphene--a material that has attracted a great deal of interest in recent years
because of its potential application in future microelectronics manufacturing.
This analog of graphene is easier to work with than real graphene, allowing more
rapid progress in exploring the true limits of this fascinating material. The
experimental techniques that will be used in this research are straightforward
enough for active participation of undergraduate and masters-level graduate
students, yet the research activities will expose students to a broad range of
phenomena in a cutting-edge field of interdisciplinary science. In fact,
throughout the project, a major emphasis will be placed on mentoring students,
particularly those from the ethnically diverse San Francisco Bay Area
population.

Carbon-based graphene has been highly touted and tested as an extraordinary
material for many applications, apart from elucidating fundamental physics
phenomena. Recently, there is a surge of interest in creating "artificial"
graphene systems not only for electrons, but also for atoms, photons, and other
quasiparticles such as polaritons. This is simply because that artificial
graphene can provide a tunable system to explore physical phenomena difficult or
impossible to achieve in natural graphene. In this project, a simple optical
induction technique will be used to create 2D honey-comb (graphene-like)
lattices as well as other nonconventional lattice structures. More importantly,
these photonic structures will be employed as a workbench for investigation some
fundamental issues including surface states, vortices and equivalent spin
effects and magnetic effects of light in graphene-like lattices. Although
performed in a simple optical setting of reconfigurable photonic structures,
much of the proposed work will have direct impacts on other areas of sciences,
ranging from condensed matter physics to atomic physics such as Bose-Einstein
condensates trapped in periodic potentials. For instance, the electronic edge
states were known for decades, but such fundamental phenomena have recently
attracted growing interest in optics that has led to the successful
demonstration of photonic topological insulators. Indeed, there is much
potential to use optical systems as photonic simulators for studying complex
classical and quantum phenomena.