* 1404139
* Mississippi's Contribution to Advanced LIGO's Search for Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Luca Bombelli, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The new Advanced LIGO detectors are on course to start soon their first science
run. Before the end of this award period, Advanced LIGO may open a new,
revolutionary window on the universe that will probe some of the most energetic
and mysterious phenomena in the sky, from merger of black holes and explosions
of supernovae to the internal structure of neutron stars. Gravitational-wave
astronomy will allow scientists to see the universe from a novel and unique
perspective, providing astrophysical insights that are not accessible with
conventional telescopes. This research delivers vital contributions to Advanced
LIGO's scientific core mission while strengthening LIGO's commitment to
improving science education among diverse and underserved segments of the
population, the youth and the general public. The success of the Advanced LIGO
endeavor will have broader impacts in physics, astronomy, technology and
engineering through the project's multiple spin offs. Research under this award
will encourage the growth of scientific advancement in the southeast region of
the United States, increase educational opportunities in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), and enhance diversity in science.

The activities funded through this award support Advanced LIGO research during
detector commissioning and early science data taking phases. After the initial
acceptance of the Advanced LIGO interferometers, University of Mississippi's
researchers and students will work with LIGO personnel to characterize and
improve the performance of the new instruments. These activities will be carried
out on site by senior personnel and graduate students residing at the
observatories, as well as off-site through the use of existing LIGO detector
characterization tools and data mining techniques. In this phase, Mississippi's
researchers and students will also contribute to the development, implementation
and maintenance of dedicated software for data analysis and detector
characterization. During the initial Advanced LIGO science runs, University of
Mississippi's personnel will work in close contact with LIGO scientists to
monitor and improve the performance of the detectors, mitigate unwanted non-
astrophysical features in the data and reduce the background of Advanced LIGO's
astrophysical searches.