* 1404832
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Predictive Modeling of Flows Containing Aggregating Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

CBET-
1404826/1404832&lt;br/&gt;Sinno/Kevrikidis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid
flows containing complex particles that interact with each other and with vessel
walls are a central feature of an enormous range of biological, chemical, and
physical processes, and the potential scientific and technological impact of
having access to predictive computer models is difficult to overstate.
Consequently, improvements in computer simulations for aggregating particulate
flows have been actively sought for many years, and to date have been driven
largely by increased availability of computer power coupled with advances in
mathematical algorithms and techniques. As this trend continues, computational
modeling is increasingly blessed (and cursed) by the "big data" streams
generated by high resolution experimental measurements and/or by detailed
computational simulations. In particular, the meaningful comparison of
computational outputs and experimental measurements, both of which are large,
complex, and statistically noisy, has emerged as a key challenge. As a result,
models often capture many qualitative phenomena correctly but their predictive
ability, and hence their usefulness to industry and manufacturing, becomes
increasingly hard to establish and exploit. The proposed work seeks to close
this gap by implementing, extending and exploiting a broad (and evolving) set of
novel data mining techniques that enable new ways of linking tailored
experiments to smartly designed simulations and back to model building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multifaceted approach will be pursued to interrogate and
use data jointly from a multiscale/multi-element model and two particulate-flow
experimental systems. The experimental systems include a "target" system
(platelets in blood), whose predictive description is ultimately sought, and a
"model" system (DNA-functionalized colloids in water), which will be used to
develop methods and help interpret the more complicated target. Both systems are
defined by "complex" particles that exhibit time-dependent adhesivity leading to
transiently evolving aggregates at a specified location on the vessel surface.
Modern data mining techniques will be exploited and extended to process the
native, high-dimensional data generated by these three sources to discover low-
dimensional statistical measures that enable meaningful merging/comparisons of
data streams from different sources and runs. Ultimately, the project
deliverables are (i) a better understanding of the physical, chemical and
biological mechanisms operating in these complex systems, (ii) data-enhanced and
data-validated engineering models, and (iii) experimental design rules for
complex, multi-parameter systems.