* 1404502
* Telescope Array Operations and Data Analysis by the University of Utah Cosmic Ray Group
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,304,641.00

The Telescope Array (TA) is the largest detector for ultrahigh energy cosmic
rays in the northern hemisphere. The nature of cosmic rays sources and the
mechanism that accelerate cosmic rays to ultrahigh energies are among the most
interesting open questions in astrophysics. The primary objectives of the TA
experiment are to measure the energy and spatial distributions, and the chemical
composition of the highest energy cosmic rays in order to address these
outstanding questions. The University of Utah is the host institution for TA,
and the cosmic ray physics group plays critical roles in the design,
integration, deployment, operation, and management of TA. These include: (a)
Facility and detector maintenance; (b) Provision of staff for observing shifts;
(c) Data handling; (d) Simulation and analysis; (e) Maintaining compliance with
Bureau of Land Management regulations. With this award the University of Utah
group will continue the operation of the TA experiment for three more years. The
TA facilities host a number of auxiliary projects and provide testbeds for
detector characterization. The Astrophysics Science Project Integrating Research
and Education (ASPIRE) is the project's major outreach activity. ASPIRE has
created engaging interactive science lessons and labs on the Internet. ASPIRE
also provides direct outreach to area teachers, students, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TA experiment comprises a Surface Detector
array of 507 scintillation counters deployed over 730 square kilometers in the
western Utah desert. Three Fluorescence Detector stations look inward over the
air space above the Surface Detector from the edge of the array. The four years
of data collected between 2013 and 2017 will double the total exposure of TA.
The specific physics objectives of continued operation will be to (a) seek
evidence for Large Scale Structure correlation and for clustering of arrival
directions of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays in the new independent data set,
testing the signals uncovered in the first five years; (b) make precise
measurement of the spectrum in the region of the GZK cut-off in order to
differentiate between competing models for the high energy spectral break, and
(c) complete the measurement of composition at the highest energies, including
the analysis of the width and shape of the shower maximum depth distributions
with statistical precision comparable to the Pierre Auger Observatory result. In
addition, TA is adding a low energy extension (TALE). TALE observations will
share personnel and facilities with TA, and will make hybrid measurement of the
energy spectrum and composition of cosmic rays in the energy region where the
galactic to extragalactic transition is suspected to occur.