* 1404080
* Integrated Photothermal Platform for Delivering Infectious Bacteria into Mammalian Cells in BSL 3 Environment for High Throughput Screening
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Pei-Yu Chiou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 489,591.00

1404080 Chiou, Pei-Yu Title: Integrated Photothermal Platform for Delivering
Infectious Bacteria into Mammalian Cells in BSL 3 Environment for High
Throughput Screening

Significance: A major obstacle in cell biology and microbial pathogenesis
research is the absence of any method for efficient high-throughput delivery of
micron-sized cargo directly into the cytosol of cells. This proposal aims to
develop a compact platform that will overcome this obstacle. We have devised a
novel strategy that uses a laser to create micron-sized bubbles that transiently
disrupt the cell membrane and drive bacteria-sized cargo into the cell cytosol.
A unique advantage of our proposed platform is that its compact size will allow
it to fit in a biosafety cabinet, thus enabling work with highly infectious
bacteria that could not be studied safely with any currently available delivery
method. In addition to bacteria, our platform will also be able to deliver
directly into the cell cytosol subcellular organelles such as mitochondria,
chromosomes, and micron sized "nano-machines". Success of our project will
enable researchers to ask experimental questions that hitherto could not be
answered and to make advances in diverse fields, including microbial
pathogenesis, cell biology, cell engineering, and regenerative medicine.

Technical Description: This platform is realized by a silicon chip-based
massively parallel photothermal nanoblade fabricated by micromachining. A
nanoblade chip is seeded with the host cells, and the bacteria that will be
injected are loaded in a custom-built fluid chamber. A handheld size fiber laser
coupled with a custom built optical scanner to provide cavitation excitation
over a large area. Immediately after laser pulsing, pressure driven flows will
be triggered to actively drive micron-sized bacteria into cell cytosol.
Massively parallel delivery into 100,000 cells takes only 10 seconds, which is 5
orders of magnitude faster than the current pipette based delivery approaches.
To accomplish our goal, we plan to conduct the following projects. Project 1 is
to develop a compact photothermal platform for high-throughput delivery of
infectious samples in BSL 3 environment. Project 2 is to develop an all-optical
driven nanoblade platform for ultrahigh throughput large cargo delivery and
project 3 is to demonstrate the utility of massively parallel photothermal
nanoblade in high-throughput screening to identify bacterial genes required for
cytosolic growth and host cell pathways that restrict bacterial cytosolic
growth.