* 1404300
* Quantum Optics in RB-Filled Photonic Crystal Fibers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 538,248.00

This project will study interactions of light with matter that are so strongly
enhanced that single photons can alter the propagation of other photons. This
strong enhancement will be achieved by injecting Rubidium atoms into the core of
special hollow fibers, known as photonic crystal fibers, which can tightly
confine the light over distances much longer than could be achieved in free
space. Various interactions will be studied which could have important
applications to quantum information science and could be used for highly secure
communications and for quantum computing. In particular, successful realization
of the three projects making up the effort could lead to a number of important
quantum devices including scalable single-photon sources, deterministic quantum
logic gates, and quantum repeaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic band-gap
fibers (PBGF) guide light via diffraction rather than by total internal
reflection and allow for simultaneous high confinement of light and gases in a
hollow-core region. As a result, PBGF's offer a unique advantage over free-
space, focused geometries for atom-light interactions due to their unmatched
ratio of path length to cross-sectional core area. The proposed effort will
consist of three projects that build on the principal investigator's recent
results. The first project will explore nonlinear phase shifts induced by single
photons and its use for quantum non-demolition measurements. The second project
entails demonstration at sub-milliwatt powers of frequency translation of a
light field and its quantum properties using the process of frequency
translation via the nonlinear process of Bragg scattering four-wave mixing. The
third project will investigate the process of coherent photon conversion in
which three quantum fields undergo a strong nonlinear interaction that is
mediated by a strong pump field. These projects will address not only
fundamental issues, such as whether large nonlinear phase shifts per photon are
possible, but also will explore whether the Rubidium-based PBGF system can
fulfill its promise as a platform for quantum information applications.