* 1404798
* US-Swaziland Planning Visit: Social and Ecological Drivers Impacting Biodiversity in Southern Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* John Stepp, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2015
* USD 34,998.00

This CNIC project supports a planning visit that will allow the PI, Samantha
Wisely, co-PI, John Stepp, and other colleagues from the University of Florida,
to meet with new colleagues from the University of Swaziland and Kruger National
Park in South Africa to develop a multidisciplinary research project that
evaluates the interrelationships between biodiversity, ecosystem functions and
human wellbeing. As ecosystems are changing around the globe, especially with
expanding land use for agriculture, it is important to understand how rapid
changes in land use alter biodiversity and ecosystem functions, and how in turn
altered ecosystem functions impact the health and livelihoods of people.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit will prepare to test a conceptual
model linking the causes and consequences of ecological and sociological
interrelationships in ecosystems. The team plans to study links among different
components of the system, the dynamics of the feedbacks, and the scales at which
the components interact to test a general hypothesis that high biodiversity
improves the wellbeing of people. They will perform the planning for research to
evaluate the interrelationship of three triads: a) plant diversity, medicinal
resources, and human health and nutrition, b) mammal diversity, disease
prevalence, and human health, c) pollinator diversity, agricultural
productivity, and human nutrition and wealth. The team plans to conduct work
across three different countries where they will survey for biodiversity across
agro-ecological gradients looking focusing on three components: rodents,
pollinators, and vascular plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together sociologists and ecologists from Africa and the US, including two US
graduate students and several African students, to collaborate on a compelling
socio-ecological system in a biodiversity hotspot, the Maputaland-Pondoland-
Albany Biodiversity Hotspot in southern Africa, which is currently in danger of
losing its high species diversity and endemic biota due to rapid land conversion
to industrialized agriculture. An improved understanding of the relationships
among biodiversity, ecosystem function and human wellbeing will impact land use
governance and personal and cultural valuations of ecological resources, helping
to promote environmental sustainability while the planet prepares to feed a
projected 9 billion people by 2050.