* 1404187
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Accounting for spatial autocorrelation in species distribution models using a Bayesian framework: consequences for predictions across space and time
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Melissa Anthony, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,621.00

Ecologists combine an understanding of current conditions with models to predict
the effects of future environmental conditions on populations and communities.
Many of the models used are incomplete, hindering these important predictions.
This project improves predictions of where species will occur as environments
change by including new data on the similarity, or degree of dependency, among
observations that are closely associated in space. It will significantly advance
fundamental research in ecology. Simultaneously, the research will result in a
clearer general understanding of how species will respond to increasing habitat
degradation, invasive species, disease, and climate change, thereby contributing
directly to biodiversity conservation.

The goal of this research is to investigate the relationship between stream flow
variability, spatial relatedness, and fish species occurrence across sites
within the Big River watershed in East Central Missouri while developing
statistical techniques to account for the effects of spatial autocorrelation on
species distribution predictions. Spatial autocorrelation is the positive
association between the proximity of sample locations and the similarity of data
at each location. It reduces the accuracy of current species distribution
models. Stream fish assemblages at 50 sites across the watershed will be sampled
and predicted based on spatial relatedness to other sampling sites and flow
variability data estimated from high resolution in-stream depth gauges. The Big
River watershed is a primary focus of collaborative conservation efforts by the
Missouri Department of Conservation and The Nature Conservancy in Missouri. The
data and results generated from this study will be of practical use by these
agencies during their attempts to balance human activities and the conservation
of biodiversity in this unique aquatic ecosystem. The project will significantly
enhance ongoing dissertation research by providing field tests of model
predictions, broadening and strengthening graduate student training.