* 1404971
* Collaborative Research: Risk-Averse Cluster Detection in Network Models of Bigdata Under Measurement Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Balabhaskar Balasundaram, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2018
* USD 271,649.00

The objective of this collaborative research award is to establish a
comprehensive knowledge-base for detecting low-diameter clusters in network
models of social and biological big-data that are subject to measurement errors
and incomplete information. This research study focuses on a novel model for
detecting clusters in social and biological networks called a "k-club." Some key
innovations pursued as part of this study include the use of a risk measure from
financial engineering that is used to quantify losses in cluster cohesiveness
that results from the measurement errors and uncertainty that underlies such
network models of big data. This measure represents the downside risk of high
losses in the worst-case scenarios leading to risk-averse mathematical models
that facilitate the detection of clusters that are more likely to be application
significant. The models and algorithms that result from this study will be
validated using laboratory experimental data and expertise provided by
collaborators in biological sciences, and also by using publicly available
social and financial network datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
work can enable biologists to better understand complex biological networks,
accelerate discoveries and reduce experimental costs. The research has the
potential to spur fundamental discoveries that can lead to advances in
biomedicine, agriculture and bioenergy with positive societal impacts. High
School mathematics teachers will be engaged to receive first-hand experience in
large-scale network/data analysis as well as identify and transfer appropriate
material to their classroom via active learning exercises. Enhancing minority
participation and professional development are key outreach goals of this
project. Graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented groups will
be actively sought to become engaged in the research and hopefully the
professoriate as recommended by the National Science Board and aligned with the
America COMPETES Reauthorization Act.