* 1404890
* GOALI: Power-Efficient, High-Resolution, Analog-to-Digital Converter for Broadband Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal No:1404890&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Power-Efficient, High-Resolution, Analog-
to-Digital Converter for RF-to-Digital Applications That Digitize Up to 1 GHz
Bandwidth with Low Power Consumption&lt;br/&gt;Jose Silva-
Martinez&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project promises to improve the power efficiency, bandwidth and resolution of
real-world analog signals with processing made possible by the development of a
novel analog-to-digital converter with an unmatched architecture that will have
a significant impact on extending the battery lifetime and reliability of
electronic devices, and it also has the potential to reduce the production cost
of mixed-mode systems on chips. Currently more than 2.7 billion users demand a
global network capacity of several trillions of bits per second. Smaller feature
size transistors in CMOS technology allow more digital functions in a single
chip making possible the physical realization of more complex signal processing
algorithms that were prohibited in the recent past. The "All in One" mobile
systems are clearly becoming the preferred source of communication. For
instance, emerging Long-Term Evolution (LTE) standards for the next generation
of cellular phones have been developed to allocate more and faster services.
Applications such as entire digitization of the newly deployed digital TV
channels, high resolution image recognition as well as a number of military
applications require wide-band and high resolution digitizers, usually requiring
over 12 effective number of bits. This project is a step towards the
digitization of multiple services. Consumer electronics, wireless communication
and image processing industries as well as homeland security and military
sectors will benefit from the development of high-resolution broadband real-time
digitizers.&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to meet future multi-standard
application demands with a new highly efficient, high-resolution analog-to-
digital converter (ADC) operating in the GHz frequency range. The aim of this
project is to develop an ADC architecture that digitizes up to 1 GHz bandwidth
with modest power consumption, utilizing minimal digital resources. The proposed
time interleave ADC architecture will employ four pipeline sub-ADCs, running at
500 MS/s each to achieve a resolution of 12 effective number of bits at a rate
of 2x109 signal samples per second while overall power dissipation is under
500mWatts. This will be possible by leveraging a very fast (40 nm or more) CMOS
technology, developing an efficient calibration scheme for better linearity and
integrating innovative IC design techniques suitable for high-resolution low-
power broadband applications. The input signal is processed by four independent
channels that operate in parallel, which then relaxes the requirements for every
channel. The main drawback of this approach is the fact that system linearity,
and so system performance, is limited by unavoidable mismatches between
channels. Inaccuracies when sampling the input signal represents another
relevant limitation to system resolution. This research will develop innovative
solutions to resolve these existing hurdles and will focus on combining the
calibration schemes with through limited-gain but highly-linear amplification
stages that should result in greener solutions. High-gain amplifiers will be
avoided when possible since they are power hungry and their bandwidth is
limited. A new efficient residue curve will be used to further improve sub-ADCs
linearity and reduce system power consumption. The proposed architecture is a
relevant step towards the realization of efficient RF-to-digital information
converters, minimizing the use of noisy and inaccurate analog hardware.