* 1404818
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: Exposing the Injection Machinery Dynamics of Bacteriophage T4 through Multi-Scale Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ioan Andricioaei, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 272,800.00

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and they are the most abundant
organisms on our planet. They are also sophisticated machines that exploit
mechanics as vividly illustrated by bacteriophage T4 which injects its DNA into
a host through an amazing protein machine. This research will answer fundamental
questions regarding how the injection machinery works using novel computational
modeling methods. The computational models will expose details of the entire,
highly dynamic injection process by advancing modeling and simulation methods
for longer time and space scales and with greater detail than current
approaches. This research, which lies at the intersection of mechanical
engineering, molecular biophysics and computational science, has direct
implications to advances in nanotechnologies which aim to harness viral
machinery for useful purposes for human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will combine continuum models and large scale all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations to arrive at a multi-scale model that captures the dynamics
of the T4 injection machinery. In particular, the multi-scale model will emerge
from a novel coupling of local (atomistic) and global (continuum)
representations of the major protein domains of the injection machinery,
including the flexible sheath structure which powers injection, the central tail
tube that penetrates the host (E. coli), and the modulating effects due to
hydrodynamic forces on the viral capsid (head) and the interaction forces of the
host on the tip of the tail tube. Simulations based on this multi-scale model
will reveal the biological time scale of injection, generate dynamical pathways
for tail contraction, explain the stored energy mechanism driving injection, and
predict the forces responsible for driving the tail into the host cell.
Individually, these represent major contributions in understanding the science
of virus infection at a mechanistic level. These contributions may also enable
future advances in the use of viruses in nanotechnology applications ranging
from gating, sensing, translocation, peptide display, and phage therapy. In
addition, this project will positively impact the education of two doctoral
students who will create the multi-scale model and a team of undergraduate
students who will construct a working mechanical model of the T4 injection
machinery. The project will also engage the broader public by featuring results
at scientific workshops, educating graduate students and postdocs in the
Mathematical and Computational Biology Gateway Program at UC-Irvine, conducting
engineering-themed lessons at Adams Academy in Ypsilanti, Michigan, and
disseminating simulation results through the Computational Modeling Facility at
UC-Irvine and to two partner institutions with large URM student populations.