* 1404398
* Full Characterization of a Cavity Electromagnetically Induced Transparency Based Quantum Gate
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Eden Figueroa, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 511,009.00

The field of quantum information science is an intensely pursued research area
due to the technological impact that a realized quantum computer would have. The
availability of a trustworthy quantum processor would revamp numerous aspects of
science and engineering, including the optimization of chemical reactions, the
development of ultra-secure communication channels, and the materialization of
powerful computers. After nearly twenty years of experimental research,
technologies have emerged that may serve as the elementary building blocks for a
quantum processor. Among these are technologies associated with the interaction
of photons and atoms. The supported research group aims to develop a milestone
towards building a quantum processor: the realization of an interface between
two single photons and atoms in a configuration designed to perform logic
operations at the quantum level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is
to fully characterize a proof of principle system capable of a two-qubit
operation using light. To accomplish this goal the supported research group will
interface two of the most powerful tools in quantum optics; that of cavity
quantum electrodynamics (cavity QED) for strong light-matter coupling and
electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) to allow control of large optical
nonlinearities. The research program will pursue two primary objectives. First,
the group will finish construction of the first experimental setup in which two
cavities are coupled simultaneously to a 87Rb ensemble, thereby creating an
interaction medium for two independent optical modes (qubits). Under EIT
conditions, the cavity fields will experience an enhanced interaction strength
permitting the observation of nonlinear effects using single-photon fields, the
essential component of a quantum optical gate. Once achieved, the second
objective is to fully characterize the gate operation using a technique known as
coherent state quantum process tomography (csQPT). This tool allows the
characterization of quantum optical processes, such as gates, using only
coherent states which are readily available from a common laser source.