* 1404769
* Automorphic Galois Representations and Automorphic L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Harris, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 220,800.00

Number theory originates from the study of solutions to equations in whole
numbers. It is one of the oldest branches of mathematics, and its methods have
for millenia been based on the interaction between the divisibility properties
of whole numbers and their size. Twentieth-century number theory formalized
these two properties in two different ways. Divisibility and the measure of size
can be seen both as geometric and as dynamical properties, the latter rooted in
the equations of mathematical physics. The branch of mathematics concerned with
their geometric relations is called arithmetic geometry; the branch concerned
with their dynamical relations is called automorphic forms. Symmetry plays a
central role in both arithmetic geometry and automorphic forms; the hypothetical
Langlands correspondence unifies these two branches by showing how each kind of
symmetry encodes the other. The PI proposes to use this coding to understand
objects on one side of the correspondence in terms of properties of the
corresponding object on the other side. A particular focus is the transfer of
divisibility properties of automorphic forms to arithmetic geometry, which often
leads to surprisingly precise information about solutions of equations.



The project is a contribution to the arithmetic theory of automorphic forms, in
the setting of the Langlands program, with special attention to the arithmetic
of motives and their associated Galois representations arising in the cohomology
of Shimura varieties, directly or by application of congruence methods. The
long-term goals are the identification of all such motives and all such Galois
representations (the modularity problem) and the proof of outstanding
conjectures on the arithmetic of motives, notably Deligne's conjecture on
special values of L-functions, and the conjectures of Greenberg, Coates, Perrin-
Riou, and others on the existence of p-adic L-functions, for the motives
obtained in this way. Special attention is given to special values of tensor
product L-functions. This project fits into an international program to use the
full range of available techniques to extend to all such motives results
established for L-functions of elliptic modular forms; the PI is actively
collaborating with colleagues in France, Austria, Israel, Japan, and Hong Kong,
as well as in the United States and Canada. The methods involved in the present
project combine standard techniques from arithmetic geometry and automorphic
forms, the differential-geometric approach to cohomological automorphic forms on
which the PI has worked for many years, with p-adic analysis, and representation
theory.