* 1404496
* Spectroscopic, Collisional, and Laser Cooling Studies of Atomic Gadolinium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2020
* Clayton Simien, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 345,063.00

A new element will be investigated as a prospective candidate for a next
generation optical atomic clock and for laser cooling. Atomic clocks have been
instrumental in the advancement of science and technology in the twentieth
century, leading to innovations such as global positioning, advance
communications, and tests of fundamental particle physics. A next generation
optical atomic clock would extend the capabilities of these systems and will
enable a renaissance of timing applications such as enhanced security for data
routing and communications, advanced earth and space time-based navigation,
geophysical surveying, testing Einstein's Theory of General Relativity, and
searches for variations in the fundamental constants of the universe. Laser
cooling is a technique for which the mechanical action of light is used to
reduce the velocity of an atom in a gas. The use of lasers to cool atoms opened
up new frontiers in physics ranging from the formation of new states of matter
to enabling novel nanotechnologies. The extension of laser cooling to a new
atomic species will enable the creation of novel ultracold atomic systems with
unique properties and dynamics. The goal of this project is to investigate the
atomic physics properties and implement laser cooling of atomic gadolinium for
its potential use as an optical frequency standard and as a step to create new
research avenues in atomic physics cross-fertilized with condensed matter
physics. More specifically, these experiments will use lasers as a probe to
determine the influence of external perturbations that limits its accuracy as an
atomic clock. In addition, the spectral features of gadolinium will be
characterized as a diagnostic tool to determine its cooling limits. This
specific milestone will enable a gadolinium optical clock of greater accuracy
and the realization of exotic ultracold quantum physics systems. This research
program will support and train undergraduate and graduate students to become the
next generation of scientists and engineers for fundamental and applied research
in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics.

This project is an experimental research program directed towards investigating
collisional and spectroscopic properties of atomic gadolinium (Gd). Gd is a
novel class of atom that has an exotic electronic configuration and large ground
state magnetic moment, which allows it to have submerged shell optical clock
transitions, ultracold collisions having ground state angular momentum, and
exotic quantum gas phases and phenomenon dominated by dipole-dipole forces. In
particular, the collision studies involve measurements of collision quenching
cross sections, and pressure broadening and shifts of the atomic states and line
shapes of the optical clock and laser cooling transitions inside a Gd vapor
cell. The objective is to characterize the collision sensitivity of these atomic
transitions to give insight into the combined action of electron screening and
configurational interactions. In addition, the radiative lifetimes, hyperfine
structure, and isotope shifts of identified intercombination laser cooling
transitions will be determined using laser induce fluorescence spectroscopy with
an atomic beam. The determination of these spectroscopic properties are
necessary for implementing narrow-line laser cooling for both bosonic and
fermonic isotopes of gadolinium. Narrow-line laser cooling is essential for
achieving quantum degeneracy with gadolinium, since its large ground state
magnetic moment prevents evaporative cooling in a magnetic trap. In addition,
laser cooling and trapping using electric-dipole transitions will be executed to
create a magneto-optical trap of gadolinium as a first step towards performing
precision measurements, investigating ultracold collision, and for studying
atomic dipolar physics.

The experimental program will have three categories of broader impacts. First,
forbidden transitions of rare earth elements are virtually unexplored. These
atomic resonances are well suited as potential candidates for next generation
frequency standards, with Q-factors nearly four orders of magnitude larger than
current neutral atom clock lines, a suppression of black-body radiations shifts
by exponents in the fine structure constant, and reduced sensitivity to
collision. Moreover, for Standard Model Physics, these transitions have enhanced
sensitivities to variations in the fine structure constant. Second, a laser
cooled and trapped gas of gadolinium will have many applications: For nuclear
physics, astrophysics, and biomedicine, laser cooled Gd will allow for
economizing nuclear fuel consumption, ultrasensitive isotope trace analysis of
the element for cosmo-chemical studies and biomedical sample testing
respectively. Also with respect to nanostructure fabrication, an ultracold gas
of Gd can be used for controlled doping or nanoscale milling to create novel
magnetic devices. Third, graduate and undergraduate students who will help
perform the proposed experiments will be trained. A goal of this project is to
attract and retain more students in Atomic Molecular and Optical physics through
the involvement of university students in the proposed experiments. This is
augmented by the fact that the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) is a
major research institution in the geographical region with an annual enrollment
of nearly 18,000 students, and the research project involves the extensive use
of lasers that is ideal for capturing a student's imagination. An additional
goal is to recruit underrepresented minorities, which represents 25 percent of
UAB's student population. Underrepresented minorities represent a large untapped
wealth of potential for becoming contributors in the fields of science and
engineering. To help address this matter a major plan is to involve minority
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students via existing UAB outreach and
REU programs to participate in research projects in the Simien Spectroscopy and
Laser Cooling group. Furthermore, special outreach activities will be done with
the aim to get K - 12 students interested in science and engineering by
performing various physics, chemistry, and material science demonstration at
local schools in the region.