* 1404162
* Nuclear Spin-Dependent Parity Violation in Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Sidney Cahn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

Nature is governed by only four fundamentally different forces:
electromagnetism, gravity, the strong force (which binds protons and neutrons
together in the atomic nucleus), and the weak force (which governs certain
radioactive decays and the interactions of some exotic particles). The goal of
this project is to investigate certain properties of the weak force. The weak
force has some features in common with the more familiar electromagnetic and
gravitational forces, but also some differences. Elementary particles (such as
electrons and quarks) have a particular electric charge, which determines the
strength of electromagnetic force they exert, and a particular mass, which
determines the strength of gravitational force they exert. By contrast, each
elementary particle has two different numerical properties, analogous to
electric charge, that determine the strength of the weak force they can exert.
One of these numbers (known as the axial weak charge) gets modified whenever the
particle is also being subjected to strong forces, such as when a proton is
surrounded by other neutrons and protons inside an atomic nucleus. The precise
way that the axial weak charge is modified in the presence of the strong force
is a long-standing question in nuclear physics. Substantial effort has been made
to understand this behavior, using large-scale experiments at accelerator
facilities. In contrast, the approach funded by the present grant uses a room-
sized apparatus staffed by only a few people in order to make precise
measurements of the quantum mechanical energy levels in molecules. Tiny shifts
in these energy levels signal the effect of the weak force, and the scientists
can interpret these shifts in terms of the axial weak charge of the atomic
nuclei inside the molecule. In a general sense, this project also advances the
range of techniques for precision measurement science, which in the past has led
to unexpected breakthroughs in technology; for example, in an earlier phase of
this project the group invented a new type of magnetic resonance probe that may
have broad applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The supported group uses parity
violation (PV) as a tool to isolate the effect of the weak force. To isolate the
nuclear axial weak charge they measure how PV depends on the nuclear spin
orientation. They use diatomic molecules to achieve a dramatic increase in
sensitivity compared to similar experiments with atoms. The small energy
splittings and narrow spectral lines associated with hyperfine/rotational
structure in molecules enhance the size of nuclear spin-dependent (NSD) PV
effects by orders of magnitude relative to those in atoms. The specific goal of
this work is to measure the NSD-PV effect associated with the 137Ba nucleus in
the molecule BaF. This will provide a measurement of the effective axial weak
charge of 137Ba. It is expected that this quantity is dominated by an effect
known as the nuclear anapole moment. The anapole moment describes a distribution
of magnetic fields within a nucleus that can only be induced by the weak force
acting within the nucleus. It has been observed in only one nucleus so far, with
a size well outside the expected range based on other kinds of experiments that
have probed how the weak force is modified in the presence of strong
interactions. The proposed measurement with 137Ba should shed light on this
discrepancy. The method used in the proposed work also has the promise to extend
to measurements on a wide range of nuclei, which would provide a rich data set
for comparison to theoretical models of this phenomenon.