* 1404046
* Theory and Application of Polyelectrolyte Complexation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2019
* USD 429,350.00

PI: Wu, Jianzhong &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1404046 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-Riverside &lt;br/&gt;Title: Theory and Application of
Polyelectrolyte Complexation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
calculate the properties of polymeric electrolytes that are central to bio-
medically relevant systems, such as drug delivery, gene knockout, and viral
replication. The goal of the computations is to establish a new calculational
procedure capable of predicting the atomistic structure, thermodynamic
stability, and environmental responses of polyelectrolyte complexes under
various aqueous conditions. In addition, the PI will seek to validate the
calculations, not just by comparison to highly idealized experimental systems,
but to actually predict the properties of such systems as polypeptide-
polypeptide interactions, which cannot otherwise be accomplished with
conventional computational methods. This is an ambitious proposal that can have
a significant impact on the fundamental understanding (and therefore rational
design) of biologically and bio-medically important molecular systems that can
lead to the design of improved drug delivery systems and gene-based
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, most of existing studies are
based on conventional polymer theories that ignore local density inhomogeneity,
explicit solvent effects, and long-ranged intra-chain and electrostatic
correlations. The simplistic representations of the polymeric systems are useful
to establish the basic rules of complex formation as well as qualitative or
occasionally semi-quantitative features of the phase behavior of bulk
polyelectrolyte systems. But the low-resolution structure and bulk phase
transitions predicted by mean-field methods are often insufficient to describe
the structure-activity relationships desired for practical applications.
Development of reliable computational tools to predict the interaction between
oppositely charged polymers lags far behind practical applications. In order to
address these deficiencies, this proposal will attempt to advance the
understanding of polyelectrolyte formation via a theoretical approach built upon
recent progress from the PI's group on high-throughput free-energy calculations
within the framework of the classical density functional theory (DFT), which
will be generalized for polymeric systems using a new perturbation method
proposed in this work. The goal of this project is to establish a new
computational procedure capable of predicting the atomistic structure,
thermodynamic stability, and environmental responses of polyelectrolyte
complexes in various aqueous conditions. In addition, the PI will seek to
validate the theory, not just by comparison to highly idealized experimental
systems, but to actually predict the properties of complex molecular systems,
such as polypeptide-polypeptide interactions, that cannot otherwise be
accomplished with conventional computational methods. The proposed work will
also identify and examine the thermodynamics that affect the stability and
delivery efficacy of siRNA (small interfering RNA), a type of RNA used for
knock-down of specific genes.