* 1404160
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of multiple invasive species on nutrient cycling in Lake Seminole: effects of warmer winters on ecosystem dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Alan Covich, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2018
* USD 16,330.00

Human activities are causing major changes in species distributions globally.
These changes have led to the development of new combinations of plants and
animals as new species have invaded a wide range of ecosystems. In many cases,
multiple species have invaded the same areas, and their interactive effects on
ecosystem processes are not well understood. The overarching objective of this
project is to investigate the interactive effects of multiple invaders on
nutrient cycling in Lake Seminole, on the border of Georgia and Florida.
Experiments will document the effects of a highly productive species of aquatic
plant from Asia, Hydrilla verticillata, living together with an abundant Asian
clam, Corbicula fluminea, and two newly established snail species (Pomacea
maculata, from South America and Pomacea paludosa from Florida). These
experiments are designed to simulate natural conditions of light and temperature
and determine differences in rates of nutrient uptake, storage, and release by
Hydrilla with and without Corbicula and the two Pomacea species. To determine
larger scale changes in abundance and distribution of aquatic vegetation due to
the presence of the other non-native species, remote sensing methods will be
developed for tracking rapid changes among non-native aquatic vegetation.
Results from mesocosm experiments and remote sensing analyses will be integrated
into a general conceptual model to forecast likely future impacts on nutrient
cycling as these invasive species move northward to other lakes and rivers.

Recent climate change and increased organism movement by humans are dispersing
many species into new locations, resulting in novel species combinations in many
ecosystems. Understanding how non-native aquatic plants and animals interact
allows for projection of their effects on specific ecosystem services, such as
nutrient cycling, provision of sustainable supplies of high-quality drinking
water, and recreational boating and fishing. The recent invasion of Lake
Seminole by Pomacea, where two other abundant invasive species (Hydrilla and
Corbicula) were already established, provides a unique opportunity to study
multi-species invasions at an early stage and to investigate effects on
ecosystem services, specifically their impact on water quality. Lake Seminole
currently plays a critical role in nutrient and contaminant storage as well as
in providing high-quality water to downstream communities. However, little is
known about the interactions or combined effects of invasive species within the
lake, nor how recent introductions will affect lake production and nutrient
cycling. This project will help to fill these knowledge gaps and to inform local
and regional stakeholders of the effects of invasive species on lake ecosystems.
A workshop will be organized to facilitate communication with stakeholders on
the effects of invasive species. The conceptual model will help to create an
early warning network to inform residents on how to reduce the spread of
invasive species, the potential risks of toxicity, and wildlife diseases. Local
students will benefit from direct participation in research and workshops.