* 1404395
* Gravitational Wave Astrophysics With Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of spacetime that carry
information about the changing gravitational fields of distant astrophysical
objects. Gravitational waves will be a radically new tool for exploring the
universe. This award supports the effort to detect gravitational waves from
merging neutron stars and black holes with the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). Black holes and neutron stars are
nature's most compact objects and their collisions are a potentially
transformative laboratory for fundamental physics and astrophysics.
Gravitational-wave physics offers exciting opportunities to inspire and educate
students of all ages, strengthening both the diversity and competitiveness of
students and improving the scientific literacy of the general public. The
proposed project will continue to drive the development of scientific workflow
management tools and high-throughput computing that will have broad impact
across the physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award directly supports
Advanced LIGO's effort to detect gravitational waves and to use gravitational
waves as an astronomical tool to explore the Universe. This project focuses on
coalescing compact binaries, with the effort dedicated towards developing,
testing and using the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) deep, offline search
pipeline for gravitational waves from compact binary coalescence. The primary
goal of this project is to detect gravitational waves and to extract the
astrophysics encoded in LIGO's signals. Engineering and science runs during the
first two years of this proposal will allow the LSC to understand both the
Advanced LIGO detectors and the search pipelines in an observational mode.
Science runs during the second and third years of this proposal will produce
astrophysical results. The first direct detection of gravitational waves could
be made during the period of this award.