* 1404330
* High Precision Energy Levels for the Simplest Polyatomic Molecule (H3+)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Benjamin McCall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,847.00

H3+ is the simplest molecule with more than two atoms: it consists of three
protons bound by two electrons. As such, it is an ideal benchmark system for
testing state-of-the-art theoretical calculations of molecular energy levels.
H3+ is significant not only for these fundamental reasons, but also because it
has been widely observed in a variety of astronomical environments, including
the atmospheres of Jupiter and Saturn and in clouds of gas between stars. These
observations are made by precisely determining the colors of light that are
emitted by the molecule, a technique called "spectroscopy". The latest
calculations can reproduce the colors of H3+ to within the accuracy of current
laboratory spectroscopy measurements, so further progress in theoretical
development will require improvements in the laboratory instrumentation. The
group supported by this grant plans to utilize a novel instrument that will
allow them to measure H3+ colors to a precision that is 10,000 times better than
previous work. The resulting dataset will serve as an enduring benchmark for
high-level theoretical calculations, and will also assist astronomical
observations of this important molecule. In the long run, it is anticipated that
this work will help in the development of improved methods of controlling
chemical reactions and thereby advance a significant fraction of the industrial
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will use a recently-constructed instrument
that allows routine sub-Doppler spectroscopy of molecular ions. This instrument
will be upgraded to achieve a precision of approximately 30 kiloHertz, or one-
millionth of a wavenumber, and then used to record high-precision spectra of H3+
in the mid-infrared. An analysis using combination differences and effective
Hamiltonian fitting will be used to produce a set of experimentally determined
energy levels of H3+, with a precision that is approximately four orders of
magnitude better than previous work. These precise energy levels will permit the
direct testing of non-adiabatic corrections to the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation, various empirical corrections, and ultimately calculations of the
Lamb shift for H3+.