* 1404233
* SusChEM: Atmospheric Fates of Neonicotinoids and Their Role in Food Security and Agricultural Sustainability
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Barbara Finlayson-Pitts of the University of
California Irvine is studying the fates of neonicotinoid (NNs) pesticides
deposited on surfaces when exposed to oxidants that are found in the atmosphere.
The development and application of synthetic pesticides since the end of WWII
has led to increased global food production, with one group of new pesticides
being the NNs. However, there is increasing evidence that some beneficial parts
of the ecosystem, such as bee activity, that play key roles in agriculture are
negatively impacted by these compounds. There is past evidence for other
pesticides with unintended toxic effects on ecosystems due not necessarily to
the pesticide itself, but rather to the oxidation products formed after the
pesticide is applied. Hence understanding the atmospheric reactions of NNs is
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is analyzing how fast common
neonicotinoid compounds react under atmospheric conditions, as well as the
nature and yields of the products and the reaction mechanisms. Techniques being
applied include attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared
spectrometry (ATR-FTIR) and diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform
spectrometry as well as a number of state-of-the-art mass spectrometry
approaches. This research provides key data on the atmospheric lifetimes and
fates of the NNs on surfaces in the troposphere, which is critical for assessing
their potential impacts on food security and agricultural sustainability. These
data are being presented to the public via summer teacher workshops, hosted lab
tours for students and citizen groups, and through visits of UCI researchers to
local schools. A new generation of students is being trained not only in
fundamental atmospheric chemistry but also in its intersection with pesticides,
food security and sustainable agriculture.