* 1404206
* RUI: High-Precision Atomic Structure Measurements and Tests of Fundamental Physics in Group IIIA Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Protik Majumder, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 346,764.00

This research program, located at an undergraduate institution, involves table-
top experiments with lasers and atoms to gain insights into the so-called
"Standard Model of particle physics" that is typically studied by physicists at
large particle accelerator facilities. In the present work, properties of the
metal atoms thallium and indium are measured to very high accuracy. Results are
then compared to state-of-the-art theoretical calculations of these same
properties, as high-quality tests of the fundamental physics phenomena probed by
these measurements rely critically on the combination of precise experimental
results reinforced by accurate, independent atomic structure calculations.
Students become involved in all aspects of the experimental work, designing and
testing laser, optical, and signal processing systems, and carrying out data
collection and data analysis procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over recent
decades, highly-precise atomic physics experiments using lasers have contributed
important insights into the physics of the Standard Model of particle physics.
Such low-energy physics tests complement accelerator-based experimental work.
The small size of these effects demands very high precision, extensive study of
systematic errors, and careful experimental design. Also, the size of these
manifestations of high-energy physics in atoms scale dramatically with Z, the
atomic number, suggesting the use of very heavy (and therefore complicated)
atomic systems. Yet in order for these measurements in heavy atoms to provide
unambiguous tests of the Standard Model, equally precise atomic theory models of
the atomic wavefunctions are required to distinguish the ordinary quantum
mechanical behavior from the "exotic" particle physics phenomena being targeted.
The PI and his students are continuing with an ongoing series of diode laser
spectroscopy measurements of the atomic properties of Group IIIA atoms
(thallium, indium) which can be compared to state-of-the-art atomic theory
calculations. They study atoms both in heated vapor cells as well as a dense,
collimated atomic beam apparatus. These atoms contain three valence electrons,
challenging the approximation techniques required to accurately compute
wavefunctions. This experiment-theory interplay has resulted in significantly
improved accuracy in recent years, and therefore improved atomic-physics-based
tests of fundamental particle physics processes in these heavy atomic systems.
In the longer term, the group is planning to perform a new experiment to measure
the Weak Interaction in an atomic beam of thallium atoms, using its parity-
violating optical rotation signature, improving upon an experimental result by a
group that included the PI some years ago.