* 1404118
* NeTS: JUNO: Virtual Mobile Cloud Network for Realizing Scalable, Real-Time Cyber Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project leverages prior work on virtual mobile network technology at NICT
and the MobilityFirst future Internet architecture at WINLAB, Rutgers
University, to develop a comprehensive services and networking solution for
high-performance cyber physical systems that scales to the "trillion object"
level targeted by the JUNO program. The aim is to develop a virtual mobile cloud
network (vMCN) which provides seamless and low latency services to real-time
mobile users and applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Major research themes
addressed by this project include the design of a new virtual networking
framework using NICT's BYON mobile cloud technology integrated with
MobilityFirst's globally unique identifier (GUID) based protocol stack; design
of virtual network services for efficient support of cloud services; exploiting
locality to speed up global name resolution; and dynamic migration of cloud
services across networks. The project will adopt a top-down application driven
methodology to validate and benchmark the performance of the proposed virtual
mobile cloud network for a specific advanced CPS application. A proof-of-concept
prototype of the proposed vMCN system will be developed using JGN-X and GENI
testbeds in Japan and US respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies
resulting from this project are expected to enable a wide range of commercial
and government applications involving real-time cloud services for mobile
devices. The project will also provide guidance for the development of future
virtual network technologies of increasing interest to the networking and
computer industries. The proposed collaboration will also help to strengthen
research ties between US and Japan specifically in the field of future Internet
architecture.