* 1404462
* Maximizing the Early-Detection Science of Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 480,000.00

Direct detection of cosmic gravitational waves, an upcoming "disruptive
innovation" in the field of astrophysics, will revolutionize our understanding
of the universe in novel and plausibly unexpected ways. The key instruments for
the new discoveries in the United States are the detectors of the advanced Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory, aLIGO. The research program of
the Columbia Experimental Gravity group supports upcoming gravitational wave
discoveries by improving the quality of the aLIGO data-streams available for
astrophysical science extraction. The group also pioneers data analysis
involving multiple cosmic messengers and gravitational waves. Many cosmic
objects with strong gravitational fields also possess the strongest magnetic
fields, the densest (bulk) nuclear matter, and the highest neutrino fluxes in
the universe. Mergers and emissions of these objects can guide us to new
physics, and can tell us about elusive cosmic events. Combining information from
different windows on the universe, including gravitational waves, will enable us
to reconstruct cosmic mysteries of our times. Students from high school through
graduate level will have the opportunity to participate in this research. The
urban setting and existing outreach infrastructure of Columbia University will
enable unique educational and outreach activities based on this research that
target schools and the general public not only in the local community but also
in the greater New York City metropolitan area.

One of the critical limitations to aLIGO's scientific reach will be the
artifacts embedded in the data due to disturbances in the detector's physical
environment. The identification of environmental noise sources, the mitigation
of their effect in the interferometers as well as the verification of instrument
timing is vital (i) for ensuring a discovery that is justifiable to the broader
scientific community, and (ii) for the realization of a spectrum of primary
science goals for the LIGO Scientific Collaboration. These all rely on achieving
the design sensitivity for the advanced detectors and on achieving the lowest
possible false event rates. In particular, the group will provide expertise in
detector noise performance, physical environmental monitoring, and detector
diagnostics studies. The anticipated "dawn of gravitational-wave astronomy" will
enable detailed analysis of the science reach of gravitational-wave searches.
Building on past experience the Columbia Experimental Gravity group's scientific
focus will be on the foundations, implications and science extraction from joint
searches that may involve neutrinos, electromagnetic and other counterparts to
gravitational-waves from cosmic explosions, mergers, and other sources.