* 1404163
* Robust Identification and Model Validation for a Class of Nonlinear Dynamic Systems and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Mario Sznaier, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 380,000.00

Robust Identification and Model Validation for a Class of Nonlinear Dynamic
Systems and Applications

The project seeks to develop a comprehensive framework for obtaining data driven
models for a class of nonlinear systems that arise in the context of a broad
range of applications that entail extracting information from high volume data
streams. Obtaining these models is the first step towards developing a new class
of systems with substantially enhanced capabilities to extract information
sparsely encoded in multimodal, extremely large data sets. In particular, as a
proof of concept, this project will focus on sustainable water quality
management in urban environments, a problem that affects over one billion people
in the Developing World and leads to losses estimated at over $2 billion/year in
the US alone. From an education standpoint, this theme will be used to link a
full range of distinct undergraduate and graduate courses, from systems theory,
environmental and hydrologic engineering to machine learning, with emphasis on
robustness and computational complexity. Undergraduate students will be engaged
in research through the OUR Charles (Opportunities for Undergraduate Research on
the Charles River) program.

While control of switched systems has made considerably progress in the past
few years, the problem of identifying and validating hybrid models amenable to
be used by these methods is far from solved. The present proposal aims at
closing this gap by developing a computationally tractable framework for robust
identification and model (in)validation of switched Hammerstein/Wiener systems.
Its conceptual backbone is a combination of systems theory, semi-algebraic
geometry and convex optimization elements that emphasizes robustness and
computational complexity issues. The main idea is to recast the identification
and model (in)validation of switched systems into a sparse semi-algebraic
optimization form and to exploit recent advances in convex optimization to
develop scalable, computationally tractable methods to solve these problems.

The advantages of the proposed approach include the ability to: (a) Address
problems beyond the capabilities of existing techniques due to a combination of
a lack of a comprehensive theoretical framework and poor scaling properties. (b)
Directly accommodate and respect features that are key to success in the
relevant application domains, such as sparse interconnection structures. (c)
Exploit a hitherto largely unexplored connection between systems identification
and the problem of extracting actionable information from very large data sets.