* 1404409
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Why poison frogs don't poison themselves: phylogenetic origins and consequences of autoresistance
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Rebecca Tarvin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,031.00

Poison frogs (family Dendrobatidae) are well known for their bright colors and
for the toxins (alkaloids) contained in their skin. In fact, some of the most
powerful natural toxins known are found in dendrobatid frogs. Because these
toxins interfere with the function of ion channels (proteins in cell membranes
that control muscle contraction and sensory systems), predators exposed to
poison frog alkaloids may experience numbness, slowed muscle response, or even
respiratory failure at high doses. Predators of poison frogs learn to associate
the frog's bright color with distastefulness and toxicity, and then avoid them
as prey items. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is that poison frogs are not poisoned
by their own toxins, and how could such a complex system evolve? One hypothesis
is that genetic changes in ion channels within poison frogs prevent the adverse
effects of alkaloids and thus prevent self-toxicity, and that this pre-
adaptation enabled the evolution of the overall predatory defense system. This
project will utilize new methods of DNA analysis and physiological tests of ion
channel function in toxic and non-toxic poison frogs to reveal the evolutionary
basis of toxin resistance in this group. In a broader context, this research
will contribute to understanding the general effects of toxins and how
resistance to these toxins can evolve. It will also strengthen international
collaborations between scientists in Ecuador and the United States, and train
several students in field and laboratory work.