* 1404566
* Measurement of the Gravitostatic Aharonov-Bohn Effect
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Holger Mueller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 480,000.00

Of the fundamental forces, gravity is probably the one most familiar in everyday
life, yet its physics is the least well understood. For one, it does not fit
into the standard model of particle physics, which is based on quantum
mechanics. In addition, the action of gravity in quantum mechanics has been
relatively elusive to experimental measurement. One of the most important
challenges in physics is thus to find new ways to investigate how gravity
affects quantum systems. The group will give a demonstration of the so-called
Aharonov-Bohm effect (AB effect) for gravity. In classical physics, the
interaction between two objects can be described equivalently based on forces or
on potential energies. Aharonov and Bohm, however, pointed out that in quantum
mechanics, two objects can influence each other even if there are zero forces
between them. This has been verified experimentally for electromagnetic forces
and potentials. The group will construct a specialized apparatus to investigate
whether there is an analogous Aharonov-Bohm effect for gravity. This will
demonstrate that gravity affects a quantum system even when it does not cause
any classical force; that knowledge of the classical gravitational force acting
locally on a particle is not sufficient to predict the particle's quantum-
mechanical behavior; and help develop a new way of measuring Newton's
gravitational constant G. Paraphrasing R. P. Feynman, for a long time it was
believed that potentials were not "real", since they could be replaced by force
fields in the description of any observable phenomenon then known. However, the
AB effect has established that potentials are real, and forces are slowly
disappearing from the modern expression of physical law. The group is
collaborating with industrial partners to apply the techniques developed in this
work in the production of advanced inertial sensors for improved navigation and
positioning.

The experiment will be based on laser-cooled cesium atoms held in an optical
lattice, inside a special arrangement of two spherical masses that produce a
"W"-shaped gravitational potential. The atoms will be at extrema of the
gravitational potential, so that there will be no net force between the
spherical masses and the atoms. Nevertheless, the masses should cause a relative
phase shift of the atomic matter waves. The group will experimentally
demonstrate the distinguishing features of the AB effect, such as nonlocality
and nondispersiveness. The optical lattice will be a standing wave inside a
Fabry-Perot cavity, to control the optical wave-fronts and provide laser
intensity enhancement.