* 1404268
* RUI: Calculation of the Positronium Hyperfine Interval
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Gregory Adkins, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 06/30/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Positronium is the bound state of the electron and its antiparticle, the
positron. As such, it forms an "exotic atom", similar in many ways to the
traditional simple atoms such as hydrogen and helium, but different because of
its unique composition and because of its tendency to annihilate, transforming
into pure electromagnetic energy in the form of high-energy photons. Many
properties of positronium, such as energy level differences and lifetimes, are
accessible to high-precision experiments. Positronium properties can also be
calculated theoretically to high precision. Consequently, positronium is an
ideal system for testing the limits of electromagnetic bound state physics. The
positronium hyperfine splitting--the interval between the spin-1 and spin-0
variants of the lowest energy state--is of prime interest because there is a
long-standing difference (of about four times the experimental uncertainty)
between theory and experiment for this splitting. The current proposal is to
calculate the positronium hyperfine interval to a higher level. When complete,
the result of this work will help to resolve or sharpen the positronium
hyperfine discrepancy. This theoretical work is timely because two experimental
groups, based at the University of California, Riverside and at the University
of Tokyo, are developing improved experimental measurements of the hyperfine
interval. The combination of improved experimental results and higher precision
theory will work together to give bound-state Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) one
of its most stringent tests to date. An important aspect of this project will be
the training of undergraduate student collaborators in the techniques and
processes of scientific investigation in this field. The overall project
involves a number of distinct parts that will make ideal projects for small
teams of students. The students will cooperate in all aspects of the work
including the development of calculational techniques and tools, the
calculations themselves, presentation at scientific meetings, and publication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positronium properties will be calculated theoretically to
high precision using the methods of bound-state Quantum Electrodynamics (QED)
because strong and weak interaction effects are negligible. The positronium
hyperfine interval will be calculated to a higher level of precision than
heretofore by completing all three-loop corrections to the hyperfine interval.
This will require an application of effective field theory methods, specifically
Non-Relativistic QED (NRQED), at the three-loop order. When complete, the result
of this work will help to resolve or sharpen the positronium hyperfine
discrepancy.