* 1404204
* Quantum Gravity and Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Eugenio Bianchi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Entanglement, the unique property of quantum mechanics that prevents the
description of a system by just looking at the properties of its individual
components, is a centerpiece in current research in diverse areas of physics
spanning from quantum information science to condensed matter physics to quantum
field theory. The main objective of this research is to understand the role of
entanglement in the description of the quantum nature of space-time. This works
investigates fundamental puzzles in theoretical physics such as the description
of the primordial state of the universe and the fate of information in black
hole evaporation. The focus is on universal aspects of space-time entanglement
that can provide valuable insights for any theory of quantum gravity.

At the Planck scale new quantum effects that go beyond Einstein's general
relativity are expected to dominate. Loop quantum gravity is one of the leading
candidate theories for describing the physics in these regimes. In this theory,
space-time has a granular structure that arises as a foam-like excitation of a
topologically invariant vacuum. From this perspective, space-time is made of
'elementary constituents' and, as in condensed matter physics, it can have
different quantum phases. The main open problem is to identify the quantum phase
that describes our smooth extended space-time. A set of techniques that were
recently developed in condensed matter physics will be used to study the amount
of entanglement between quantum geometry degrees of freedom. This research will
directly address the question of the quantum nature of space-time. The results
of this research on entangled-network states will provide the basis for
extracting physical properties of space-time states in quantum gravity. Three
directions will be investigated. The first regards the Minkowski space-time
state where the entangled-network state is obtained via a variational ansatz for
the minimization of the ADM energy. The second direction regards the use of
entangled-network states in quantum cosmology, the study of entanglement near
classical singularities, and the thermalization time of subsystems in the de
Sitter expansion phase. The third direction regards black hole space-times, the
relation between entanglement entropy and black hole entropy, and the dynamics
of entanglement entropy in the evaporation process.