* 1404405
* Quantum Monte Carlo Calculations of Nucleon Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Kevin Schmidt, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 392,870.00

Many nuclear processes in our universe occur under extreme conditions in
supernovae and neutron stars. The properties of nuclei and nuclear matter under
these conditions, which are difficult or impossible to reproduce in the
laboratory, must necessarily be calculated theoretically. These data are needed
to understand astrophysically important systems and processes such as neutron
rich matter, neutron stars, supernovae, and r-process nucleosynthesis and
neutrino scattering. The quantum many-particle methods developed within this
project have broad applications across many areas of physics. These include the
nuclear physics aspects directly relating to the project, cold atomic gas
research, and electronic structure. Methods previously developed within this
project have been applied in each of these areas. The project will train both
undergraduate and graduate students, give them exposure at national and
international conferences, and provide for dissemination of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue work developing and
using accurate techniques to calculate the properties of nuclei and nuclear
matter using quantum Monte Carlo methods, i.e. stochastic sampling methods for
the large number of quantum degrees of freedom. A primary aim is to develop
auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo methods to sample both the space and spin-
isospin degrees of freedom of protons and neutrons in nuclei with all important
parts of the nuclear interaction. These include both the spin-orbit and three-
body interactions. New wave functions which can be efficiently evaluated for
nuclei are being developed, with the goal of obtaining accurate properties for
medium to large and neutron rich nuclei. Superfluidity has major consequences in
neutron star matter. The investigator and his students will use the same methods
to study both the nuclear systems and the related phenomena in cold atomic
gases. Many of the pairing and superfluid mechanisms important in nuclei and
nuclear matter can be studied and verified in these systems where detailed
experimental measurements can be made using table-top experimental setups.