* 1404121
* Enabling Multi-Messenger Astrophysics in the Advanced LIGO Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Shawhan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

According to Einstein's general theory of relativity, massive astrophysical
objects can produce gravitational waves, which are ripples in the geometry of
space-time that travel outward at the speed of light. Scientists around the
world are currently building and refining exquisitely sensitive instruments,
named LIGO in the U.S. and Virgo in Europe, to detect these tiny ripples
directly for the first time. These instruments are expected to detect signals
from colliding neutron stars, black holes, and/or other sources starting in a
few years. The work supported by this award will increase the science value of
LIGO-Virgo data by enabling rapid communication and joint analysis with
astronomers who may see the same events using optical, radio, X-ray or gamma-ray
telescopes--"multi-messenger" science. Among other things, this work has the
potential to test theories of the origins of short gamma-ray bursts and fast
radio bursts, two types of brief enigmatic signals seen by astronomers. Besides
direct scientific results, this research will build cooperation within the
scientific community, and results will be shared with the general public through
summaries posted on the ligo.org web site and at outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous experience, we will pursue two
main projects to enable multi-messenger searches. First, we will play a leading
role in preparing the "electromagnetic (EM) follow-up program" that the LIGO and
Virgo collaborations have committed to supporting. We will provide software
tools and validation to select gravitational-wave (GW) event candidates,
assemble relevant information, and send alerts to astronomers who have partnered
with LIGO and Virgo to actively search for EM counterparts. We will facilitate
communication among partners and participate in the analysis of any
astrophysical events that are jointly observed. Second, we will implement and
carry out joint searches for GW signals and radio bursts detected by large-
field-of-view radio telescope facilities such as LWA1. Combined with the all-sky
sensitivity of LIGO and Virgo, this will improve our ability to detect certain
types of rare astrophysical transients while suppressing local noise sources.