* 1404089
* Retinal Nanophotoswitch
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Mark Humayun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

Proposal: 1404089&lt;br/&gt;PI: Humayun, Mark S.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Retinal
Nanophotoswitch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the proposed research is to develop a novel neurophotonic molecular switch for
light-activation of neurons. A visual prosthesis based on this nanophotoswitch
(NPS) has the potential to improve the visual acuity for the millions of
patients suffering from retinal degenerative diseases, such as retinitis
pigmentosa and age-related macular degeneration. This proposal is very
innovative. The biophysical mechanism is completely differentiated from
electrical devices and other molecular photo-switch-based approaches. Beyond
vision restoration, it is a generally useful approach for controlling excitable
cells. If successful, it may have a great impact on patients who are underserved
by current treatments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research
provides excellent educational opportunities for participating graduate and
undergraduate students. The proposing team has an exceptional record on
inclusion of women, under-represented minorities, and undergraduates in their
research. They also have a good track record on outreach to the local community,
and planned outreach activities include Research Experience for Teachers and
activities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;Nanophotoswitch (NPS) offers a new tool to elicit electrical activity
for basic science studies of neuronal function, both in vitro and also
potentially in vivo. The hypothesis is based on the NPS design and results of
pilot experiments, that light induces an electrical dipole in the NPS.
Preliminary data indicate that an NPS based on ruthenium bipyridine (Rubpy)
inserts into cell membranes and upon visible-wavelength illumination triggers
action potentials in cultured excitable cells and in wholemount rat retina. When
injected into the eye of blind photoceptor-degenerate rats, visual stimulation
induces electrical activity in the superior colliculus. It was also demonstrated
that NPS can both depolarize or hyperpolarize the membrane, depending on the
environmental redox potential. This unique combination of bi-directional
modulation of the membrane potential in one biophotonic switch affords the
ability to both activate and inhibit the action potential firing of the
illuminated cells with the same molecule, presenting largely increased
flexibility in neuronal control. The NPS would be useful in studying any
electrically excitable cell, including, for example, cardiomyocytes, smooth
muscle cells, neuroendocrine cells, and certain glial and cancer cells. Since
light-activated signaling unit is individual neurons, a visual prosthesis based
on NPS system has the potential to provide higher visual acuity for the millions
of patients with photoreceptor loss due to retinal degenerative diseases, such
as retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
Distinct from other nano-scale optical cellular modulating approaches using
optogenetics or azobenzene-based photoswitches, this approach obviates the need
for gene manipulation, toxic ultraviolet illumination or immunogenic molecules,
due to the unique light-to-electrical signal transduction mechanism of the NPS.