* 1404311
* New Frontiers in Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* John Beacom, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 495,000.00

Nuclear astrophysics is the application of nuclear physics knowledge obtained
from laboratory studies to the universe and its contents. This is essential for
understanding how the chemical elements are produced, the ways stars are
powered, what causes exploding stars called supernovae, the origin of cosmic
rays, and more. A key research frontier is based on using neutrinos, subatomic
particles that have no electric charge and very little mass, and which barely
interact with matter. This makes neutrinos hard to detect, but allows them to
escape from and thus reveal physical conditions in the deep interiors of
astrophysical objects. The unique information they carry will help resolve
longstanding questions in nuclear astrophysics. Research is needed to further
develop detection techniques and to draw conclusions from the data. There is
high demand for students and postdocs trained in this research area. The topics
covered, which also include black holes, dark matter, and the universe itself,
capture the imagination of the public and attract young people to explore
careers in science.

This project is intended to lead to significant gains in our understanding of
astrophysical objects and neutrinos themselves. The knowledge of theoretical
physics and astrophysics will be applied to help lead to new detections of
astrophysical neutrinos and to develop new understandings from that data. A
central focus of this project is on the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background,
the cosmic flux of neutrinos and antineutrinos produced by the explosions of
massive stars over the past several billion years. This flux has not been
detected yet, but it is within reach, and careful work is needed to help isolate
this faint signal. Related topics include detecting other astrophysical neutrino
sources, the nature of supernovae, and the properties of neutrinos. Junior
scientists supported by the grant will be mentored in the full range of skills
needed to be successful in their future careers. To maximize broader impacts,
the work integrates efforts in research, mentoring, teaching, and outreach, with
a focus on underrepresented populations, including the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.

This award is supported jointly by the Theoretical Nuclear Physics Program in
the Division of Physics, the Stellar Astronomy and Astrophysics Program in the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.