* 1404674
* Development and Application of New Tools for Analyzing Single Molecule Photoluminescence Intermittency
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Philip Reid, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2017
* USD 470,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program is supporting the
research of Phillip J. Reid of the University of Washington to develop new
computational analysis techniques to more fully understand how light is emitted
by molecules in electronic optical devices. These systems are technologically
important and find many uses in the telecommunications industry, but it is still
not understood why, when they are continuously illuminated by light, the
molecules in the device respond by giving off bursts of light, rather than a
steady stream of emitted light. This blinking, also known as photoluminescence
intermittency (PI), also appears to be strongly affected by the environment
surrounding these molecules. The investigators are using mathematical methods to
analyze the blinking patterns in order to understand both the origin of the
blinking itself as well as how the environment around the molecules affects the
blinking pattern. The new tools being developed for this analysis will be able
to quantify changes in blinking induced by changes in the molecule's environment
and will also be easier to implement. The work is producing analysis methods
that are much faster than existing techniques. Thus, the research is having a
broad impact on technology as well as science through the development of new
tools that will be applicable to a wide range of measurements in many fields
including photonics, materials science, electronics, and biology. The work is
having a further broad impact on the training of the future generation of
scientists by giving students involved in this research hands-on experience with
advanced techniques.

In this project, robust statistical tools for analyzing photoluminescence
intermittency (PI, or more commonly "blinking") are being developed to more
fully understand the variation between emissive and non-emissive states observed
in single luminophores under continuous illumination. The work involves the
study of light emitted by single molecules in complex systems, including polymer
composites and organic photonic materials. The investigators are using these
newly developed methods to measure the photostability of nonlinear optical
materials and the impact of dielectric environment on the PI of chromophores in
complex condensed phases. PI data collected from such systems often exhibit
significant deviations from power law distributions, complicating the analysis
of emissive event kinetics. The new tools are using advanced Bayesian
statistical models to extend approaches for parsing PI traces into emissive and
non-emissive events at rates roughly an order of magnitude faster than Change
Point Detection, the current state of the art, via a code set that is easily
implemented. The new tools also use cumulative distribution functionals and
kernel density estimation to expand analysis of PI to allow for a variety of
distribution functions (parametric and non-parametric) to be quantitatively
compared to experimental data. This approach allows for a statistically robust
evaluation of the effect of perturbation (temperature, isotopic substitution,
etc.) on PI, advancing studies of photonic materials and providing an important
tool for other researchers trying to connect photophysical processes to PI.