* 1404682
* I-Corps:  E2 Home: Web-based Application for Home Energy Efficiency   Using Contextual Information from Smart Meters and Smartphones
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 3,886.00

In recent years, a significant amount of research has focused on problems
related to electricity distribution and consumption in the nation. Although the
efficiency and robustness of the electricity distribution network can be
improved by deploying a smart grid infrastructure, the end users and their
consumption behavior continue to play an important role in the overall
performance of such a grid, in particular their impact on the peak usage. At the
same time, due to rising retail energy prices and growing concerns about the
environment, end users have become more interested into technological solutions
that can help them reduce electricity consumption. In this proposal, the team
introduces a Web-based application that intelligently helps customers lower
their electricity consumption. The application leverages existing data sources,
such as sensors, smart meters, and smartphones, to collect data not only about
electricity consumption, but also the context in which this occurred (e.g., user
location, activity), and then transform them into actionable information for the
user by means of a MapReduce-based data fusion and visualization on interactive
Web-based charts and maps. Unlike existing applications that present a one-
dimensional view of the smart meter data, the proposed approach offers
personalized actionable information in the form of simple targeted actions that
users can take to reduce their electricity consumption. This project builds on
concepts and solutions for sensing, networking, and processing of data in
wireless sensor networks and smart environments. More specifically, the proposed
technology can successfully integrate large dynamic heterogeneous data streams
originating from live third-party sources using a MapReduce-like paradigm, and
then present the relevant trends and patterns to the end user on interactive
charts and maps on the Web.

The potential societal and commercial impact of this project is significant.
Based on the initial exploratory interviews with potential customers, there
exists a significant demand to use an application like the one proposed. These
potential users are attracted by detailed personalized suggestions as to what
actions to take in order to reduce electricity consumption, thus essentially
lowering the load on the generation and distribution grid as a by-product. The
team also expects the solution methodologies developed for this I-Corps project
to be applicable in other domains, such as smart healthcare, and private or
public transportation. For instance, existing data sources could be leveraged to
offer an accurate overview of one?s health and well-being, leading to more
accurate diagnosis and pre-emptive actions to improve health conditions.