* 1404805
* Collaborative Research:  Characterization of Functionally-Graded Sol-Gel-Derived Silica Films on Multiple Length Scales, from Single Molecules to Macroscopic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniel Higgins, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,924.00

Non-Technical Abstract The development of new materials for advanced
technologies usually requires that a large number of different samples be
synthesized and tested one by one to find those best suited for the intended
application. An alternative to this often-tedious process is to produce a
material incorporating a chemical gradient in which the composition gradually
varies along a single sample. The speed at which optimum new materials are
developed and identified is thus greatly enhanced. These rapid-throughput-
screening applications of chemical gradients find possible utility in the
development of better catalysts for production of pharmaceuticals, plastics,
lubricants and fuels and in the fabrication of surfaces with adhesion properties
tailored for the attachment and growth of biological tissues. Chemical gradients
also find direct utility in the separation of specific components from complex
chemical mixtures and in guiding the delivery of liquids, chemical precursors
and cells in miniaturized chemical devices and sensors. For all such
applications, the gradients to be employed must have well defined chemical and
physical properties. Ideally, they would exhibit gradual, monotonic
compositional and properties variations extending from the macroscale down to
molecule levels. In reality, such idyllic character seldom exists. Unexpected
properties variations may arise from the spontaneous separation of the gradient
components during preparation, producing materials that exhibit stepwise rather
than gradual properties variations, and limit the participation of often-
desirable cooperative interactions. These attributes make gradient materials
uniquely more complex and valuable than either single component materials or
uniform nongradient films prepared from identical precursors. This activity
emphasizes exploration of the chemical and physical complexity of organosilane
gradients prepared by novel wet-chemical methods recently developed by the
principal investigator's groups. The outcomes will lead to development of
gradients having better understood and better controlled properties that can be
more effectively implemented in advanced materials. The synergy between the
collaborating groups will lead to the enhanced training of a diverse body of
undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art materials synthesis and
their characterization by advanced chemical imaging methods. These students will
be actively mentored by both investigators and will participate in a summer
exchange program between the two campuses and weekly web conferences to broaden
their educational, scientific and career horizons.

Technical Abstract With the support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Material Research, the principal investigators will
(1) investigate the extent to which phase separation and synergistic
interactions occur along multicomponent organosilane gradients prepared by the
sol-gel process and (2) evaluate the sizes and compositions of the resulting
domains. Materials to be investigated will include multicomponent polarity,
acidity, charge and dopant gradients derived from different organoalkoxysilane
precursors. Over the long term, the impacts of nanometer-to-micrometer scale
phase separation and cooperative interactions on the macroscopic properties of
these gradients will be explored. Gradient composition will be characterized on
multiple length scales (micrometer-to-millimeter) by x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and Raman mapping. All
three will yield quantitative data on the distance scales over which gradient
composition varies and will allow for the chemical origins of any cooperative
effects to be fully understood. Single molecule superlocalization microscopy
will be used to probe the gradients on nanometer length scales and to elucidate
cooperative interactions between the gradient components themselves as well as
between a probe molecule and the film components. Quantitative data on materials
polarity will be obtained through implementation of unique single molecule level
measurements of the local dielectric constant of the films. In all cases,
results from the gradients will be compared to those from uniform nongradient
samples.