* 1404569
* Gravitational Radiation and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,419,314.00

This is a research project on the physics and astrophysics of gravitational wave
sources, partially in support of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO); it will be carried out by the Caltech Relativity Theory
(CaRT) group, led by Yanbei Chen (PI), Christian Ott and Mark Scheel (Co-PIs).
Through numerical simulations and analytical studies, this project will not only
provide more accurate models for LIGO sources, but will also lead to a deeper
understanding of the behavior of space-time geometry and matter under extreme
conditions - near black holes, neutron stars, especially when these extreme
objects collide with each other. These more accurate models and deeper
theoretical insight will also be applied to the analysis of LIGO gravitational-
wave data. This project will serve as a training ground for young physicists and
astrophysicists, by teaching them a wide variety of research techniques. Members
of the CaRT will also pursue a wide range of activities that reach out to the
broader scientific community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project will consists of three directions:&lt;br/&gt; (A) By
combining analytical techniques and numerical simulations (using the Spectral
Einstein Code [SpEC]): (i) Increasingly accurate gravitational waveforms for
binary black hole coalescence will be generated and used to produce numerical
template banks for LIGO; (ii) The geometrodynamics of highly curved spacetimes
will be visualized and explored.&lt;br/&gt; (B) SpEC will be applied to the
study of gravitational wave (GW) sources with matter (neutron-star binaries,
neutron-star/black-hole binaries), contributing to a deeper understanding of:
(i) their GW, neutrino, and electromagnetic emissions, as well as (ii) their use
in constraining the nuclear Equation of State (EOS). Newly developed higher-
order hydrodynamics methods will be incorporated into SpEC. With these, ultra-
long inspiral simulations will be carried out and compared to post-Newtonian
theory. Recently discovered EOS-dependence of NSNS post-merger oscillations will
also be investigated in full general relativity.&lt;br/&gt; (C) The CaRT group
will contribute to the LIGO Scientific Collaboration's (LSC) efforts to detect
GWs and extract information from detected signals. They will (i) lead the effort
to infer physics from future GW observations of core-collapse supernovae; (ii)
participate in searches for GWs from distant core-collapse supernovae; (iii)
improve methods for the detection of GWs from continuous sources such as
pulsars.