* 1404605
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography Resins Based on Nanomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Michele Vittadello, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

A new family of innovative immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)
resins based on graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets for protein purification is
proposed. These IMAC resins potentially constitute a disruptive technology in
the protein purification market well beyond the current level of application of
IMAC stationary phase materials. This novel IMAC material is expected to provide
improved protein loading capacity and specificity compared to commercially
available resins. Alternative applications in response to customer needs of the
IMAC material and its possible derivatives will be explored. The most promising
commercial applications of the proposed IMAC resins will be determined on the
base of a customer discovery and business development effort by means of a
targeted market exploration in the biotechnology sector.

The IMAC method is an elegant and powerful approach for isolation of proteins
with high purity. The team estimates that the IMAC resin global market is likely
to experience further growth. The IMAC resin proposed herein, when compared to
existing commercial products, will: a) be endowed with higher volumetric and
gravimetric metal density, b) exhibit superior protein loading capacity and
purity, c) ensure state-of-the-art durability and chemical stability, d) promote
high retention of activity of isolated proteins, e) provide control of binding
affinity versus analyte protein specificity. Some of these characteristics have
been investigated in the course of the research conducted. Other applications
may be possible beyond the natural business segment of the IMAC resin.