* 1404932
* Collaborative Research:   P2C2--Reconstructing Deglacial and Holocene Climate Variability in Southeast Asia Using Speleothems and Isotope-Enabled Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Michael Griffiths, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2017
* USD 59,496.00

The Asian Monsoon system is an important component of the global climate system
that plays a major role in the transport of heat and moisture from the tropics
to higher latitudes. Even small variations in the strength and/or timing of
seasonal rainfall can have significant impacts on the billions of people living
within the Asian monsoon domain, yet climate model projections of future monsoon
changes still remain uncertain. While paleoclimate records have significantly
advanced our understanding of summer monsoon variability in some regions, we
still know very little about the range and mechanisms of monsoon variability in
Southeast Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, a collaborative effort
between scientists from the University of California, Irvine and William
Patterson College of New Jersey, will generate high-resolution speleothem (cave
calcite deposit) records of past hydroclimate variability over the last 20,000
years from Laos, a key site at the interface between the Indian and East Asian
monsoon systems. The new oxygen isotope records will document changes in
Southeast Asian monsoon strength on sub-decadal to orbital timescales, filling
in a key spatial and temporal gap in the paleoclimate record of the tropics.
Through integrating paleoclimate proxy data, instrumental climate data, and
climate model analyses, the project will address three main questions: (1) How
has Southeast Asian monsoon intensity varied over the past 20,000 years in
response to orbital forcing, millennial-scale abrupt climate events, and
interannual to multi-decadal climate modes?; (2) What are the mechanisms that
control precipitation and speleothem oxygen isotopes on interannual to orbital
timescales in Laos?; and (3) How do the Laos speleothem records relate to
broader spatial and temporal patterns of past climate variability in the
tropical Indo-Pacific, the Asian monsoon region, and high latitudes? In addition
to the scientific outcomes, this project will provide research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students and will be incorporated in outreach efforts
aimed at improving the participation of underrepresented groups in the
geosciences. For instance, a hands-on field and laboratory exercise on
paleoclimate, climate change, and native culture will be developed for the NSF
funded American Indian Summer Institute in Earth System Science held at the
University of California, Irvine each summer.