* 1404147
* Chemistry of Mitochondrial Protein Acetylation:Evolution of Substrate Reactivity as a Regulatory Mechanism
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Charles Brenner, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2017
* USD 504,000.00

All cellular life depends on enzymatic activities that break down fuels and
transforms small molecules into big ones. Enzyme functions are tuned by
modifications, which are typically added by other specialized enzymes. In
mitochondria, the energy powerhouses of cells, many enzymes are inhibited by
addition of a 2-carbon unit termed acetyl, which is also a common currency in
mitochondrial fuel oxidation. These changes have important consequences for the
balance between energy generation and fat storage. The applicants proposed that
acetyl modification of mitochondrial enzymes is driven by chemical reactivity
rather than enzyme activity. They aim to lead an interdisciplinary and
international research team to test this hypothesis and to predict chemical
reactivity from enzyme structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Drs.
Charles Brenner and Michael Schnieders to determine whether they can explain the
rates of protein acetylation of mitochondrial enzymes from first chemical
principles, namely depression of lysine pKa values by nearby positive charges
and partial desolvation. They will combine experimental techniques and novel
computational methods to determine rates of chemical acetylation and to predict
sidechain pKa values. Because mitochondrial enzymes are frequently inactivated
by protein acetylation and this has been proposed to drive fuel-sensitive
metabolic changes, the project may also be able to explain how animals evolved
chemical mechanisms to maximize weight gain during times of over-nutrition and
to minimize weight loss during calorie restriction.&lt;br/&gt;