* 1404886
* Miniaturized mass spectrometry using lithographically patterned electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Daniel Austin, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Professors Daniel E. Austin and Aaron R. Hawkins of Brigham Young University are
supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division
of Chemistry to explore viable pathways to fabricate highly miniaturized linear-
type ion trap mass spectrometers. The goal of this project is to develop a low
cost, simple to manufacture, portable mass spectrometer and to demonstrate its
applicability to fast on-site chemical measurement problems. One such
application is the monitoring of atmospheric particulates. A wide range of
scientific and technical areas, including industrial, environmental, clinical,
and air quality monitoring, can benefit from on-site mass spectrometric chemical
analysis. This is ultimately an instrument development project, and like all new
and improved measurement tools it will facilitate advances in science and
technology areas that rely on these measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is focused on the development of a miniaturized linear ion
trap (LIT) mass spectrometer (MS), using two parallel ceramic plates onto which
all necessary electrodes are lithographically patterned. The proposed two-plate
concept will allow precise alignment of the electrodes, a requirement for
maintaining acceptable MS resolution, mass accuracy, and selectivity with
miniaturized MS. With one plate fixed, only the position of the second plate
will be varied using both mechanical as well as fine piezoelectric alignments.
After the plates are aligned, they will be permanently affixed with epoxy to
create a miniaturized MS analyzer. Once assembled, the analyzer will be
interfaced to a commercial GC to demonstrate portable GC-MS
operations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrument construction and testing tasks
involve interdisciplinary education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students in chemistry and electrical engineering, two areas that increasingly
work together in instrument development and for which cross-training is
particularly valuable.