* 1404641
* GOALI: Manufacturing of Nanostructure-Enhanced Mn-Al-base Materials via Modulated Machining and Thermomechanical Consolidation for High-Performance Permanent Magnets
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Jorg Wiezorek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2018
* USD 299,998.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research on an innovative manufacturing process for the improved
preparation of high performance permanent magnet materials. The process combines
the preparation of high-purity micro-particulates that are internally composed
of an ultrafine-grained structure from MnAl base alloys using a novel machining-
based process. During subsequent low-temperature thermo-mechanical consolidation
a composition-invariant solid-state phase transformation will be used to obtain
dense bulk ferromagnetic aggregates. Magnetic and mechanical properties will be
measured. Microstructure evolution during thermo-mechanical processing will be
determined by x-ray diffraction and electron microscopy measurements. Physics
based numerical models will be combined with experiments to determine the
process-structure-property relationships. The research will provide the science
underpinning the creation of the internally nanostructured alloy particulates,
as well as for the phase transformation facilitated retention of the nano-scale
grain size in the low-temperatue consolidated ferromagnetic aggregates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides new processing and materials science
knowledge to meet the critical need for the effective manufacture of rare-earth-
metal-free magnetic materials, which are critical to technologies used in the
conversion between mechanical work and electrical power, as well as in
transmission and distribution of power. Improved manufacture of permanent magnet
materials based on abundant ingredients supports the implementation of clean
wind power and electric vehicle technologies. Additionally, the underlying
process schema is amenable for adaptation to a range of alloy systems.
Therefore, the processing science knowledge the research will deliver is
expected to advance the field of powder-particulate based manufacturing of
functional and structural material in general. The research project involves an
interdisciplinary academia-industry team from the University of Pittsburgh and
Alcoa, provides synergy for project resources, ensures the industry relevance of
the research, enables multifaceted graduate education for students, and
expedites technology commercialization. It will also positively impact
engineering education, promote lifelong learning for industrial practitioners,
and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.