* 1404394
* Simple, cost effective, and electronically-controlled condensers to increase the resolution and contrast of near-infrared microscopes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Luis Grave de Peralta, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 390,767.00

Title: Simple, cost effective, and electronically-controlled condensers to
increase the resolution and contrast of near-infrared
microscopes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: When a
condenser is incorporated into an optical microscope, it produces a cone of
inclined illumination incident on the sample under study resulting in improved
imaging resolution. However, existing condensers typically comprises multiple
lenses (or mirrors) and diaphragms that should be mechanically adjusted. In
order to simplify the use of microscopes and further improve imaging resolution
a novel optical condenser, which does not require moving parts, lenses, or
mirrors, is proposed. The new optical condenser is formed by a hollow hemisphere
containing a large number of near-infrared light emitting diodes (LEDs) in its
internal surface. This approach, named as Electronic-Controlled Condenser (ECC),
allows for multiple inclined illumination angles and doubles the resolution of
the microscope. The proposed ECC is simple and cost-effective and will be
particularly important for near-infrared imaging microscopy. Infrared microscopy
has broad applications in inspection, metrology, and reliability analysis which
are invaluable diagnostic assessments for the semiconductor, optoelectronic, and
photonic industries. The research activities proposed in this effort will
provide excellent interdisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate
students in the areas of simulation, optics, advanced microscopy, and nano- and
micro-fabrication. Results obtained under this effort will be disseminated
through journal publications and conference presentations. &lt;br/&gt;Technical:
Independent electronic control of each near-infrared LED in an ECC will allow
the implementation of a large variety of illumination configurations, which
includes but are not limited to, bright and dark field microscopy, omni-
directional, inclined, and circular illumination, infrared tomography, and
direct Fourier optics filtering techniques. In addition, the availability of
LEDs emitting at different wavelengths in the near-infrared will enable the
realization of ECCs emitting quasi-monochromatic or polychromatic illumination
where the wavelength selection is determined by specific near-infrared
microscopy applications. Other important attributes of the proposed next
generation condensers for far-field near-infrared microscopy include real-time
and raster-free images, it dispenses the need of imaging post-processing
reconstruction, and it is simple to use and cost effective. This effort
encompasses research on simulations, fabrication, spatial and temporal
electronic control of a large array of LEDs, and transformative imaging concepts
to achieve simple wide-field near-infrared subwavelength resolution. Research
under this proposal spans a broad range of technical and educational issues in
science and engineering, and addresses important applications. Four major
research thrusts were identified in this proposal: 1. Simulations: simulations
will be performed to determine optimum spatial light intensity distribution and
resolution limit corresponding to various illumination configurations. 2.
Spatial and temporal filtering: a comprehensive study will be carried out on
image resolution and contrast under a variety of spatial and temporal
illumination schemes implemented by direct electronic control of individual or
groups of LEDs in an ECC. 3. Fabrication: control nanostructures will be
fabricated to verify the resolution limit for the various illumination
arrangements. 4. Imaging procedures: the optimum imaging illumination procedures
for a variety of samples commonly used in the semiconductor and photonic
industries will be investigated. When integrated, these studies will result in a
simple and practical subwavelength resolution technique in the near-infrared.
ECCs with multiple spatial and temporal illumination configurations represents a
transformative technology in the area of near-infrared microscopy. The proposed
research will further the understanding on the resolution limits and will
significantly advance the state of the art of near-infrared microscopy imaging.