* 1404865
* Probing Van der Waals Coupled One-Dimensional Physics in Double-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Feng Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award funds a project that
investigates novel one-dimensional(1D) physics in double-walled carbon
nanotubes, a model family of van der Waals-coupled 1D materials. One-dimensional
carbon nanotubes have remarkable electrical, mechanical, and optical properties.
This research project aims at advancing fundamental understanding of these 1D
carbon materials, the knowledge of which could enable new types of electronic
and photonic devices. The project provides an interdisciplinary learning
environment, where graduate and undergraduate students can learn state-of-the-
art laser spectroscopy and nanoscale fabrication, and collaborate with theorists
and other experimentalists internationally. The project also takes advantage of
the diverse student body and education activities in UC Berkeley to enhance
broad participation in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a project that aims at
fundamental understanding of van der Waals coupled one-dimensional physics in
double-walled carbon nanotubes (DWNTs). DWNTs provides an ideal family of model
systems to explore new 1D physics arising from van der Waals interactions: there
are hundreds of different DWNT species, and each DWNT specie is uniquely
characterized by the chiral indices of the constituent outer and inner single-
walled carbon nanotubes. The perfect structure and rich variety of DWNTs is
quite unique, and it enables quantitative and systematic studies of emerging 1D
physics in different van der Waals-coupled structures. In this project, the
principle investigator plans to investigate novel 1D phenomena in different
DWNTs using a combination of single-tube spectroscopy and electron diffraction
on individual DWNTs. In particular, the research activities cover three exciting
directions: (1) Electronic structure renormalization in incommensurate DWNTs (2)
Coupling between excitons and Luttinger liquid in metal/semiconductor DWNTs
(i.e. DWNTs composed of a metallic outer wall and a semiconducting inner wall).
(3) Ultrafast energy transfer between the inner- and outer-wall nanotubes.
Physical understanding obtained in this project is not only of fundamental
interest, but also important for nanoelectronic and nanophotonic applications
based on DWNTs.&lt;br/&gt;