* 1404771
* Microstructural Foundations of Magnesium Performance: A Data Mining Approach to High-throughput Electron Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* David Fullwood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2018
* USD 382,862.00

In order to meet ambitious targets for reduced energy consumption and emissions
in modern vehicles, one of the most widely adopted strategies involves the
deployment of lightweight structural materials. At less than a quarter of the
density of steel, magnesium is a natural contender to replace legacy materials
in automotive and other vehicle components. However, despite its desirable
physical properties, magnesium accounts for only a small proportion of the make-
up of a typical automobile. The reason, in large part, stems from the difficulty
with forming the relatively brittle magnesium alloys into complex shapes
required for vehicle components. This award supports research into the science
underlying micro-scale behavior of magnesium alloys during forming and other
deformation operations. By uncovering the relationships between the metal's
microstructure and its response to deformation, modified manufacturing processes
and improved alloys can be designed to enable widespread use of lightweight
magnesium components in vehicular and other weight-sensitive applications. This
will be complemented by STEM-oriented outreach activities and external
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The response of a magnesium component to
applied deformation is governed by two atomic-level phenomena: slip and twin
activity. Twinning is especially vital to deformation at and near room
temperature, due to the difficulty of slip. This project will build upon newly
developed microscopy techniques (high-resolution electron backscatter
diffraction) to generate snapshots of nano and micro-level structural activity
during forming activities. Data mining knowledge extraction techniques will be
applied to the resultant huge data sets of twin and slip activity in order to
accelerate the discovery of interrelations between microstructure and magnesium
deformation mechanics. The data mining will employ a decision-tree type analysis
and a neural net approach. The resultant knowledge will be embedded in a meso-
scale model of twin / deformation activity as the basis for assessment and
design of improved alloys for light-weight structural applications. New insights
will emerge into twin development that span various grain-size ranges and
critical temperature levels. Key structure parameters will be modeled, including
detailed grain-boundary character, accurate local (relative) strain levels,
dislocation activity / slip transition temperatures, measures of crystal lattice
entropy and other metrics of local heterogeneity. Furthermore, the high-
throughput microscopy and data mining advances developed as part of the study
will serve as a new framework for accelerated knowledge discovery for
constitutive models of deformation in crystalline materials.