* 1404527
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Surviving habitat loss: Physiological and evolutionary basis underlying tolerance to deforestation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,865.00

Tropical deforestation reshapes biological communities, benefitting some
species, while pushing others towards local extinction. This research will
examine the ecological and evolutionary underpinnings of tolerance to
deforestation by focusing on the genetics of two closely related Central
American frog species. Along with climate change and disease, habitat loss is
pushing numerous amphibian species towards extinction. Understanding the
biochemical basis for thermal adaptation is a crucial area of research given the
multifaceted ways that humans are heating local, regional, and global climates.
This research will inform conservation outcomes by providing insight into the
reasons that some species are capable of bucking this global trend. The project
also will involve the training of a graduate student and undergraduates,
including individuals from groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will study two species in the
genus Craugastor that differ in their tendency to live in forested and
deforested areas. Their previous research identified thermal tolerance as the
primary factor explaining whether a species can survive in warmer, deforested
areas. They will subject both species to forest- or pasture-like temperature
regimes, and then uses Illumina-based RNA sequencing to test whether
interspecific differences in constitutive expression and capacity to upregulate
thermal stress tolerance genes (e.g., heat shock proteins) correspond to habitat
affinity. They can thus begin to assess how gene regulation facilitates survival
in deforested habitats. While differential expression may facilitate survival,
structural differences (i.e., in protein coding sequence) also likely play a
role. They will compare sequence data between species to scan for signatures of
adaptation by employing both conventional molecular evolutionary tests for
positive selection (i.e., dN/dS), as well as developing a novel structure-based
approach that examines how changes at the DNA level are expected to alter
protein stability at warm temperatures. Using protein homology modeling and RNA
sequence data, they will test the hypothesis that proteins in the deforestation-
tolerant species exhibit increased thermal stability. Because conventional
methods of testing for positive selection are prone to false negatives, the use
of a structure based, hypothesis-testing framework will substantially increase
the detection of thermal adaptation. This study will place ecological changes
caused by human activity in a macroevolutionary context, and provide a specific
structural hypothesis to detect thermal adaption in an increasingly warm, human-
dominated biosphere.