* 1404884
* Toroidal-spiral particles (TSPs) for co-delivery of multiple compounds of different sizes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ludwig Nitsche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterial program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of Illinois Chicago is to develop a basic understanding
of the materials-science basis for a new polymer-based technology to deliver a
cocktail of therapeutic drugs locally to the sites of complex diseases such as
brain tumors. Previous generations of polymeric drug-delivery vehicles have
faced difficult challenges in encapsulation efficiency of expensive drugs,
protecting the bioavailability of delicate protein drugs, and independent tuning
of release profiles of multiple drugs for optimum therapeutic effect. Toroidal-
spiral particles (donut shaped spiral particles - TSP) solve these problems via
the novel internal structure and mechanism of particle formation and drug
loading. The visually appealing nature of the experimental and computational
results, as well as the societal relevance of the biomedical applications,
represents a natural draw for high school students being recruited into chemical
engineering. Publicity for educational modules and broader dissemination will
occur through: 1) direct outreach to 21 Chicagoland high schools; 2) the annual
American Institute of Chemical Engineers Chicago Section Student Symposium; and
3) "Science Minors" student workshops co-organized by the Principal Investigator
and the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
This award enables research into key materials - science and functionality
issues needed to unlock the technological and societal impact of a new polymeric
platform for multi-drug delivery: toroidal-spiral particles (TSP). The toroidal-
spiral (TS) structure of the particles is self-assembled through competitive
kinetics of drop sedimentation, diffusion, and cross-linking. During the
formation of the TSP, macromolecules such as therapeutic proteins and
oligonucleotides can be auto-entrained into the TS channel, while a small
molecular drug can be pre-blended into the polymer drops. Upon solidification
into particles, the release of each compound occurs through a separate pathway
and can be manipulated independently to reach therapeutic synergy. This project
will address three main, enabling aspects of TSP technology: (1) enhance many
further biomedical and biotechnical applications, tunable biodegradation of TSP
will be studied and measured; (2) independent manipulation of release profiles
of cytotoxic drug versus therapeutic proteins will combine laboratory
measurements with computational models to ascertain the structure-release
relation and to optimize structures for biomedical applications; and (3) in
vitro characterization the cellular association and activity of agents released
from TSP will use model cell lines for brain tumors and endothelial tissue. In
addition to multidisciplinary training of the graduate research assistants
involved, fostering undergraduate research opportunities (emphasizing
underrepresented minority student participation) and spin-offs in undergraduate
engineering education, this project offers multiple avenues for outreach and
dissemination among Chicago and grade 6-12 and community-college students.