* 1404366
* Electron-driven Correlated Dynamics of Complex Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Allen Landers, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,931.00

Electron-molecule interactions initiate and drive almost all chemical processes
relevant to areas such as radiation damage, environmental chemistry, industrial
plasmas used in the processing of materials for microelectronics and in modern
lighting applications. Recently, there has also been an increasing awareness of
the importance of electron-molecule interactions in biological systems. For
example, low-energy electrons seem to have a significant effect in driving DNA
strand breaks due to the passage of ionizing radiation through biological
material. Given the prominence of electron-molecule interactions in many
environments, it is imperative that we understand how electron interactions
drive chemical processes, particularly those that lead to bond breaking in
molecules, as the remaining fragments often serve as progenitors to chemical
reactions and reaction chains. It is also important to understand how energy
flows into and out of molecular systems. It is this energy flow that governs the
dynamics of any electron-molecule interaction. Given advancements in modern
computational resources, theoretical models are poised to address electron
interactions with more complex systems, that is, those of more that two or three
atoms. However it is difficult to assign any level of confidence to the outcomes
of these models due to the sparsity of experimental measurements to benchmark
against. This project will measure the bond breaking and molecular dynamics
driven in electron interactions with several complex molecular systems, for
example, hydrocarbons, alcohols, and simple organic molecules, to serve as
experimental benchmarks to theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interactions of electrons with the complex systems above reveal information
about the structure and dynamics when driven to non-equilibrium states. By
exploring both high- and low-energy electron interactions, with these complex
systems, we can ascertain a more in-depth understanding of the physics driving
the correlated dynamics. This project brings the application of the momentum
fragment imaging apparatus at Auburn University to the study of correlated
dynamics in electron-molecule interactions. The momentum imaging technique
measures the full three-dimensional momentum of dissociation fragment ions as a
result of electron interaction. This allows for a complete study of dissociation
dynamics as a function of both electron energy and interaction angle with
respect to a bond axis. It also allows for a measurement of the energy
partitioning between translational and internal ro-vibrational energy of
dissociating fragment ions. At low electron energies, dissociative electron
attachment (DEA) is dependent on the incidence angles of electrons, with respect
to particular bond axes, and selectivity of bond cleavage can be realized.
Recent results for DEA show that complex stretching and bending dynamics, beyond
a quasi-diatomic representation, must be accounted for to adequately explain the
dissociation dynamics of triatomic systems. This project will extend previous
work by transitioning to more complex systems, as mentioned above, that have
seen little or no previous experimental attention. At higher electron energies,
the structure and dynamics of select diatomic and triatomic systems driven into
highly excited and ionic states will also be probed via momentum imaging of ions
formed by the dissociative ionization and ion-pair processes. At both the low-
and high-energy regimes, these various processes exhibit constant energy
transfer. It is this constant energy transfer that allows for the specific
determination of states involved in these processes.