* 1404400
* Nano - Rheology of Enzymes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Giovanni Zocchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 11/30/2017
* USD 484,217.00

Nontechnical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the mechanical
properties of enzymes, which are, with DNA, the molecules most central to life.
Enzymes operate like nano-scale machines complete with moving parts, yet the
mechanics of the large molecular deformations they undergo is hardly
characterized. The project addresses this knowledge gap. It is based on a unique
experimental technique which is revealing unsuspected materials properties of
these large but compact molecules. It turns out that enzymes are mechanically
similar to 'silly putty' ! By characterizing the surprising materials properties
of the molecules of life, the small team, comprising the PI and two graduate
students, expands basic knowledge of molecular scale phenomena in a fundamental
direction. On the educational side, the graduate students involved in the
project acquire a unique perspective and rare, truly interdisciplinary technical
skills. They think like physicists, and at the same time are technically
competent with the molecular biology techniques necessary to lead the
development of a new materials science of biomolecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes are deformable
molecules, but what is the dynamics of this remarkable 'softness' ? Armed with a
unique experimental tool which allows, for the first time, sub-Angstrom
resolution measurements of enzyme deformability, the small research team
(comprising the PI and two graduate students) is discovering surprising yet
fundamental materials properties of these compact macromolecules. This project
aims to characterize the recently discovered viscoelastic mechanical response of
the folded enzyme, its physical origin and generality. The proposed measurements
specifically address the temperature dependence of the internal dissipation for
conformational motion, as well as the origin (surface effect / bulk effect) of
this dissipation. The broader goal of the proposed experiments is to develop a
continuum mechanics approach to the study of conformational motion. This
approach may uncover universal features of the mechanics of enzymes, which are
not apparent in the traditional kinetic description. One example is the
viscoelastic transition; more generally, these experiments impact our
understanding of dissipative dynamics in molecular scale systems. Finally, the
PI's aim is to build an understanding of what is general and what is system
specific in the mechanics of enzymes and biomolecules generally. This knowledge
is essential for the design of modular, artificial molecular control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental method ('nanorheology'), invented in the
PI's lab, measures the ensemble averaged deformation of the folded state of a
protein elicited by an applied oscillatory stress. The technique measures the
mechanical susceptibility of the sample molecule in the relevant frequency range
(10 Hz - 10 kHz) and for deformations in the relevant sub-Angstrom to sub-
nanometer regime.