* 1404084
* Collaborative Research: Manipulating Epigenetic Mechanisms to Enhance Non-Viral Transgene Expression
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Kaushal Rege, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 426,386.00

CBET - 1404084/1403214&lt;br/&gt;Rege/Elmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA or gene
delivery to mammalian cells has several applications in biotechnology and
medicine. However, the activation of foreign genes (transgenes), and subsequent
efficacy of protein expression from them, is often hindered by defense
mechanisms inside the host cell. For example, cells are able to control
transgene protein expression by either burying existing genes inside condensed
chromosomes in the nucleus in order to turn them off, or by relaxing chromosomes
in order to expose genes and activate them. A family of 'epigenetic' enzymes
present within cells typically controls these processes of gene regulation;
enzymes that activate genes are generally classified as activators, while those
that turn genes off are called repressors. In the proposed research, the
investigators will study the role of these epigenetic enzymes in regulating the
expression from delivered transgenes. Furthermore, tools from the emerging field
of synthetic biology will be employed to design novel DNA sequences and
activator enzymes that enhance protein expression from delivered transgenes.
Findings from these studies will have a transformative impact on biotechnology
processes and medical treatments (e.g. gene therapy) that utilize DNA or gene
delivery to mammalian cells. Outreach from this project will reach K-12 students
through a PCR-based molecular biology project facilitated by the Quanta program
at ASU. The proposed outreach will be designed to increase participation of
students from underrepresented populations in STEM activities in Arizona and
Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the same way that words are neatly
organized in the pages of books in a library, cellular genes are condensed by
histone proteins to form chromosomes in the nucleus. Epigenetic regulation,
mediated by several enzymes, plays a key role in controlling gene expression
inside cells. Since recent work has shown that epigenetic mechanisms can silence
viral genes, it is likely that epigenetics may also regulate the expression of
foreign genes (i.e. transgenes) that are delivered in the form of plasmid DNA to
mammalian cells. The goal of this project is to manipulate intracellular
epigenetic enzymes in order to enhance transgene expression by (1) using drugs
to inhibit repressors and to prevent the deactivation of transgenes, (2) adding
designed DNA sequences to the plasmids in order to recruit activator enzymes,
and (3) using principles from synthetic biology in order to design and validate
novel epigenetic activator enzymes that can selectively bind transgenes and
enhance their expression. These approaches will deepen our understanding of
epigenetic mechanisms that regulate protein expression from foreign transgenes
(plasmid DNA) in human cells, leading to increased efficacy of gene therapy
treatments in medicine, and cellular engineering approaches in
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program of the CBET Division
and by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biology.