* 1404269
* RUI: Exploring Charging Issues in Third-Generation Gravitational-Wave Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dennis Ugolini, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 143,232.00

Einstein's Theory of General Relativity predicts that the motion of massive
astronomical bodies such as black holes or supernovae will generate tiny changes
in the curvature of space called gravitational waves. Experiments such as the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) are designed to
detect these waves by measuring the length difference between two paths with
laser light. The optics in these experiments are suspended in vacuum to isolate
them from all forms of vibration. With no air to conduct it away, excess surface
charge can build up on the optics over time. The motion of this charge changes
the surrounding electric field, vibrating the optic and degrading the
sensitivity of the experiment. The group at Trinity University has been
measuring the rate at which surface charge builds up and a method of removing
the charge that does not harm the delicate reflective coatings on the optics.
Funding from this grant supports the completion of a charge removal system for
delivery to the LIGO observatories and the study of the effect of different
optical cleaning and handling techniques on the mobility of surface charge, and
even the individual charge motions themselves. Pursuing this research will help
improve the sensitivity of Advanced LIGO and future gravitational-wave
detectors, for which surface charge has been a known limiting noise source since
2006. The funding supports undergraduate research at Trinity University, where
students can gain valuable experience working locally on a scaled-down vacuum
system prototype while contributing to the overall LIGO research effort. The
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is most sensitive to
gravitational waves at signal frequencies near 100 Hz. A limiting noise source
at these frequencies is surface charge on test masses, the motion of which
generates fluctuating electric fields that vibrate the masses. The noise
contribution depends on the charge magnitude and the correlation time for charge
motion. This project tackles three issues related to charging noise. One is to
finalize a deliverable discharging system and assist with its installation at
the LIGO observatories. Prototype systems using ionized nitrogen gas have been
demonstrated at both MIT and Trinity University, but it still must be verified
that the process does not damage the test mass reflective coating. This is done
by acquiring a test mass of known absorption, exposing it to an ionized nitrogen
system, and then having its absorption retested (this process has been used in
cooperation with Stanford University for previous discharging techniques). The
second is to characterize the relaxation time constant and charging/discharging
rate for Advanced LIGO test masses using different cleaning and handling
techniques, to determine which methods will reduce charging noise. This requires
obtaining several LIGO test mass witness samples, applying different cleaning
techniques (methanol, liquinox, First Contact, etc.) to each, moving them into a
vacuum system, charging with a high-voltage electrode pattern, and then using a
Kelvin probe to measure the rate at which the deposited charge dissipates across
the face of the test mass. This methodology will also be applied to proposed
optical coatings and substrates for third-generation interferometers in
cooperation with the Optics Working Group of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration.
The third is to modify an existing atomic force microscope at Trinity University
so that it can perform Kelvin probe microscopy. This will make it possible
tovisualize individual charge "hopping" across an insulating surface, with the
goal of refining the Markov process model of low frequency noise contributions.