* 1404059
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Electron Bifurcation in Methanogenic Archaea
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Eduardus Duin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 385,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Evert
Duin of Auburn University and Dr. John Leigh of the University of Washington to
study the important process of electron bifurcation, which occurs when living
systems convert energy from one form to another. In this process, two electrons
enter the system with identical potential, but when they exit, one has a much
lower potential than the other. Consequently, electron bifurcation makes
possible an uphill, energy-demanding, electron reduction of a biological
molecule because a downhill oxidation occurs concomitantly, which balances the
energy consumption and generation. The process has been observed in the methane-
producing and -consuming functions of Archaea, which produce biofuels, but also
in other forms of life, including our own bodies. Understanding how this process
works could be beneficial for improving the production of biogas or helping to
optimize the conversion of methane to biodiesel and could help us answer a
variety of health-related questions. The research has a further broader impact
on the preparation of students at all educational levels to become the next
generation of scientists. The collaborative nature of the project that involves
groups from different geographic regions of the United States creates an
environment in which the students acquire skills for interdisciplinary and
collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron bifurcation enables
enzymes to create electrons with a very low redox potential by simultaneously
creating an electron with a high redox potential. This eliminates the need to
couple the former electron transfer step to ATP hydrolysis. The bifurcation
process always involves a quinone or flavin group. The Duin and Leigh groups
will study the electron bifurcation by the hydrogenase:heterodisulfide reductase
complex, which contains iron ions within iron-sulfur clusters. The theory is
that some of the iron-sulfur clusters play an important part in the electron
bifurcation process by donating electrons to the central flavin and then
accepting either the high or low potential electrons. Site-direct mutagenesis
will be used to make changes to the iron-sulfur clusters and to the flavins and
their direct environment. The consequences of these changes on the electronic
and magnetic properties of the clusters and flavins will be evaluated by
absorption, electron paramagnetic resonance, and magnetic circular dichroism
spectroscopies and the bifurcation process will be examined by determining the
redox properties of the clusters and flavins and the kinetics of the redox
processes.