* 1404388
* Laser Cooling of Molecular Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Kenneth Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 454,252.00

Global positioning systems and rapid data communication require the ability to
precisely measure time. The most precise timing systems rely on the use of
lasers to extract energy from atom or ions (so-called "laser-cooling"
techniques) in order to remove uncertainty due to the atom or ion motion. Only
relatively recently have these laser-cooling techniques been demonstrated to
work on molecules. The scientific goal of this project is to demonstrate the
laser cooling of a trapped molecular ion, which could have potential future
applications in the precise measurement of time and some of the fundamental
physical constants of nature (the numbers which ultimately determine
quantitatively how everything in the universe behaves).

The initial target ion for laser-cooling is BH+. (BH is a molecule consisting of
one boron atom bonded to one hydrogen atom.) The challenge of laser cooling
molecules is the extra degrees of freedom relative to atomic ions. BH+ has a
level structure similar to SrF, a recently cooled molecule, and we propose to
implement a similar scheme. (SrF is a molceule consisting of one stronium atom
bonded to one one fluorine atom.) The key difference is that the expected
vibrational decay rate of BH+ is significantly faster. This leads to a broader
distribution of rotational states and additional care is required to close the
transition. In addition, the excited electronic state of BH+ can predissociate
to an unbound state of the ground electronic state. This dissociation rate is
predicted to be slow enough that laser cooling will still be possible. If
successful, this project will result in the first laser cooling of a trapped
molecular ion. The potential failure of the project due to predissociation will
give us additional insight into slow hydrogen tunneling processes and serve as a
test for theories of the quantum dynamics of molecules. An ideal outcome is the
formation of a molecular ion Coulomb crystal for the study of cold chemistry and
the precision measurement of molecular vibrations.