* 1404550
* SusChEM: Covalent Phthalate Mimics: an Alternative to Phthalate Plasticizers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Rebecca Braslau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2020
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award will support the research program of Prof. Rebecca Braslau at the
University of California Santa Cruz in developing alternatives to phthalate
plasticizers used in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) formulations. Professor Braslau
and her students plan to develop simple and economic methods to covalently
attach phthalate ester mimics to PVC, imparting plasticity to otherwise brittle
PVC, while preventing migration of small molecules that can leach out and become
metabolized into endocrine disrupting chemicals. Phthalates are currently
utilized on the million-ton scale annually, yet are implicated in a number of
health problems. A successful outcome of this project will provide a new
strategy to replace phthalate plasticizers using methodology that is scalable to
industrial applications, mitigating the buildup of endocrine disrupting
phthalates in consumer products and in the environment. The attachment of the
plasticizer to PVC by chemical bonds may also improve the lifetime of the
consumer products using flexible PVC. In addition, this research will provide
interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students in the fields
of synthetic organic chemistry and materials science, educating them with the
tools they will need to make significant contributions in the future. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be mentored by the PI to participate in
professional activities, presenting their work at meetings, and taking an active
part in the preparation of manuscripts stemming from their research findings.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project entails a simple and economic method to covalently attach phthalate
ester mimics to PVC, as a substitute for standard phthalate plasticizers. As
phthalate esters are now used on the million-ton scale annually, a substitute is
desirable that is chemically similar, but which shows no migratory ability from
the PVC matrix. Small molecule phthalate plasticizers leach from PVC products,
changing the properties of the PVC with time, and releasing potential endocrine
disrupting chemicals into the environment. A simple Huisgen 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition of alkyl azides and dialkyl acetylenedicarboxylates at moderate
temperatures in the absence of copper will be utilized to prepare
1,2,3-triazoles bearing ortho-esters containing a variety of alkoxy groups, to
mimic phthalate esters plasticizers. These phthalate mimics will be covalently
linked to PVC, either by modification of commercially prepared PVC, or by
copolymerization of vinyl monomers bearing ortho-diester triazole phthalate
mimics with vinyl chloride. In addition, copolymers of monomers bearing
phthalate mimics will be prepared as polymeric plasticizers to be blended with
PVC. The properties of the modified PVC materials will be extensively evaluated
to assess plasticity as indicated by Tg depression, homogeneity as a function of
time, migratory potential, polymer morphology, and elastomeric behavior. The
polymeric plasticizers will be analyzed for miscibility with PVC. The stability
of these materials upon subjecting them to hydrolysis and subsequent extraction
will be tested according to ASTM standards. The thermal and photodecomposition
of these polymer-bound triazoles will be studied.