* 1404110
* Understanding and Reducing Thermal Noise via Atomistic Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Hai-Ping Cheng, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

The research project is a computational oriented theoretical effort that aims at
understanding the physical origin of thermal noise in optical coating materials
at the atomic level and providing guidance for the optimal ratio of metallic
elements in composite amorphous oxides (silica, titania, tantala, hafnia etc).
Thermal noise that is caused by atomic movement at finite temperature affects
the performance of ultra high-resolution interferometers such as the laser
interferometer employed in the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LIGO) and is of special interest to the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration (LSC). The project will provide rigorous training for graduate
students in computational physics. The PI has collaborations with a number of
international experimental and computational materials physics groups including
a group at Glasgow UK, ETH Zurich, and a group at Fudan University Shanghai. She
also visits Colombi at the Institute of Astrophysics Paris to discuss issues
regarding large-structure simulations. The LSC is an international organization.
It also has a tight relation with other organizations that focus on
gravitational wave observations. The optical group organizes focus sessions at
LIGO meetings jointly with other gravitational organizations (VIRGO, AGO etc.)
and in independent workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced LIGO, the major
upgrade of LIGO, is expected to be limited by thermal noise in the most critical
~50-150 Hz frequency band while the performance of several state-of-the art
frequency stabilization systems is limited by thermal noise at frequencies as
low as a few Hz. This project also studies mechanical properties of crystalline
materials (GaAs/AlGaAs, and GaP/AlGaP), a new paradigm for optical coating that
has been demonstrated experimentally. Improving dielectric coatings and reducing
thermal noise have applications in many high precision optical measurements far
beyond LIGO, such as time and frequency measurements, measurements of the
equivalence principle, and many others. The computational approach of
characterizing amorphous materials will also be useful to many other areas such
as nano-scale science, materials science, and bio-science.