* 1404482
* CDS&amp;E: Multiscale Dynamics Simulation of Self-Assembly and Transport in Nanoparticulate Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Yuwen Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 364,796.00

CBET 1404482&lt;br/&gt;Zhang, University of
Missouri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dry and wet nanoparticulate systems are
encountered in a variety of applications including pharmaceutics, biomedical and
chemical processing. In understanding and optimization of these systems, an
accurate predictive capacity is critical. Since the physics of the interacting
force fields in such systems are complex, a multi-scale approach is necessary,
requiring large-scale simulations. The proposed research aims to develop cost-
effective and accurate predictive approaches for multi-scale computations of
nanoparticulate systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiscale dynamics simulation of
self-assembly and transport of nanoparticles in both dry and wet nanoparticulate
systems will be performed by integrating sub-models at different scales using
data-enabled approaches. The unique behavior of the dry particulate systems is
that they present both solid-like and liquid-like features leading to a number
of fascinating characters. Understanding the transport of nanoparticles in wet
particulate systems through multi-scale computation will significantly improve
the process by revealing dominant parameters to obtain desirable final
nanostructure. An "objective-driven" method will be utilized to regenerate
appropriate parameter sets by combining Ab initio calculation for interatomic
force construction and Monte Carlo optimization of parameters. A multiscale
computation, which covers atom-atom, atom-cluster, and cluster-cluster scales,
will be carried out through a data-stream support methodology. Through atom-atom
level simulation, crucial sets of force field (FF) parameters will be generated;
the atom-cluster level computation will mainly investigate interactions between
a single or a group of clusters (nanoparticles) and immersing flowing liquid
molecules. Once all the infrastructures are well established via reconstructing
innovative cage particle and porting to extensible LAMMPS, many phenomena
associated with self-assembly and transport in nanoparticulate systems can be
rigorously computed under this framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
"objective-driven" method will be implemented into software to meet needs of
many optimizations works, including obtaining desired FF parameters. The newly
developed atomic style-cage granule and other sub-models will further empower
the open-source molecular dynamics code LAMMPS, which has a very large number of
users around the world. Since the code is also compatible to LIGGGHTS (based on
LAMMPS) and CFDEM (a combination of LAMMPS and OpenFOAM), their users will also
definitely benefit from the functionalities and data obtained from this project.
The outcome of the research will be disseminated through publications in
archival journals, presentations at national and international conferences, and
students' thesis/dissertations. The proposed outreach activities will also help
promoting the public awareness and recognition of science and engineering and
promote the public image of scientists and engineers, which will play a very
important role in education in all levels and may also have broader impacts on
technology, economy, and society.