* 1404916
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Vibratory Cutting Mechanics with Novel Compliant Needle Geometry for Precision Needle Positioning Machine
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Jason Moore, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2018
* USD 149,774.00

This collaborative research award supports fundamental research on vibratory
tissue cutting mechanics to improve needle insertion placement accuracy inside
the body for cancer treatment and other medical procedures. This research will
determine how vibrational tissue cutting force is related to vibrational
parameters and needle cutting edge geometry with both fixed geometry and
utilizing the novel concept of compliant tool geometry. Vibratory tissue cutting
mechanics will be investigated with a precision needle positioning machine that
vibrates needles of varying compliant needle tip geometries. This research will
also investigate how laser micro machining and multi-axis wire electrical
discharge machining can be employed to produce small scale intricate needle tip
geometries.

Results will provide knowledge of vibratory tissue cutting mechanics and novel
microfabrication techniques. Knowledge of vibratory tissue cutting will bring
about the development of innovative minimally invasive medical instrument
designs that improve procedure efficacy, reduce patient trauma, and reduce
medical cost. Microfabrication knowledge gained will lead to new laser-based
micro manufacturing and multi-axis electrical discharge machining techniques.
These fabrication techniques will enable the future development of
microstructured medical devices that have a larger range of sizes, shapes and
materials than conventional microfabrication techniques can produce. This
collaborative research project between Pennsylvania State University and North
Carolina State University will also positively impact engineering education at
these universities and enhance cross-disciplinary research collaboration.