* 1404041
* A wireless sensor-brain interface to restore finger sensation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Timothy Lucas, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 599,995.00

PI: Lucas, Timothy H. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1404041&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Title: A wireless sensor-brain interface to
restore finger sensation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to develop a device, called a sensor-brain interface (SBI), which can restore
the sense of touch and the sense of movement in a paralyzed hand. Considerable
evidence suggests that these sensations will greatly improve a person?s ability
to regain function of their hand. When combined with a therapy for restoring
movement, the SBI has the potential to improve the quality of life of millions
of people with hand paralysis due to spinal cord injury or other neurological
conditions. The SBI has three components: sensors worn on the fingers,
electronics that convert the sensor signals into appropriate electrical
stimulation patterns, and stimulating electrodes to convey the signals directly
to the brain. Novel designs are used for each of these components to achieve a
system that is unobtrusive to wear and intuitive to use. The first two
components have broader significance in the rapidly expanding field of wearable
technology. The third component will inform the multitude of clinical therapies
using electrical stimulation to modulate brain function. Collectively, the three
components will yield a substantial vertical step towards reconnecting body and
brain after paralysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Somatosensory signals are critical
to normal motor function but their transmission, as with movement commands, is
interrupted in paralysis. Neuroprosthetic devices are typically designed to
restore movement but not sensation in the paralyzed limb. The resulting modest
performance has not justified the use of these devices in a wide clinical
population. To improve performance, the investigators will develop a sensor-
brain interface (SBI) with the goal of restoring sensation to a paralyzed hand.
The SBI has three components corresponding to the three aims of the project. The
first aim is to make wearable tactile and motion sensors that are small and
completely wireless and therefore unobtrusive to the user. The investigators
will pursue two types of novel battery-free sensors of mechanical stimuli: (1) a
battery-free active sensor of fingertip vibration powered by harvesting energy
from emitted radio waves and (2) a fully-passive, circuit-free sensor using
flexible radiofrequency identification tags to sense fingertip pressure and
finger joint angle. The second aim is to design a body-area network (BAN) to
wirelessly acquire and process the sensor output, configurably map the sensed
signals to neural stimulation parameters, and wirelessly convey the parameters
to a neural stimulator. The BAN will be accomplished with two, battery-powered,
low-power circuits: (1) a sensor controller worn at the wrist and (2) a
stimulation controller worn near the head. The third aim is to perform in-vivo
tests to validate function of the SBI and evaluate the hypothesis that the
cuneate nucleus (CN) of the brainstem is an advantageous site for encoding
somatosensory information. The CN maximizes the amount of downstream neural
circuitry available to process the artificial stimuli and to make the resulting
percepts more intuitive to the user. The encoding performance will be compared
to a more conventional, cortical encoding site. Finally, two different encoding
paradigms will be compared to assess their relative merit. The scope of this
project is to develop a functional SBI prototype and test the device in non-
human primates. Following completion of the project, the investigators envision
that the SBI could be combined with brain-controlled muscle stimulation for a
complete, bidirectional, sensorimotor neuroprosthesis for reanimating a
paralyzed hand.