* 1404245
* Quantum Optomechanics on Multiple Mass Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Nergis Mavalvala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

Measuring the position of mechanical objects very precisely has several
applications in fundamental research as well as in technological devices. In
atomic force microscopes (AFM), for example, lasers are used to read out the
position of a microscopic cantilever scanning over a surface, with sufficient
precision to measure surface variations on the sub-nanometer scale (less than a
thousandth of a millionth of a meter--9 zeros past the decimal place). On a
completely different size scale, laser light is used to read out the positions
of kilogram-scale mirrors of interferometric gravitational wave (GW) detectors
with sub-attometer precision (less than a millionth of a millionth of a
millionth of a meter--18 zeros past the decimal place). Even though these
devices occupy very different scales, they are united by similar principles and
limitations to precision position measurement. AFM cantilevers, the mirrors of
GW detectors, and indeed a large variety of other mechanical oscillators used as
tools of quantum information science, as time keepers, as frequency standards,
or as other precision sensors have one thing in common. They all seek to operate
at the best precision that quantum mechanics allows. When using laser light to
measure the position of a mechanical object, the quantum fluctuations of the
light, arising from the discrete nature of photons, imposes a limit on how well
one can do. This work explores these quantum limits to position measurement in
laboratory experiments that span micro-gram to gram scale mechanical
oscillators, with the goal of developing techniques for improving position
measurements in general, but also with specific applications to GW detectors.
The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) seeks to detect
GWs emitted by violent cosmic events such as supernova explosions and collisions
of neutron stars and black holes. Since GWs are completely distinct from
electromagnetic radiation, direct detection of GWs is expected to open a new
window into the Universe and provide opportunities to study cosmic phenomena
that are "invisible" using light alone. GWs from astrophysical sources cause
microscopic distortions of spacetime that can be measured by an interferometer
whose mirrors are suspended as pendulums to isolate them from all other effects
beside the GW. The changes in arm length, typically of order 1e-19 meters
(1/10000 the size of a proton!), are detected by very precise measurement of the
interference pattern of the laser light reflected from each 4 kilometer long arm
of the interferometer. Quantum fluctuations of the light arising from the
discrete nature of photons limit the sensitivity of GW detectors. The so-called
shot noise, due to the random quantum fluctuations of the light, limits the
precision with which the interference pattern, and hence the GW signal, can be
measured. Similarly, radiation pressure noise limits the sensitivity due to the
interferometer mirrors being "kicked" by the fluctuating momentum of the photons
that is transferred to the mirrors when the laser light reflects from them. The
proposed experimental program comprises cavity optomechanics experiments with
gram- and micro-gram scale mechanical oscillators are aimed at studying several
radiation pressure induced phenomena, including direct observation quantum
radiation pressure (backaction) noise that is expected to be a major limiting
noise source in Advanced LIGO; observation and manipulation of optomechanically
induced transparency; observation of ponderomotive squeezing, a promising
alternative for generation of squeezed states of light; ground state cooling of
macroscopic objects; and reaching and surpassing the free-particle Standard
Quantum Limit, which would allow for direct tests of quantum non-demolition
measurement techniques. The main purpose of this research is to further the
understanding of optomechanical systems in the quantum regime focusing on the
features most relevant to GW detectors. Equally attractive is the prospect of
exploring the fundamental physics of quantum correlations due to light-mirror
couplings in a macroscopic mechanical oscillator system.