* 1404302
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Barry Blumenfeld, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,800,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has.

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the premier Energy Frontier particle
accelerator operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland. It is
currently one of the foremost facilities for answering these Beyond the Standard
Model questions and studying the properties of the Higgs boson. The work
proposed here will continue the pioneering effort that this group did in the
discovery of the Higgs by the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at CERN.
They have been a leader in the study of Higgs properties, and have developed
important tools used by the community as a whole. The group led the work on the
4-lepton decay channel in the discovery of the Higgs. One of the innovations
developed by this group is known as the Matrix Element Likelihood Approach
(MELA), an analysis technique that allowed CMS to determine the quantum numbers
of the Higgs. The work proposed here will expand that technique, applying it to
the new higher energy data that will soon be delivered by the LHC and use it in
new searches for physics beyond the Standard Model.

This project would also support technical contributions to the operation of the
CMS detector and to the study of new detector technology for high luminosity
upgrades of the LHC. The operational contributions are based on techniques that
are currently in use or are derived from those currently in use. The
contributions to the study of detector upgrades are based on tools that were
developed to support the present operation.

Broader Impacts:

The impact of the proposed research program reaches beyond the narrow definition
of particle physics. The proposed work on active pixel detector technology has
application to instrumentation used at synchrotron light sources to study
materials and biological systems. The proposed research has a strong educational
component. It provides direct support and training for a number of students. In
particular, the testing of prototype detectors for future upgrades would provide
a diversity of experiences that are not otherwise available to young scientists
working in particle physics. The PI's group is the host of a QuarkNet center
that has a current membership of 25 Baltimore area high school teachers. The
QuarkNet Center has initiated and helped to organize a very successful series of
regional Physics Fairs that have brought science to thousands of area residents.