* 1404129
* Intermediates in the Reactions of Pterin-Dependent Hydroxylases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Paul Fitzpatrick, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 438,596.00

With this award the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Paul Fitzpatrick of the University of Texas Health
Science Center-San Antonio to study the mechanism by which oxygen is activated
when food is metabolized and converted into new cells and tissues. Molecular
oxygen from the air consists of two oxygen atoms bonded together. Living
organisms are capable of the incorporation of these atoms in biomolecules, a
process that is not spontaneous and that requires the activation of the
molecular oxygen. To achieve this goal, they use enzymes that contain metal
ions. Dr. Fitzpatrick will study an iron-containing enzyme and pursue the
elucidation of intermediates formed upon the chemical interaction between
oxygen, the iron-containing enzyme, and the enzyme substrates. The work is
having a broad impact on our understanding of the basic chemistry by which
oxygen powers living organisms, as well as on the training of the next
generation of scientists, including undergraduates who might not otherwise have
the opportunity to become involved in scientific research.

The goal of the experiments being carried out in this project is to determine
previously uncharacterized steps in the activation of oxygen by non-heme pterin-
dependent enzymes. A variety of spectroscopic methods are being used to
determine the structure of the NO complex of tyrosine hydroxylase with tyrosine
and a tetrahydropterin bound as a model for the quaternary complex with oxygen.
Rapid-reaction methods are also being used to trap and characterize an
intermediate in the reaction of tryptophan hydroxylase and to address the role
of proton transfer in cleavage of the oxygen-oxygen bond.