* 1404008
* Stacked, paper-based culture models of heart valve layers:  effects of hypoxia gradients and heterogeneous extracellular matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kathryn Grande-Allen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 319,000.00

PI: Grande-Allen, Kathryn J. Proposal Number: 1404008 Institution: William Marsh
Rice University Title: Stacked, paper-based culture models of heart valve
layers: effects of hypoxia gradients and heterogeneous extracellular matrix

Heart valve disease affects hundreds of thousands of people of all ages and
socioeconomic classes worldwide. Given the growing association of calcific
aortic valve disease with aging, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, the treatment
of just this disease alone represents significant health care costs now and in
the future. Currently, valve diseases can only be treated through surgical or
interventional means; there is no pill one can take to prevent or reverse valve
disease. It is unclear exactly how valve diseases get started or how they
worsen. Since the interactions between the cells and the material surrounding
the cells - like collagen and complex carbohydrates - appear to play an
important role in the health of the valve, as well as in the diseases, the PI
has developed a unique way to study these interactions. The use of advanced,
innovative approaches to grow the valve cells in an environment mimicking a
normal, healthy or diseased valve will provide significant new information on
the fundamental biology of heart valves and will help understand the disease
process and test new non-surgical therapies. In addition, the goals and
activities of this research will be distributed to a broad audience of students
(ranging from high school to graduate school) as well as high school teachers.

The function of heart valves is made possible by the unique microstructural
arrangement of extracellular matrix (ECM) components within the tissue. Many
groups including the PI's have begun to investigate how ECM fundamentally
regulates valve cell and tissue behavior, often using 2D cell cultures and
immunohistochemistry, but these methods can be time-consuming and provide
limited insight into active tissue remodeling. Cell culture environments such as
hydrogels or fibrous scaffolds constructed from ECM or synthetic polymers offer
cells a 3D environment that can be highly biomimetic, but analysis of the cell
behavior throughout the entire thickness of the 3D scaffold is challenging.
Thus, the proposed studies will evaluate the normal and pathological behavior of
valvular ECM and valvular interstitial cells (VICs) using the new field of
paper-based cell culture technology. In particular, stacks of paper impregnated
with gel scaffolds are appealing for high throughput, automated analysis of cell
behavior throughout the stack, and can be used to evaluate the effects of
hypoxia. Indeed, this technology is exceptionally well suited to investigate
VIC-ECM relationships. More specifically, this technology will be used to
assemble stacks of papers - each impregnated with a different ECM-based gel
scaffold - into a layered structure that mimics the heterogeneous layered
structure of the heart valve. This method will allow several in-depth studies to
examine the effects of certain types of extracellular matrix, the amount of
oxygen the cells are receiving, and the heterogeneous layered nature of heart
valves, on the phenotypic and signaling behavior of the valve cells. These
responses will be evaluated and compared for two original heart valve sources of
the VICs (aortic vs. mitral valve). The overall goal of the work is to evaluate
the normal and pathological responses of VICs to ECM and hypoxia. It is expected
that this unique experimental system will generate insight regarding the
fundamental behavior of valve cells and how this behavior can be regulated,
which will be impactful on developing new therapies for disease and the design
of tissue engineered valves.