* 1404929
* Reactive Intermediates in cytochrome oxidase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Syun-Ru Yeh, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2017
* USD 439,997.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Denis Rousseau, Syun-Ru Yeh and Gary Gerfen from the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine to quantitatively determine the factors that
determine how the reduction of oxygen to water is coupled to proton
translocation in cytochrome c oxidase. Over 95% of the oxygen consumed in humans
is taken up by cytochrome c oxidase, an enzyme located in the inner membrane of
mitochondria. The reduction of oxygen to water by the enzyme generates energy
that is harnessed to translocate protons across the inner mitochondrial
membrane, forming a proton gradient, which in turn is used to generate chemical
energy for use in the cell. A major gap in our understanding is how the oxygen
reduction is coupled to the proton translocation. In this grant a postulated
mechanism for the coupling will be explored. The results of this project are
expected to yield new insights into the functional properties of cytochrome c
oxidase, and thereby impact the field of Bioenergetics. The experiments will
involve both the development of new rapid mixing techniques and the use of
state-of-the-art spectroscopic technology, which will serve as an outstanding
training platform for students and postdoctoral fellows.

Previous studies have shown that the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with
cytochrome c oxidase generates many of the same intermediates as those formed in
the reaction of oxygen with the cytochrome c oxidase. The mechanism by which
hydrogen peroxide reacts with cytochrome c oxidase is unknown. The hypothesis
that hydrogen peroxide reacts with the heme a3 group and forms a radical species
as the first step in the reaction and that the radical subsequently migrates to
amino acid residues will be tested. A proposed model for proton translocation
based on the transfer of a radical from Tyr244 to Tyr129 will be tested also.
The pH, the hydrogen peroxide concentration, and the oxygen concentration will
be varied to determine how the reaction is regulated. The measurements will
identify where the initially formed radical is located and the time dependence
of the various intermediates that are subsequently formed. Finally, the full
evolution of the intermediates into those detected in the past by hand mixing
techniques will be determined. Rapid mixing techniques will be used to initiate
the reaction, rapid freeze quench methods will be used to trap the
intermediates, and new silicon mixers will be designed and fabricated; these
methods will make possible the following up of the reaction on timescales from
microseconds to minutes. EPR spectroscopy will be used to study the
intermediates and reaction products. Students and post-doctoral fellows who
participate in the project will gain education and training in Bioenergetics,
advanced technology development and state-of-the-art spectroscopy. New silicon-
based mixers designed for this project will be made available to the wider
academic community.