* 1404766
* RET Site on "Challenge-Based Learning and Engineering Design Process Enhanced Research Experiences for Middle and High School In-Service Teachers"
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Anant Kukreti, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 498,949.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of Cincinnati (UC) entitled, RET Site on "Challenge-
Based Learning and Engineering Design Process (EDP) Enhanced Research
Experiences for Middle and High School In-Service Teachers", under the direction
of Dr. Anant Kukreti, Director for Engineering Outreach, College of Engineering
and Applied Science.

This proposal establishes a RET Site for a total of 36 (12 per year) STEM in-
service middle and high school teachers in Challenge-Based Learning (CBL) and
Engineering Design Process (EDP) pedagogy. The goals are three fold: 1) To
educate, cultivate, and enrich science and math teachers' content delivery in
their classrooms by exploring the engineering design-and challenge for 7-weeks
during the summer. 2) To improve grades 7-12 students' science and math
achievement and stimulate interest in STEM careers as a result of better
instruction and curriculum delivered by participating teachers trained in
engineering content and design-based instruction. 3) To support participating
teachers in becoming role models by applying their research experiences in their
classrooms and communicating them effectively to their colleagues. The RET Site
builds on the proven success of 2 NSF RET Sites, 5 NSF REU Sites, and 2 RET
Supplements.

This RET Site broadens the impact of the current Cincinnati Engineering Enhanced
Mathematics and Science Program (CEEMS), a NSF Targeted Math & Science
Partnership (MSP) Program grant, which includes 14 Ohio school districts with
73,392 students and 4,709 teachers. This RET Site includes 14 non-CEEMS school
districts (12 in Ohio and 2 in Kentucky) with 72,546 students and 4,369
teachers. Since RET and CEEMS teachers both develop and test curriculum design,
teaching techniques, and student learning modalities using CBL-EDP pedagogy and
include 71.1% of the students regionally in Ohio, collectively they will clearly
impact the way math and science curricula are delivered to meet new standards
regionally.