* 1404866
* Structure/Function Correlations Over Binuclear Non-Heme Iron and Related Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,117,078.00

Organisms utilize binuclear non-heme iron enzymes to facilitate a wide range of
chemical reactions using O2. As examples, humans need ribonucleotide reductase
to generate DNA building blocks, and classes of bacteria use soluble methane
monooxygenase to convert methane (a greenhouse gas) to methanol (a usable fuel).
These enzymes have been targeted for the development of anti-cancer drugs and
biofuel catalysts. Understanding their chemistry at a molecular level requires
elucidating structural changes of the iron active core over the catalytic
reaction; however, many of these are not accessible with traditional
spectroscopic techniques. Thus, this project includes the development of new
spectroscopic methodologies that utilize intense magnetic fields, circularly
polarized light, and third-generation synchrotron radiation. Experimental data
combined with quantum mechanical calculations will define reaction mechanisms of
six enzymes and related models. The molecular level insight gained from this
project will promote drug discovery and biotechnology. The methods developed
have impact on many areas of science and are made available through numerous
national and international collaborations, which are now expanding to undergrad-
only U.S. institutions. This project also includes multiple outreach efforts,
including participation of high school teachers/students in summer research in
our labs and other K-12 programs. The PI has trained a large number of highly
successful scientists and edits major scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The binuclear non-heme enzymes form expanding
classes that activate O2 for H-atom abstraction, desaturation, hydroxylation,
and electrophilic attack, and reduce O2 to H2O and NO to N2O. The PI has been
developing spectroscopic methodologies to probe their O2 activating reduced
states (variable-temperature/variable-field magnetic circular dichroism, VTVH
MCD,) and their oxygen intermediates (nuclear resonance vibrational
spectroscopy, NRVS). The focus is now on: 1) understanding the mechanism of O2
activation by 1e- reduction (myoinositol oxygenase, the prototype that activates
O2 as bound superoxide); 2) developing/using NRVS/MCD to define the nature and
activation of peroxo-2FeIII intermediates; 3) extending Aim 2) to the high-
valent intermediates Q in soluble methane monooxygenase and X in ribonucleotide
reductase; 4) defining the mechanisms of O2 and NO reduction in flavin diiron
proteins and other related classes; 5) continuing to develop/use VTVH MCD and
other spectroscopies to understand structure/function correlations in new
classes of these enzymes. These studies over a wide range of binuclear iron
enzymes establish general principles utilized by multicenter enzymes for O2
activation and in directing catalysis.