* 1404209
* Experimental Physics Research Program at Columbia University/Nevis Laboratories
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Emlyn Hughes, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2018
* USD 4,510,000.00

Overview: The principal goal of experiments in modern particle physics is to
uncover new physics that underlies the Standard Model. Possible approaches
include the study of physics processes at the highest available collision
energies at accelerators or through studies of the very rare interactions of
neutrinos. The Columbia Particle Physics group tackles both directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of physics at the highest available
collision energies: A goal of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (the LHC)
at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the Higgs Boson,
recently discovered there in 2012, and to discover new physics beyond the
Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals are relevant to the
understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting
fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as
we do now. To meet the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new
detectors and accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and
analytical methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader
impact for the training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement
of technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years represent a transition of the LHC
physics program from a collision energy of 8 TeV data-taking and operation, to
extended operations and data taking at nearly double the energy, 13-14 TeV. Over
a thousand scientists from the United States are involved with this scientific
program on several major experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbia team is
one of the leading groups participating in the ATLAS experiment at CERN. Their
contributions include extensive involvement in the scientific and technical
management of the experiment, substantial contributions to the maintenance and
operations and upgrades of the key detectors for energy measurement, the Liquid
Argon Calorimetry. In the search for new physics, the group is deeply involved
in QCD (jet) studies including boosted jet technology, Standard Model and Beyond
the Standard Model studies of events with pairs of vector bosons (WW, ZZ and WZ)
in the final state to search for new resonant states, gravitons and
supersymmetry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Neutrino Physics:
Another major question is what happened to all the antimatter in the universe?
Fundamental symmetry arguments suggest that matter and antimatter should have
been produced in equal abundance in the early universe, but now all we see is
matter. A key to unraveling this mystery may lie with elusive particles called
neutrinos, which are abundant in the universe, but which barely interact with
matter. There are three of these particles known. Why three? And what are the
masses of these particles? Are there more? Experiments are underway to
understand these phenomena and to see if more than three neutrinos
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbia group is completing is contributions to
an earlier reactor-based neutrino experiment called Double CHOOZ and is now
heavily involved in a new experiment named MicroBOONE, which is coming online at
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Illinois. This program will
address several of the key questions in neutrino physics including the search of
additional neutrinos as well as advance an important new technology for the
field, the Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber. The Columbia group has major
responsibilities for the readout electronics of the Time Projection Chamber and
triggering system, detector simulation, data acquisition software, and physics
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A principal focus of the
Columbia group over many years and strengthened with this award is the training
of undergraduate students through their highly successful Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) summer program. This program has demonstrated a
commitment to the inclusion of under-represented groups, including many students
from undergraduate-only institutions. Follow-up tracking has shown an impressive
rate of success for graduates of their programs to pursue advanced degrees in
STEM fields.