* 1404716
* The Response of Brain Cells to Traumatic Injury
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Wolchok, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 395,722.00

Traumatic brain injury is a diverse and complex injury that affects 1.7 million
Americans annually. Survivors frequently have permanent cognitive loss,
behavioral issues, and emotional disturbances that affect them throughout their
life. These life-altering changes are likely caused by damage to the cells of
the brain that occur in response to injury. What remains unclear is how the
behavior of brain cells is influenced by the events that occur during injury. To
explore the response of brain cells to traumatic brain injury the research team
has developed a novel bench top crash tester. Similar in concept to the full
scale crash test systems used by the automotive industry, the bench top system
will be used to apply impact conditions to populations of brain cells grown in
the lab. The knowledge gained from this research program could help illuminate
the poorly understood cellular changes that follow traumatic brain injuries and
help guide the development of new therapies. The project will have broader
impacts on neuroscience, biomedical engineering, and the healthcare field. The
research will be complemented by integrated educational projects at the
undergraduate and high school academic levels that are designed to motivate
scientific participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrocytes are ubiquitous cells
throughout brain tissue that play an essential role in neuronal survival. Yet,
the mechanobiology of astrocytes, and in particular how their neuro-supportive
role is affected by the mechanical stimuli that are generated during traumatic
brain injury is not well understood. This research program will explore the
mechanobiology of astrocytes, and investigate the hypothesis that the neuro-
degenerative extracellular matrix environment produced by astrocytes following
traumatic brain injury is triggered by mechanical stimuli. To explore this
hypothesis, the research team will employ a custom impact bioreactor and cell
culture system to (1) precisely apply traumatic brain injury mimetic impacts to
populations of astrocytes in culture and (2) concentrate and collect the soluble
(growth factors and cytokines) and insoluble (extracellular matrix) molecules
released in response to impact loading. An improved understanding of the
relationship between impact stimuli and the production of soluble and insoluble
molecules will help elucidate the role astrocytes play in the neuro-degeneration
processes that follow traumatic brain injury.