* 1404849
* SusChEM: Carbohydrate Recognition in Type B Carbohydrate Binding Modules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Thomas Dziubla, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Plant cell walls are constructed from a solid polymer of carbohydrate molecules
called cellulose. Microbes produce enzymes capable of breaking down the
cellulose into individual sugar molecules, which can then be used in chemical
processes to make fuel. The enzymes often consist of at least two domains: one
responsible for cleaving chemical bonds and one responsible for locating the
cellulose surface (Carbohydrate Binding Modules or CBMs). CBMs also help the
enzyme differentiate between perfect, crystalline regions and imperfect, non-
crystalline regions, yet how the structure of the protein is capable of this
distinction remains unknown. Understanding how this happens will enable
development of new biotechnology for biofuels production as well as many other
applications. This study will train graduate and undergraduate students in the
development of realistic protein-carbohydrate models and in advanced
thermodynamic calculations. This project will also be integrated into an
outreach program intended to promote interest in high performance computing
among underrepresented researchers and provide the necessary tools to generate
successful results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-EPSCoR and the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division are funding Dr. Christina Payne from
the University of Kentucky to determine the mechanisms of carbohydrate
recognition in CBMs and the means by which these proteins are capable of binding
non-crystalline cellulose more tightly than soluble oligomers. Molecular
dynamics simulations and enhanced sampling free energy methods will be used to
evaluate the molecular-level origins of oligomeric carbohydrate recognition
within and across three families of cellulose-specific, Type B CBMs. Non-
crystalline cellulose-binding CBMs will be modeled bound to the insoluble
substrate, and alchemical free energy pathways will be used to determine the
free energy of binding to non-crystalline cellulose. Molecular dynamics
simulations of a tandem CBM construct in solution and in proximity to
representative non-crystalline cellulose substrate will be used to relate
findings from the individual modules to the tandem construct behavior. Principle
component analysis and elastic network modeling will uncover residue correlation
and mechanical coupling contributing to cooperative binding and avidity. The
outcome of this study will provide an unprecedented level of insight into the
complex solid and soluble carbohydrate substrate recognition mechanisms of CBMs,
the findings of which hold considerable promise for enhancing biomass conversion
technology.