* 1404342
* Collaborative Research: Equipment for and Running of the PSI MUSE Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Evangeline Downie, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 9,150.00

A fundamental goal of subatomic physics is the precise determination of the
physical properties of subatomic particles. The radius of the proton is one of
these properties. The radius can be measured by scattering electrons or muons
from protons, or by measuring the energy levels of hydrogen or muonic hydrogen,
an atom in which the electron is replaced by a muon. To date, the radius has
been measured by scattering of electrons, and by the energy levels of hydrogen
and muonic hydrogen. The muonic measurements disagree with the electronic
measurements, an issue known as "the proton radius puzzle." The discrepancy has
attracted wide attention, because it may indicate the existence of previously
unobserved and unexpected differences between the interactions of muons and
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dedicated MUon proton Scattering Experiment
(MUSE), which will run at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland and
directly compare the scattering of muons and electrons from protons, is highly
anticipated by experts in the field for its potential to resolve the puzzle.
This project will cover the prototyping and development of several crucial
components of the MUSE experiment detectors. This project will involve the
training of students and young scientists, at the undergraduate, graduate, post-
doctoral, and junior faculty levels. The institutions involved in this project
have trained large numbers of students of each type, including from minority
populations. The training they have received in the process of doing basic
research has led to careers in a variety of areas, from medical physics to
national security, in addition to continued work in fundamental physics
research. The MUSE experiment will broaden the perspective of American students
by having them work in an international collaboration at an international
laboratory, which will prepare them effectively to become prominent global
scientists of the next generation. With the broad interest in the proton radius
puzzle, MUSE has the potential to be broadly inspirational beyond the current
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment uses a mixed beam of
electrons, muons, and pions. The measurement requires high precision and small
systematic errors. This project will build and test the components of the
detector system. These include scintillation fiber detectors to measure the
trajectories of incoming particles, Cerenkov detectors for particle
identification, GEM detectors for precise positioning, straw tube detectors for
measuring the trajectories of scattered particles, and scintillation detectors
for particle identification of the scattered particles. In addition, a liquid
hydrogen target will be developed. Development and testing of these detectors
will demonstrate that the required precision can be obtained.