* 1404926
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Machining-Induced Influences to Ultra-Fine Grained Pure Titanium for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

This collaborative research award supports fundamental research on machining of
ultra-fine grained pure titanium for biomedical applications. The research will
test the hypothesis that machining induces microstructure changes in severe
plastic deformation-processed ultra-fine grained metals, which affects their
functionality and cell-material interaction performance. Specifically, key
research activities include fabricating bulk ultra-fine grained titanium using
equal channel angular extrusion, characterizing the machining-induced
microstructure change and functionality variation in terms of grain size,
dislocation density, residual stress, and corrosion behavior, and investigating
machining-induced cell-material interaction alterations in terms of osteoblast
cell adhesion and proliferation. Ultra-fine grained titanium bars will be
studied because of titanium's promising use for medical implants and
prosthetics.

Research results will provide knowledge and understanding of machining-induced
material property variations and functionality alterations of severe plastic
deformation-processed bulk ultra-fine grained titanium. The methodology will
contribute to the adoption of ultra-fine grained metals in the healthcare
industry requiring high strength and corrosion resistance and the automobile
industry requiring high strength-to-weight ratios. This collaborative research
project features a unique collaboration among materials processing, machining,
and biomedical manufacturing researchers. The research activities will promote
advanced manufacturing for healthcare applications as well as disciplinary
education in materials, materials processing, and manufacturing through
curriculum development. The research will also positively impact the
participation of diverse groups and promotion of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics activities at the University of Florida, Texas A&M,
and Georgia Tech.