* 1404125
* Waveguide QED: Photon Correlations in Strongly Coupled Open Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Harold Baranger, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Correlations among photons are typically very weak: because photons do not
interact with each other, the position of one photon does not depend on the
position of another photon. However, if 'matter' is present with which the
photons strongly interact, the matter mediates an effective interaction between
the photons-- the first photon strongly affects the matter which then affects
the second photon-- that then leads to photon-photon correlation. The matter can
take a wide variety of forms, such as atoms, quantum dots, or superconducting
qubits. Interactions in one dimension (1D) are particularly interesting since
the photons cannot miss each other which often leads to enhanced correlations.
Interest in these quantum optics phenomena in one dimension, dubbed 'waveguide
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED)', or "waveguide QED",, has rapidly grown in recent
years, driven notably by the fact that several such experimental systems can now
be made with relatively strong interactions. Examples include tapered fibers
coupled to atoms, microwave transmission lines coupled to superconducting
qubits, and semiconductor dielectric waveguides coupled to quantum dots. Photon
correlations in multi-qubit waveguide systems will be studied. Theoretically
much is now known about a single atom or qubit interacting with 1D photons, and
so the time is ripe for considering photonic waveguide systems with more complex
matter. First, situations in which a few two-level-systems (qubits or atoms,
say) interact with 1D light will be studied with the aim of describing the
specifically quantum properties of the light that can be produced (non-classical
light). Then, the case of many qubits (a large amount of matter) will be
considered with the idea that new phases of the light/matter system may be
possible. Phase transitions in driven systems, called dynamical phase
transitions, are receiving increasing attention; the waveguide QED system may be
a way to realize different kinds of dynamical phases. The research in this
project connects to several other broad fields. First, nanophotonic devices
often involve two-level systems and 1D modes as building blocks. The new
physical effects studied here will lead to a better understanding of such
elements and may lead to qualitatively new devices. Second, the proposed
structures in their superconducting qubit/microwave version constitute quantum
meta-materials, a rapidly developing offshoot of the enormous interest in meta-
materials generally in recent years. Third, quantum networks for quantum
information purposes involve elements that look exactly like the waveguide QED
systems studied here. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of this research is the
correlations among photons in a waveguide caused by their interaction with
discrete quantum objects, such as atoms, quantum dots, or qubits. Photon
correlations caused by strong light-matter interaction have been studied
extensively in the context of relatively closed cavities. In contrast, one-
dimensional (1D) waveguides are quantum open systems, in some of which,
nevertheless, it may soon be possible to achieve strong coupling to atoms or
qubits. In this theoretical work photon correlations in multi-qubit waveguide
systems will be investigated. Specifically, three areas will be studied. First,
nonclassical light and time delay for few qubit systems will be studied. The
photon correlations (coherences) will be calculated for several few qubit
situations involving up to 10 two-level or three-level systems. An immediate
result will be the change in the properties of the non-classical light generated
as a function of number of qubits - non-classical features are expected to be
enhanced, though the interplay with interference effects may be complicated.
Three-level systems introduce a new aspect: time-delay. The use of this for
enhancing interaction or interference effects (interferometry) will be
evaluated. Second, for many qubit systems, the question of whether dynamical
phase transitions can produce new states of light will be studied. An infinite
system with sparse periodic, disordered, or dense atoms or qubits brings in the
possibility of a new state of light. Since the system is necessarily driven,
this would involve a dynamical phase transition. Whether such a transition can
take place in a waveguide QED system will be evaluated. Finally, quantum optics
phenomena with DC electrical transport will be studied. Electromagnetic
radiation along a chain of Josephson junctions coupled to a superconducting
qubit is a new waveguide QED system. If time permits, the possibility of probing
the system by electrical transport through a weakly coupled probe junction, thus
revealing the quantum optics properties, will be investigated. Several methods
will be used to tackle these problems. Tasks 1 and 3 can be started with exact
methods that were developed previously, and then will be continued with
numerical propagation of pulses. Both the few and many qubit problems will be
approached with a slave-boson mean field theory and Keldysh quantum field
theory. The comparison with the exact methods in the few qubit cases will
provide an important cross-check.