* 1404855
* Ocean 2YC: Expanding a Community of Oceanography Two Year College Instructors
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Allison Beauregard Schwartz, Northwest Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2014
* USD 29,007.00

Twenty two community college oceanography faculty will be supported to attend a
workshop and participate in a session at a 2014 joint conference of the American
Society of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO), The Oceanography Society (TOS) and
the Oceans Section of the American Geophysical Union (AGU). The workshop will
focus on teaching ocean sciences at Two Year Colleges (2YC) and the conference
is a bi-annual, joint meeting that brings together a large percentage of the
national and international oceanographic science community.

Community colleges are a critical part of our educational system, and serve
almost half (or approximately 8.2 million) of all U.S. undergraduate students
(National Science Foundation, 2012). Further, these programs serve a substantial
portion of minority students, with 32% of students enrolled in community
colleges being an ethnic minority and 61% being female (American Association of
Community Colleges, 2012). Yet, community college faculties rarely have access
to professional development funds that allow for national conference attendance
and the critical interactions that lead to higher quality instruction (Geo2YC
Workshop, 2010). Community college oceanography faculty face some startling
challenges in their classrooms, including lack of access to current scientific
research, lack of equipment, and an extremely large range in student interest
and abilities in one course section.

In order to encourage teaching of ocean sciences at 2YC and the development of
connections between 2YC faculty and ocean scientists, a workshop on teaching
oceanography will be held prior to the conference and a session on
"Undergraduate ocean science education in the 21st century: an exploration of
successful practices" will be held during the conference. This effort also
contributes to the development of educational communities that will make use of
Ocean Observing Initiative data.