* 1404895
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Documenting Early Eocene environmental and climatic change in southwestern Wyoming from a paleobotanical perspective
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Steven Manchester, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,467.00

The Bridger Formation (~49 Ma) in southwestern Wyoming is ideally situated for
examining paleobotanical and climate changes in the Eocene. While this formation
has played an important role in the understanding of extinct mammals and
reptiles, the abundant fossil plants have been largely overlooked, despite their
potential for documenting the environment. The Bridger fossil flora provides the
opportunity for unusually complete reconstruction of the original flora, because
it preserves all plant organs including leaves, wood, flowers, fruits, seeds,
and pollen. The fossilized plants will be examined to assess the species
composition, paleoclimate, and paleoecology with a combination of botanical,
paleontological, and geological approaches. These results will be compared to
other Eocene floras from the greater Rocky Mountains and west coast of North
America. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This work is important because the Bridger
flora likely has many species that evolved and contributed to the modern
vegetation of western North America. In addition, this work will document
vegetational changes in response to climate shifts. Research results will be
presented at upcoming conferences and published in appropriate journals in
addition to engaging the greater public with a free lecture in Wyoming near the
field site. A website will also be created for regular field and lab updates.
Co-PI Allen will design a small, temporary exhibit showcasing the Bridger flora
for display at the Florida Museum of Natural History and will continue to serve
there as a volunteer interpretive guide. Allen will also mentor an undergraduate
to provide him/her an opportunity to gain real research experience.