* 1404375
* Computational Studies of Multiorbital Model Hamiltonians for Iron-Based Superconductors  in Quasi  One-Dimensional Geometries.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Elbio Dagotto, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 435,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education focused
on studies of a family of iron-based materials most of which become
superconductors at low temperatures. Superconductors conduct electricity without
any power loss below a certain critical temperature. However, this critical
temperature for traditional superconductors discovered in the early 20th century
is very low (near absolute zero). If the critical temperature for
superconductivity could be raised to near room temperature, a plethora of novel
technological advances would instantly be possible. A milestone in the quest to
raise the critical temperature of superconductors was achieved in the late 1980s
with the discovery of a family of copper-based ceramic-like magnetic compounds
(the so-called cuprates) with critical temperatures that are halfway between
absolute zero and room temperature. While the mechanism that produces
superconductivity in traditional superconductors is fairly well understood,
achieving a fundamental understanding of the mechanism that leads to
superconductivity in the cuprates has been a significant challenge. A new piece
of the puzzle of high temperature superconductivity was added by the discovery
of iron-based superconducting materials in 2008. The iron-based family of
materials is very rich and their properties fall somewhere between those of
traditional superconductors and the cuprates. Understanding the way in which
their crystal lattice, spatial arrangement of electrons, and magnetic degrees of
freedom interact to bring out the interesting properties of the iron-based
materials will shed light on the mechanism that leads to high temperature
superconductivity.

To achieve this goal new theoretical frameworks have to be established in order
to study systems where electrons with different spatial arrangements strongly
interact with each other. The goal of the present project is to develop models
that capture the essence of the iron-based materials and study them with
powerful computational approaches and analytical techniques in order to (i)
explain the emerging experimental data, and (ii) offer guidance to
experimentalists in their quest to synthetize materials with potential
technologically relevant properties. Another important aspect of this activity
is the training of PhD students who will learn how to use computation to solve
problems in condensed matter physics and materials science. A close connection
with young Latin American scientists, both residing in the USA and abroad, will
be developed. This is expected to contribute to an increase in the number of
young Hispanic researchers with an interest in physics, materials, and
computational science.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education focused
on model Hamiltonian studies of complex oxide materials that require a multi-
orbital Hubbard formalism for accurate description of their electronic
properties. The recent discovery of the iron-based high critical temperature
superconductors has established a new area of research where ideas based on
electronic mechanisms for superconductivity can be tested. Compared with the
superconducting copper oxide materials, in the iron pnictides and chalcogenides
several Fe 3d orbitals must be considered simultaneously for a proper
theoretical description of these compounds. Based on this motivation,
computational studies of model Hamiltonians for families of complex materials
that require a multi-orbital Hubbard formalism to describe their electronic
properties will be performed. The results of this effort will not only elucidate
the properties of iron-based superconductors, but they will also guide the study
of other materials that require a multi-orbital formalism.

The focus of the project will be on quasi-one-dimensional materials because
there are real materials with these characteristics, such as BaFe2Se3 (two-leg
ladders) and TlFeSe2 (chains), and because the computational calculations are
considerably more accurate in one dimensional geometries than in two. The many
body calculations will be performed by a combination of Density Matrix
Renormalization Group and Exact Diagonalization techniques, both addressing
static and dynamical quantities, but they will also be supplemented by Hartree-
Fock approximations in two dimensions. The physical aspects that will be
addressed include (i) construction of phase diagrams with varying the Hubbard
repulsion, Hund coupling, and electronic density with special focus on the
orbital-selective Mott transition; (ii) calculation of dynamical responses in
order to compare theory against angle-resolved photoemission and neutron
scattering experiments; (iii) investigation of pair formation and their dominant
channels, particularly in two-leg ladders; and (iv) studies of possible self-
organization tendencies in the electronic sector.

The investigations will address a variety of topics of current interest in
Condensed Matter Physics. The study of the phase diagrams of multi-orbital model
Hamiltonians for the iron-based superconductors will allow the PIs to pursue
conceptually novel areas of research involving exotic states with magnetic,
orbital, charge, and pairing ordering tendencies that will lead to an improved
view of complex materials that require a multi-orbital formalism for their
modeling. Another important aspect of this project is the training of PhD
students who will learn how to use computation to solve problems in condensed
matter physics and materials science. A close connection with young Latin
American scientists, both residing in the USA and abroad, will be developed.
This is expected to contribute to an increase in the number of young Hispanic
researchers with an interest in physics, materials, and computational science.