* 1404489
* 3D Near Field e-Writing with Submicron Resolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 310,000.00

This award supports fundamental research to advance capabilities of the Near
Field Electro-Writing process towards three-dimensional hierarchical structures
with sub-micron resolution through innovation in spatial control of the jet. The
working principal of this electro-writing process is based on near-field
electrospinning process, in which a continuous polymer fiber is
electrostatically jetted from solution or melt to a collector in close
proximity. Unique to this new process, a piezo-actuated auxiliary electrode will
be added near the spinneret to focus and precisely manipulate the jet;
conductivity of polymer inks will be monitored; and instability analysis and
fiber diameter modeling will be conducted to unlock the fundamentals of this new
process. The three PIs will combine their expertise in device engineering,
machine dynamics, materials chemistry and processing, mechanics, and instability
analysis to analyze the fundamental process mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new process could create complex hierarchical structures with unprecedented
accuracy that will benefit many applications in biomedical, micro-electronics,
and energy fields. The knowledge obtained from the modeling work will add to the
understanding of the physics of sub-micron fiber generation/evolution, its
interaction with receiving base and its manipulation and control through
external electric fields. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained through research and education activities to become the next generation
work force implementing the new tools and capabilities in industry.
Electrospinning techniques will be introduced to undergraduate courses as a
platform to support student-driven innovations for course projects, which can be
spun off to undergraduate research. Results will be disseminated to the
community through publications and public lectures.