* 1404230
* Quantum entanglement in Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Matthew P.A. Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2018
* USD 435,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education
aimed to investigate how entanglement, a fundamental concept of quantum
mechanics, can be used to advance understanding of quantum mechanical states of
many particle systems such as electrons and atoms. The quantum mechanical states
of two particles that are well separated in space can be intertwined leading to
what appeared to Einstein as "spooky action at a distance." The concept of
quantum entanglement is now emerging as a new lens through which to view systems
of many, interacting quantum mechanical particles. The novel concept of quantum
entanglement entropy allows entanglement to be quantified, and in the past 5-10
years has served as a meeting point at the intersection of several fields,
including quantum information science, quantum computing, quantum gravity, cold
atomic gases and condensed matter physics. Entanglement entropy can serve as a
powerful diagnostic to distinguish different quantum mechanical states. It is
proving especially useful in computer simulations of systems of many particle
systems. This award supports the PI in his aim to advance the conceptual
underpinnings of quantum entanglement, and will explore instances when
entanglement might defy the conventional wisdom that temperature "washes away"
characteristic signatures of quantum mechanics in the properties of materials -
perhaps even in ordinary water. The PI will continue his efforts to bring
quantum computing, which seeks to prepare and manipulate quantum mechanical
states to perform the logic operations of a computer, to the general public
through accessible public lectures.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education aimed
to investigate novel collective quantum phenomena and quantum entanglement in
three important areas of contemporary quantum condensed matter physics.
Increased understanding of many-body entanglement will undoubtedly have impact
on continuing efforts to control quantum information in the laboratory. In this
project, the PI will focus primarily on three research efforts: 1. Developing
and refining a new approach to access novel phases of strongly correlated
systems of bosons, spins, and fermions by forming and condensing dyons, bound
states of electrical and magnetic charges. 2. Seeking to access and explore the
Mott transition, a quantum phase transition between a metal and a Mott
insulator. The Mott transition will be approached by using a combination of
state-of-the art numerical simulations and theory. 3. Initiating a new effort
exploring entanglement of finite energy-density states of many-body quantum
systems, focusing on the entanglement embodied in the wavefunction sign
structure. Possible new phenomena, that might occur in finite-temperature fluids
once quantum effects are fully taken into account, will be explored with
possible implications in the context of astrophysics. The PI will continue his
efforts to bring quantum computing, exciting materials-related phenomena, and
novel states matter to the general public through accessible public lectures.