* 1404205
* RUI: A Program of Undergraduate Participation in CUORE and the Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Gutierrez, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 186,300.00

Neutrinos are amongst the most abundant particles in the Universe and yet we do
not know many of their properties. For example, we do not know their absolute
mass scale or their particle-antiparticle nature. Because of their abundance,
even a small mass could have far-reaching consequences for understanding their
role in the evolution of our Universe. Knowing if neutrinos are their own
antiparticles could have implications in understanding the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of our Universe. Neutrino-less double beta decay (NLDBD) experiments
address these two fundamental questions. Double beta decay is a rare nuclear
decay that has been measured in several nuclei when it is energetically
favorable. Some nuclei are stable against ordinary beta decay but are unstable
for double beta decay in which two neutrons in the nucleus are simultaneously
converted to protons and two electrons are emitted. Double beta decay can
proceed through several modes. The experimentally measured process, the two-
neutrino mode in which two electron antineutrinos are also emitted, is
completely described by known physics. NLDBD is an as-yet-undetected decay that
involves no neutrinos in the final state and necessarily would indicate that
neutrinos are their own antiparticle. The rate of such decays determines the
scale for the effective neutrino mass. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUORE (Cryogenic
Underground Observatory for Rare Events) is an experiment to search for NLDBD in
the isotope 130-Te and is currently being built at the Gran Sasso National
Laboratory in Assergi, Italy. CUORE is an array of TeO2 crystals used as
cryogenic bolometers for the purpose of particle detection. The crystals act as
both the source and the absorbing calorimetric material. These kinds of
detectors offer good energy resolution and efficiencies and are well-suited for
NLDBD searches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the PI to continue
to provide opportunities for undergraduate students to participate on the CUORE
experiment. This will involve tasks such as monitoring the gluing of thermistors
and heaters on the 988 crystals, helping to assemble the calibration system and
elements of the electronics and assisting with cryostat alignment, with tests of
the various subsystems of the detector and with cryostat cool down or warm up
diagnostics. This will give students invaluable experience working with a
cutting-edge physics experiment in a world-class underground laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An exciting sector of public outreach that Cal Poly will
pursue is to develop an interactive visualization scheme for CUORE physics. This
software will serve as a channel for the public to gain insight into the
scientific process and explore the mysteries of particle physics. Through Cal
Poly's Center for Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education they will help
local teachers develop project-based-learning modules for high school physics
courses that incorporate the underlying physics of CUORE.