* 1405688
* II-EN: Hadoop NextGen Infrastructure for Heterogeneous Approaches to Data-Intensive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jimmy Lin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,852.00

The ability for organizations to process enormous quantities of data and to
extract insights from those data has revolutionized commerce and science. This
phenomenon, known as "big data", is shaping the very fabric of our society. Our
insatiable appetite for more data, and knowledge from the data, requires
significant computational infrastructure for storage and analytical
capabilities. Continued investments in infrastructure for academic researchers
are vital from two perspectives: From the research perspective, the university's
ability to help advance the state of the art in big data technologies is
dependent on access to the right computational resources. From the educational
perspective, the university's mission to train the next generation of scientists
and engineers cannot be successfully accomplished without big data
infrastructure that is becoming essential to their careers. The goal of this
project is to provide computational resources to researchers at the University
of Maryland to continuing envisioning the future of big
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern empirical approach to tackling many
challenges in natural language processing, information retrieval, data mining,
machine learning, and other related domains involves exploiting large amounts of
data to learn statistical models that are able to capture characteristics of the
problem. A necessary ingredient to this "big data" approach is scalable
infrastructure that can distribute computations across a cluster of machines.
Hadoop, the open-source implementation of MapReduce, has achieved widespread
adoption as the de facto platform for data-intensive
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking, MapReduce excels at large-
scale content analysis in an offline, batch setting. However, this is not
enough: we need a data-intensive computing platform that supports heterogeneous
models of computation. Hadoop NextGen (aka YARN), provides exactly this: it
allows a physical cluster to support a wide range of computational models via a
generic resource allocation framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports the acquisition of a Hadoop NextGen cluster at the University of
Maryland to support the following activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To explore
computational models beyond MapReduce, including&lt;br/&gt; batch/online
tradeoffs in machine learning, real-time streaming&lt;br/&gt; computations, and
graph processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To sustain innovations in algorithms
for content analysis as well&lt;br/&gt; as modeling implicit and latent
relationships between heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt; content (text, images, graphs,
etc.) at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To exploit novel hardware architectures
for data-intensive&lt;br/&gt; computing (e.g., Graphics Processing Units and
Solid State Drives).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These resources will help the
Laboratory for Computational Linguistics and Information Processing (CLIP) and
collaborators at the University of Maryland sustain and enhance its successful
record of innovation and the integration of research and education.