* 1405525
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Connecting dryland soil trace gas emissions of NOx, N2O and CO2 to  microbial community dynamics along a nitrogen deposition gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2016
* George Jenerette, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 19,745.00

The importance of species diversity and community composition for ecosystem
processes has been shown in plants and animals, but fewer studies have focused
on soil microorganisms. Soil microorganisms may play an important role in
processes contributing to climate change and air pollution through production of
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Scientists
currently estimate the existence of millions to billions of microbial species,
but how changes in species composition relate to ecosystem function is not well
understood. This study will combine measurements of soil gas production with
advanced techniques for DNA analysis to examine diversity of soil bacteria and
fungi to address the following questions: 1) How does air pollution affect
species composition of soil microorganisms and what is the impact on ecosystem
processes? 2) To what extent does microbial community composition influence
feedbacks to climate change and air pollution? This study will use experimental
manipulations in the Colorado Desert of southern California to investigate how
temperature, soil moisture and nutrient availability regulate soil
microbiological feedbacks. The results will increase predictive power for the
impact of future climate scenarios on ecosystem processes, and contribute to a
deeper understanding of microbial ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drylands cover
greater than 30% of the global land surface. Increasing human activity in
drylands intensifies air pollution with unknown consequences. Knowledge of the
relationships between microbial community structure and soil feedbacks to global
change drivers can inform land management strategies and be incorporated into
agricultural practices to reduce pollution and improve efficiency. Furthermore,
this research will inform regulatory bodies so that soil feedbacks are
considered when emission standards are set. Finally, the project will provide
new educational opportunities to a wide audience, including graduate,
undergraduate, and primary students from local schools. These opportunities will
feature new environmental genetic techniques that have only recently become
available. The skills and knowledge gained from the study will be incorporated
into community outreach events that aim to excite children from local elementary
and high schools about science and college opportunities.