* 1405134
* Nanofluid Rechargeable Flow Battery
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gary Koenig, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 332,604.00

A major limitation of electric vehicles is that for most battery designs
recharging cells can take a few hours, resulting in range anxiety for consumers.
An alternative possibility is to use a flow battery, where fresh electrolyte
could be pumped in and spent electrolyte pumped out at a dedicated refueling
station. Unfortunately, current flow battery chemistries do not have high enough
volumetric energy density to be practical for transportation applications. The
proposed project will investigate a new type of flow battery that has the
potential to drastically increase the volumetric energy density relative to
current flow battery systems. Unlike current flow batteries where the energy is
stored in dissolved metal salts, the proposed system will store energy in solid
nanoparticles. The system studied in this proposal has the potential to increase
the energy density of flow batteries by a factor of greater than 5, making it
possible to use these flow batteries in transportation applications. Such an
energy density improvement could both enable flow batteries for electric
vehicles and would make the time to recharge an electric vehicle battery
comparable to the time it takes to fill a gas tank. This project will also
involve the creation of a remote flow battery experiment, where anyone can
perform an experiment on a flow battery system in the PI's lab by accessing a
publicly available website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
investigate the structure-property relationships of a flow battery where the
electrolyte is comprised of a nanofluid with active electrode materials that are
solid transition metal nanoparticles. The approach relies on synthesizing
monodisperse, spherical electrode particles that will be used as the active
materials in the nanofluid. These particles will be characterized
electrochemically and rheologically in relation to application in a flow battery
system. The researchers will also explore different designs of the electrode
geometry that the nanofluid will come into contact with to optimize the energy
and power delivered from the nanofluid. The system will result in a tradeoff
between maximizing energy density and minimizing viscosity. The goal is to have
high active material loading in the nanofluid while avoiding impractical
operating viscosities and also maximizing collisions between the active material
nanoparticles and the electrode. This project will potentially contribute to the
fields of colloid stability in electrolyte solutions, battery electrode
materials, and flow battery systems. This nanofluid system should be extendable
to a variety of battery chemistries, which would open up a new field of research
in the battery community. Implementing the nanofluid battery system would also
result in new parallel fields of study, including thermal management of this
unconventional energy storage system.