* 1405728
* Dynamics of Wave Structures in Fluid Dynamics, Oscillatory Media, and Plasma Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Toan Nguyen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 90,000.00

The research will investigate the dynamics of boundary layers, coherent
structures, and plasma equilibria. These objects are expressed as special
solutions to mathematical models involving partial differential equations and
have been widely used in various scientific disciplines. They are for instance
of fundamental importance in biology, engineering, and physics. Utilizing
boundary layer theory, engineers are able to significantly simplify the analysis
of fluid flows near a solid body, such as a ship, or an airplane. This has
proven exceptionally useful in aerodynamics. The PI will develop mathematical
tools to study the validity of boundary layer simplifications of viscous flows,
and thereby provide a deeper understanding of physical observations and
laboratory experiments. The PI will also establish mathematical criteria, under
which coherent structures in oscillatory media and equilibria of a plasma are
well behaved under disturbances. The search for a stability criterion is
important in practice, for instance, in helping engineers design stable devices,
which could otherwise be damaged by unstable waves.

The research focuses on mathematical questions concerned with the dynamics of
boundary layers in fluid dynamics, the stability of coherent structures in
oscillatory media, and the magnetic confinement of a plasma. The mathematical
equations to be considered include the incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes
equations, general reaction-diffusion systems, and the relativistic Vlasov-
Maxwell systems. Generic boundary layers of the Navier-Stokes equations are
analytically shown to be spectrally unstable for sufficiently large Reynolds
numbers. The PI will develop a nonlinear theory, building on the Fourier-Laplace
transformed approach and the Evans function techniques, to prove the invalidity
of boundary layer approximations in the vanishing viscosity limit. The research
will also provide an understanding of the complete dynamics of nonlinear
solutions near spectrally stable source defects. The PI will develop a novel
nonlinear iteration scheme to study the stability properties of time-periodic
traveling wave solutions, based on the spatial-dynamics techniques and the
pointwise one-dimensional Green's function approach. Finally, the PI will
initiate new investigations on magnetic mechanisms to confine a plasma modeled
by the relativistic Vlasov-Maxwell systems.