* 1405862
* II-EN: Infrastructure for Computer Architecture Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Resit Sendag, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 63,804.00

The research enabled by the proposed infrastructure enhancement is directly
related to the major challenges that face the microprocessor industry.
Dissemination of the resulting tools and results will accelerate the progress of
hardware and software multi-core research. It will also increase the
understanding of dynamic data reference and branch behavior in computer
programs, which as a result, will provide insights into the design of future
hardware prediction mechanisms. The infrastructure enhancement will have an
impact not only on research productivity but also on education activities. The
additional resources will permit the introduction of more simulation projects
and hands-on multiprocessor design in upper levels of the curriculum, and at the
same time broaden the participation of undergraduate students in research
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of high-performance FPGA
development boards and small-scale servers will be used by the researchers at
the Microarchitecture Research Insights Laboratory at the University of Rhode
Island to support ongoing computer architecture research projects on FPGA-
accelerated simulation and pattern-centric hardware prediction mechanisms.
Results and tools from the research enabled by this acquisition will enable
exploration of architectural innovations in future multi-core systems by
providing much needed modeling and simulation solutions on FPGAs that overcome
software simulation performance bottleneck. The effort will greatly enhance the
ability of faculty and students to do computationally intensive research
projects and will provide high throughput for tasks arising from computer
architecture research done by simulation.