* 1405709
* Arithmetic of Rationally Simply Connected Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Jason Starr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 168,000.00

Polynomial equations are ubiquitous in science and engineering. Particularly
important are the kinds of polynomial equations that arise in fields like
cryptography and computer science, where the inputs and the outputs of the
polynomials are fractions or their near-cousins (elements in a "global field").
For these equations, it is important not only to know that there are solutions
in fractions, but also to know that there are many solutions, and that we can
find such solutions efficiently in a finite amount of runtime (i.e., there are
efficient bounds on the size of the numerators and denominators of some fraction
solution). Investigating these questions is a major goal of algebraic geometry.
Remarkably, ideas from geometry, particularly ideas suggested by physics, give a
proof of existence of integral solutions for many special polynomial equations
over global function fields. The main goal of this project is to exploit this
advance and prove the veracity of certain conjectured bounds on rational
solutions of these special polynomial equations ("rationally simply connected"
systems of equations) over global function fields, thus giving an efficient
algorithm for finding rational solutions. In addition, there are several
educational and training goals: improving the writing of math students through
weekly meetings, helping with a summer math camp for high school students, and
holding twice-annual one-day training workshops for math students coinciding
with one an important weekend workshop series in algebraic geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the main objective is to study the Batyrev-
Manin conjecture on asymptotics of rational points of bounded height over global
function fields for the special class of "rationally simply connected"
varieties: a class that includes, for instance, the projective homogeneous
varieties so ubiquitous in representation theory. Recent work relates rational
points over global function fields to geometric properties of moduli spaces of
rational curves on lifts of the varieties over the complex numbers. By
exploiting this, there is hope to give efficient height bounds on rational
points implied by the Batyrev-Manin Conjecture, and hopefully to settle the
conjecture in important special cases. Secondary goals are to understand the
Picard groups of these moduli spaces (roughly, the different possible "height
functions"), and to extend the amazingly successful story of Neron models to a
more general class of varieties than Abelian varieties. Broader impacts include
continuing and extending a mathematical writing and professional development
seminar begun by the PI, to continue the partial support of the PI for the
Mathematics Summer Camp at Stony Brook University, and to institute a new series
of one-day training workshops for graduate students timed to coincide with the
AGNES series of twice-annual weekend workshops in algebraic geometry.