* 1405062
* Photochemical Delivery and Metal Mediated Reactions of Bioactive Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 153,000.00

It is now well established that the gaseous molecules nitric oxide, carbon
monoxide and carbon disulfide are important regulators of many biological
functions in mammals and, more specifically, in humans. For examples, nitric
oxide is a regulator of blood pressure, while nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, and
sulfur compounds such as carbon disulfide have key, but still poorly understood,
roles in wound healing and inflammation. The continuing research represented by
this project encompasses two related topics. The first is concerned with
elucidating the fundamental chemistry that defines the physiology of these
species, while the second is concerned with designing new technology to deliver
such bioactive small molecules (BSMs) to specific biological targets on demand.
The former topic involves the application of modern instrumentation to examine
rates of the chemical reactions of these BSMs with biologically relevant metal
centers, while the latter is focused on utilizing light as a trigger for
controlling the timing, location and dosage of BSM release at specific sites.
Graduate and undergraduate student researchers in these projects acquire
interdisciplinary training in micro- and nano-materials science, chemical
biology, photochemistry and chemical synthesis and kinetics. They also are
active in K-12 outreach activities, where they share the excitement of their
research activities with teachers and students in local schools.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the NSF Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Peter C. Ford from the University of California, Santa
Barbara for interdisciplinary investigations into new strategies and precursors
for photochemical delivery of the BSMs NO and CO to physiological targets and
for exploratory studies into delivery of the potentially bioactive molecule CS2.
Experimental methods will include syntheses of conjugates between BSM precursors
and chromophores including organic dyes and nano-materials for one- and 2-photon
excitation. Modern optical methods (ultra-fast laser studies, confocal
microscopy, etc.) will evaluate quantitative photosensitization mechanisms and
provide guidelines for design optimization, while in vitro (cell culture)
studies provide initial tests of biological viability. In collaborative studies,
the investigators will explore polymer-based nano- and micro-carriers for
delivery of BSM precursor-chromophore conjugates to specific biological sites.
The principles thus defined should be broadly applicable to delivery of other
bioactive molecules. In addition, stopped-flow and flash photolysis kinetics
spectroscopy, computations and collaborative low temperature matrix studies will
be used to elucidate fundamental mechanisms of BSM reactions with biologically
relevant metal-centered substrates. Evaluating such pathways is crucial to
defining the chemistry/physiology relationships of these complex systems.