* 1405719
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Audit Study to Understand Hiring Practices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Vincent Roscigno, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 11,060.00

Despite significant progress over the past few decades, women's workplace
achievements continue to lag behind those of men. Gender disparities are due, in
part, to occupational segregation - the social pattern in which men and women
occupy different, often unequal jobs, frequently in different industries.
Indeed, research indicates that occupational segregation is even more important
than within-job disparities in the unequal distribution of resources among men
and women. While there is significant evidence to suggest that women and men do
make different occupational choices, limited research exists on employers'
actual hiring practices in regard to gender. Thus, there are gaps in our
understanding of the extent of gender discrimination in the United States and
the role it plays in occupational segregation. By collecting data on employer
practices across the United States, this dissertation will investigate hiring
discrimination on the basis of gender in both white-collar and working-class
occupations and pinpoint characteristics associated with it. Analyses will
address whether hiring discrimination is heightened in working-class jobs, as
many scholars speculate, and thus, is a fundamental reason for relatively few
women and starker occupational segregation patterns in working-class jobs,
compared to white-collar jobs. This study will also examine whether labor market
conditions, such as job growth patterns and regional variation, affect the
degree of social closure mechanisms, an important yet understudied area in the
hiring literature. Lastly, the research will examine whether higher levels of
human capital can compensate for inequality derived from ascribed statuses
(i.e., sex) during the hiring process. This research advances gender
stratification and organizational theories by evaluating the role that merit
plays in hiring practices and has crucial, direct implications for employment
hiring and nationwide legal policies.

Utilizing a resumé audit study the research will investigate the presence of,
and contexts associated with, hiring gender discrimination in eight states
across five U.S. regions, and examine how qualifications moderate gender
discrimination in white-collar and working-class occupations. Resumé audit tests
provide compelling data for hiring discrimination because job choices,
qualifications and productivity levels are held constant between the two
candidates, only the gender changes. This project is based on 2,000 matched
pairs of resumés and will conduct analyses on the callback rates for the male
and female candidates and analyze results by occupation, labor market
conditions, occupational sex ratios, and regions.

There are many direct impacts that can develop from this research on
discrimination and work. There are plans to widely disseminate the findings in
both academic and public forums where these impacts can be maximized.
Additionally, valuable research experience will be provided to undergraduate
students working on this project. They will be directly involved in data
collection, and will have the opportunity to write an undergraduate thesis out
of preliminary data. In addition to learning about hiring discrimination, they
will be able to leverage their research and writing experience in future job or
graduate school opportunities.