* 1405599
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Species limits, hybrid zones, and systematics of the North American turtle genus Sternotherus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Leslie Rissler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,110.00

Biodiversity is typically measured by counting the number of species in an area
and the conservation status of species is assessed through periodic inventories
to measure gain or loss of species over time. However modern science has
discovered the prevalence of cryptic species. These are species that have few or
no obvious morphological distinguishing features, which traditionally define
species, but do not interbreed and therefore are separate biological species.
New genetic technologies can identify cryptic species and provide important
tools to more accurately measure biodiversity. The southeastern United States,
especially Alabama, is a hotspot of aquatic biodiversity, especially for
turtles. The North American turtle genus, Sternotherus, diversity has been
under-described taxonomically relative to other turtle lineages due to
morphological conservatism between and within species This project will
investigate the morphology and genetics of Sternotherus to identify cryptic
diversity and the evolutionary relationships among taxa. These data can be used
to make evidence based conservation planning decisions which can optimize the
use of funding to protect and conserve biodiversity. While accomplishing the
project goals, undergraduate students will be mentored in a variety of
biological sub-disciplines including field ecology, molecular biology, and
bioinformatics. Effort will be made to include students underrepresented in STEM
fields as well as Alabama natives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project
will test species limits and infer relationships within a poorly resolved and
imperiled turtle genus: Sternotherus. Sternotherus currently consists of four
species for which past studies have presented conflicting relationships. This
calls into question the taxonomic validity of some species and suggests that
other populations are cryptic taxa. The researchers will collect samples from
turtles across their entire distribution in the southeastern United States.
These turtles will be measured for many morphological characters including shape
and size. The researchers will perform genetic analyses using mtDNA and RAD-tag
sequencing on the turtle DNA. This research takes an integrative approach
considering gene history and hybridization for identifying species and species
relationships within Sternotherus. These data will be used to test 1) genus wide
species limits; 2) the role of hybridization between species; and, 3) species-
level relationships within this group of turtles. This integrative analytical
approach will resolve taxonomic relationships as well as identify incomplete
lineage sorting, rapid radiations, and low level gene flow which confounded
genetic signal in previous work