* 1405857
* Precision Studies of the Standard Model using Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Wouter Deconinck, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* James Thomas
* 07/31/2018
* USD 705,000.00

In the quest to understand the fundamental structure of matter, most physicists
have taken a reductionist approach by breaking down matter into its elementary
constituents: electrons, quarks, gluons, etc. In addition to these known
elementary particles that constitute the Standard Model of particle physics (our
current best theory of the fundamental particles of matter and their
interactions), there may exist more as-of-yet undiscovered elementary
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports efforts to precisely
measure so-called electroweak properties of the proton and of the electron in
two large experiments at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(Jefferson Lab). Discrepancies between these measurements and the predictions of
the Standard Model will point to new physical processes that are not yet
included in the Standard Model. In case of agreement certain extensions to the
Standard Model will be ruled out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision electroweak
measurements present a unique approach to test the Standard Model of particle
physics at low-energy electron accelerators. Jefferson Lab is currently the
world's leading laboratory for these parity-violating electron scattering
experiments, and is uniquely suited to complete the ambitious Qweak and MOLLER
experiments. The results of both experiments, by themselves but especially in
combination with the results from the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, will allow
us to constrain models of physics beyond the Standard
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Qweak experiment started in May 2010 and
collected data until May 2012. The experiment has performed the first
determination of the weak charge of the proton with only 5% of the available
data, and is aiming to make a precision measurement sensitive to physics beyond
the Standard Model with the full data set. The investigators will continue their
central role in the track reconstruction, data analysis, and simulation efforts
crucial to the successful completion of the experiment. The MOLLER experiment is
expected to run as early as 2017, and will measure the electroweak mixing angle
to a precision comparable to the best available high-energy measurements through
a measurement of the weak charge of the electron. The investigators will take a
leading role in the development of the track reconstruction detectors for the
MOLLER experiment, and the development of a novel type of electron beam
polarimeter based on Moller scattering in polarized atomic hydrogen gas. This
new polarimeter will allow the measurement of the electron polarization to the
required precision of 0.4% using a technique that will be applicable at other
electron accelerators as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are
working to increase economic and racial diversity in physics through specific
recruiting efforts for the William &amp; Mary REU program. The investigators are
committed to increasing interaction between the physics department and the
broader community through the organization of "PhysicsFest," a yearly physics
department open house, and through "Saturday Morning Physics," a regular public
outreach lecture series aimed at local middle and high school students.