* 1405871
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: An Open Platform for Internet Routing Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,589.00

The path that data takes across the Internet from its source to its destination
is a critical determiner of the service quality that a user experiences. The
path is controlled via routing, which is influenced by traffic engineering and
policy. Therefore, routing problems--instability, failures, circuitous paths--
have a critical impact on performance. Despite these issues, researchers and
network operators have difficulty studying Internet routing. Available vantage
points provide little visibility into how the networks interconnect, making it
difficult to assess the resilience and performance of existing paths. On top of
this limited visibility, researchers lack means to experiment with alternate
paths.

The infrastructure developed by this project will allow researchers and network
operators to observe Internet paths and to experiment with alternate approaches
to routing. The infrastructure consists of two synergistic tools: Transit Portal
allows an experimenter to make route announcements that influence current
routing, and Reverse Traceroute allows the experimenter to measure the resulting
paths. The PIs have used early versions of the infrastructure to improve
Internet performance, reliability, and diagnosis.

The project opens the infrastructure to use by the networking community and in
classrooms, providing a basis for understanding and improving the Internet. The
key components are 1) increasing the number of Transit Portal sites; 2) adding
support for Transit Portal experiments that join fully emulated networks to the
actual Internet; 3) upgrading and hardening the Reverse Traceroute code so that
it is useable by the broader community; and 4) improving experiment workflow by
scheduling and reusing measurements more efficiently.