* 1405286
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary ecology of a vertebrate-microbe symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2017
* Alison Gould, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2017
* USD 17,510.00

We will study co-evolution between a coral reef fish (Siphamia tubifer) and its
symbiotic, light-emitting bacterium (Photobacterium mandapamensis). To test the
hypothesis that the host fish?s ecology and behavior shape and maintain the
specificity of the fish?s association with the bacterium, this study will
determine the extent to which genetic differences exist among populations of
both the fish and bacterium, and how these differences correlate over space and
time. Work will be carried out on specimens of the fish collected from coral
reefs in Okinawa, Japan. We will use a recently developed method in population
genetics, restriction site-associated DNA sequencing, to determine the genetic
structures of populations of the fish and bacterium with fine-scale
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic associations between fish and
specific types of luminous bacteria are biologically important components of
many marine ecosystems, and their persistence depends on their biological
specificity. Understanding how specificity arises and is maintained is
especially important now, as changes in the marine environment, such as
increases in sea surface temperature and acidification, are occurring more
rapidly. These changes have the potential to de-couple symbiotic associations by
altering the ecology of both organisms. As a vertebrate ? microbe symbiosis,
this association is also being developed as an experimental model system for
learning how vertebrate animals, including humans, acquire, accommodate, and
function cooperatively with beneficial bacteria. This project will contribute to
scientific infrastructure by providing research training for undergraduate
students and will promote international research exchange with Japanese
scientists and students.