* 1405634
* CHS: Medium: Understanding and designing for online disclosure and its effects on well-being
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Janis Whitlock, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,203,821.00

From mundane details of daily life to tragic warnings of planned suicide, people
exchange a massive amount of personal information in social media that defies
traditional models of self-disclosure. This project will advance understanding
of personal information disclosure in social media contexts and will use this
information to develop well-being interventions designed to enhance self-
reflection and capacity to productively seek and offer support. Such
interventions benefit individuals and society overall by helping people know how
and from where to seek support in informal and formal social networks. Knowledge
about key drivers of self-disclosure will also be useful in improving the design
of other systems that use personal data and will inform public discussions about
the use and risks of personal information online. The PIs will work to raise
awareness of disclosure benefits and risks through users' participation in
experiments, use of systems, and publicizing research results beyond the
research community, e.g., by working to move research results into practical
applications through the Bronfenbrenner Center for Translational Research at
Cornell.

More specifically, this research will yield a multi-theoretical and multi-level
model of how individual attributes such as personality and mental health status,
technological affordances such as reviewability and audience visibility, and
social network properties such as size, density, diversity, and tie strength,
individually and in combination, shape anticipated rewards and risks of
disclosure and disclosure strategies. These models will incorporate responses by
network members into the production cycle of disclosure, and examine how these
combined characteristics determine both anticipated and actual outcomes. The
researchers will collect examples of actual disclosure behaviors in both text
and photos, annotated with information about people's disclosure goals and
perceptions, individual characteristics, and social networks, and will use these
to validate predictive models of the presence of and responses to disclosure in
social media data. These models will help identify when people create meaningful
content, which in turn can be used in systems and interventions that support the
well-being of social media users, both in the general population and those at
risk. These systems and interventions will operate by using disclosed
information to facilitate reflection, enrich existing positive psychology
interventions, and promote awareness of and effective responses to disclosure
and mental health needs.