* 1405410
* Collaborative Research: Second Order Inference for High-Dimensional Time Series and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Wei Biao Wu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,016.00

During the last decade, analysis of high-dimensional independent data has gained
substantial attention. The project involves a variety of estimation and
statistical inference problems for high-dimensional multiple time series, a
universal type of data seen in a broad spectrum of real applications in spatio-
temporal statistics, biomedical engineering, environmental science, finance, and
signal processing. As an important research problem, one should extract
information from a large number of time series, where the second order structure
plays a fundamental role in those applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
developed from this project will provide the theoretical foundation for
estimating and inference of the space-time covariance and precision matrix,
their related functionals, and time-varying graphs of high-dimensional time
series. All of the problems are linked together to characterize the second order
properties of the high-dimensional time series with the non-linear and non-
stationary time dependent features. We will also study enhanced methods that
account for the temporal and spatial dependence structures. Results from this
research are useful for understanding the dynamic features of high-dimensional
dependent data. In particular, the techniques are applicable to biomedical
engineering problems such as modeling brain connectivity networks by using fMRI
data.