* 1405053
* P2C2: Testing for the Physical Origin of Tree-Ring Divergence
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Alexander Stine, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2018
* USD 284,737.00

Records derived from tree rings make a unique contribution to reconstructions of
surface temperature because they are well-distributed on land, have annual
resolution, and extend back centuries or even millennia. Interpretation of
reconstructions based on tree-ring growth is complicated by the potential loss
of information when raw tree-ring observations are combined into chronologies,
and by the variety of climate influences on tree-ring growth.

This research tests for the influence of detrending methodology and multivariate
climate control on tree-ring records across the Arctic using both archival data
and newly developed high-latitude chronologies. The process leading to tree-ring
based climate reconstructions will be modeled, starting with climate influences
on tree growth and progressing through sampling and chronology construction.
This framework will then be used to test hypotheses about the influence of
climate processes and methodological approaches on the resulting chronologies,
placing particular attention to the effects of detrending and light availability
on climate reconstructions. New tree-ring cores from high-latitude sites will
also be collected in order to test for an influence of small-scale variability
in the light environment on tree-ring growth. This project and its associated
methodological advances will improve understanding of tree-ring based climate
proxies and lead to improved climate reconstructions. Codes and data generated
in the course of the project will be made publically available. Funding will
also support the research, education, and mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students at San Francisco State University.