* 1405997
* Ultrafast Laser Spectroelectrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Dana Dlott, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 462,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the
Division of Chemistry, Prof. Dana Dlott of the University of Illinois is
developing advanced laser-based instruments that probe molecules on the surfaces
of electrodes during electrochemical transformations. Electrochemical systems
such as fuel cells and batteries form a significant part of our industrial
economy, yet it has proven difficult to understand how these processes work at
the fundamental level of individual molecules. A deeper fundamental
understanding produces the knowledge needed for major new advances in
electrochemical sciences. The investigators build batteries and fuel cells with
optical windows, and shine laser beams at the electrodes to watch how the
molecules behave in real time. There is a major problem, though; for every
molecule at the electrode where the chemistry takes place, there are about one
billion spectator molecules not doing anything of interest. To address this
problem, the investigators are developing methods that involve pulsing the laser
beams and controlling the laser wavelengths by computers. This allows the laser
beams to ignore the spectator molecules so the researchers can see how chemistry
takes place deep inside electrochemical reactors. The work will have a broad
impact on the development of new technologies that will enhance the performance
of devices such as fuel cells and batteries. It is having a further broad impact
on the training of the next generation of scientists, by involving students at
the graduate and undergraduate level in scientific research. The project
consists of two related efforts to develop instruments for spectroscopic probing
of electrochemistry using a nonlinear coherent infrared (IR) spectroscopy method
termed sum-frequency generation (SFG). SFG is one of the most powerful methods
to study chemistry at buried interfaces such as electrodes buried under thick
electrolyte layers. The first effort seeks to improve the ability to obtain SFG
spectra at buried interfaces by overcoming temporal and frequency distortions of
fs IR pulses passing through an IR window and an electrolyte. Computer-
controlled IR pulse-shaping techniques are used to predistort the IR pulses so
they arrive undistorted at the electrodes. The second effort seeks to develop
instruments to study ultrafast molecular dynamics at electrodes by ultrafast
laser temperature jumping of the electrodes while probing the adsorbed molecules
by SFG. In an electrochemical cell, a rather small (50 K) temperature jump can
have a significant effect (100 mV) on the electrode potential. The temperature-
jump method is a way to rapidly (in nanoseconds) jump electrode potentials far
faster than is possible by electrical methods.