* 1405237
* Collaborative Research: IODP Expedition 336 Objective Research: The deep biosphere of young and oxic oceanic crust
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Heath Mills, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2015
* USD 157,008.00

The proposal addresses a fundamental aim of the ocean drilling program, namely
to help characterize one of the largest and least studied ecosystems on Earth,
the deep biosphere of the igneous crust buried below the ocean floor. The
principal scientific objective of IODP expedition 336 is, in particular, to
investigate the microbial population in basaltic crust from the North Pond area
near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The study samples are weathered and porous basalts
taken from beneath ~100 m of sediment in the North Pond area. The study proposes
to determine both the diversity of the microbe population (using DNA) and its
metabolic activity (using RNA). The PI?s will investigate the relationship
between microbes in the basement and those in the water column and determine
which metabolic pathways are used by the deep basement microbes. The study will
also provide baseline data for the long-term biological observatories installed
in the sub-seafloor basement during expedition 336. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding
deep biosphere life is a major thrust of the new IODP science plan and has
implications for understanding the limits of life. The NSF-funded C-DEBI (Center
for Dark Energy Biosphere Investigations) program and Deep Earth Academy promote
K-12 education and communicate the results of deep biosphere studies to broad
technical and popular audience. An undergraduate student will be involved in the
research.