* 1405665
* Dissertation Research: Systematics and evolutionary history of the southern redback salamander: using next generation sequencing with organisms with large genomes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Christopher Austin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,240.00

The southeastern United States is a hotspot for amphibian biodiversity, but many
amphibian species in the region are undergoing rapid declines. This is
especially true for salamanders, which are incredibly diverse in the Southeast.
Examining genetic relationships, climate factors, and changes in geographic
distributions can increase our understanding of the complex mechanisms
influencing the generation and decline of species. The goals of this project are
to combine data from new methods of DNA sequencing with geographic and
environmental data, in order to test hypotheses about evolutionary relationships
of the southern redback salamander and changes in its geographic distribution
through time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salamanders have genomes approximately 10
times larger than humans, and this large genome size can pose problems for new
DNA sequencing methods. This project will test the utility of a newly
established DNA sequencing protocol in resolving evolutionary relationships for
species with large genomes. This research will be the first study to use a next-
generation DNA sequencing technique to generate a genome-wide data set of
400-800 million DNA sequence fragments for a species. Results from this study
will inform salamander conservation, amphibian systematics, and evolutionary
biogeography more generally, as well as the future of systematics studies of
organisms with large genomes.