* 1405644
* CI-P: Collaborative Research: RUSD - Real User Speech Data for the spoken dialog community
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2016
* USD 88,440.00

New interest in spoken dialog research has recently been generated by the advent
of SIRI(TM). This application has ignited the imagination of many who have begun
to believe that speaking to automatic assistants is possible and useful. In the
near future everyone will need to use speech to communicate with technology such
as Google Glass and smart watches which can't use a keyboard. Using speech will
also give wider access to technology, for example to the elderly and the
disabled. It will serve as an economic motivator, spurring new technology and
technology-based products. &lt;br/&gt;The vision of the Real User Speech Data
project and community infrastructure (RUSD) is that it will serve the spoken
dialog community by sparking the creation of streams of spoken dialog data from
real users, by distributing data and by helping researchers access spoken dialog
platforms where they can compare their findings with those of others. It will
link high school and undergraduate students (who have lived with the technology
all of their lives, and can imagine how they would like to talk to technology),
with technology experts who can implement their ideas. RUSD will serve the needs
of the spoken dialog community at the same time by helping this community to use
these novel and useful speech applications to record and collect speech of their
users. RUSD will help to distribute this speech data to the community. It is
essential in making successful systems as it will be used to retrain them
(adding data makes the statistical representations more precise) and to assess
them (comparing systems helps find which novel techniques improve the systems)
and to create new ones. In this manner, RUSDs contribution will lead to both
higher quality research and to widespread use of speech technology. The current
planning project is dedicated to the discussion of the future RUSD with the
research community which includes a hands-on Challenge contest to finalize
RUSD's functional requirements, and to the preparation of a comprehensive RUSD
proposal to the CISE Research Infrastructure Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal for the RUSD project and
community infrastructure is sparking new initiative that will generate data and
research platforms for the community. It will relate high school and
undergraduate students' ideas for novel, transformational applications of speech
technology with the current spoken dialog community's technology. The resulting
real applications will provide the streams of data from real users who are
interested in repeatedly using an application because it helps them in some way
(solving some task, or entertaining them). This will allow researchers to make
their systems more robust. &lt;br/&gt;Unsolved basic research issues in spoken
dialog include: signal processing in noise, recognition of groups of "difficult"
users (like the elderly and non-native speakers), management of complex dialogs
(i.e. in meetings and with agents), and the automatic use of meta-linguistic
information such as prosody. RUSD will help support new applications so that
they can be used as research platforms where these and other issues can be
explored. The Dialog Research Center (DialRC) has provided this service for one
application, Let's Go, which gives bus information in Pittsburgh. Since then
research has evolved, necessitating real dialog systems in more challenging
areas. One site cannot create and run all of them. RUSD can help the community
to create these systems, insuring that they meet the needs of the community and
obtaining consensus on a unified infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;The planning phase
of RUSD includes: (1) querying the spoken dialog community to define its needs
going forward; (2) conducting a Challenge to determine interest in producing
real streams of data and platforms; (3) gathering tools that can be used for the
Challenge systems and ensure their documentation; (4) preparing the full
proposal to the CISE Research Infrastructure Program for RUSD's design and
implementation.