* 1405494
* I-Corps:  Innovation Corps Training for NPView Network Security Leadership
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2016
* David Nicol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed team has developed a tool that addresses the security of
organizations' networks to ensure that those systems are not only compliant with
current regulations but also ahead of adversarial techniques. The fundamental
innovation is to combine network firewall analysis with state-of-the-art network
modeling techniques so that knowledge about the complete connectivity map of an
organization's network can be extracted and queried in order to verify the
implementation of a security policy. IT infrastructures are difficult to protect
given the variety of applications and devices, the heterogeneity of
communications, and the motivation and resources of adversaries.

The power industry has responded to this problem by mandating critical
infrastructure protection regulations to be followed by all large electric
utilities. Every year, several utilities receive penalties of up to $1,000,000 a
day because of violations found in the security of their networks during audits.
This proposal presents a commercialization project for the NP-View tool, a
software application designed to support utilities and auditors in assessing
whether networks are secure and in compliance with government NERC/CIP
regulations. At the core of NP-View is a technology that uses device
configurations to create a virtual network representation that accurately
predicts how packets traverse networks and provides analysis of a given network
security policy. The benefits for network compliance officers and auditors
include higher confidence in their asset security, as well as reduced amounts of
time and resources needed to analyze security posture and prioritize
vulnerability mitigations. An initial version of the tool was tested with 30
beta users from electric utilities and consultant businesses through an
evaluation program sponsored by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
Feedback from beta users and from NERC auditors led the team to believe in a
strong commercial opportunity for this project, first in the power industry, and
secondly in the broader market of enterprise network owners.

Disruptions of power infrastructures quickly lead to chaotic situations in which
human lives are put at risk. Power grid control centers are reliant on IT
infrastructures. It is critical to ensure the resiliency of systems and networks
through methodical IT security protection, monitoring, and response. Through
development and dissemination of automated verification technologies, the
proposed work will have an impact on the ability of network operators and
security administrators to implement the correct set of rules to keep critical
assets out of the reach of cyber adversaries. The ultimate benefit to the power
industry and to society at large will be meaningful improvement of the security
of an important resource.