* 1405766
* Single-Use Bioreactor Systems Education and Training
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edward Re, Solano Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,960.00

An emerging technology in the field of biomanufacturing is the use of disposable
or single-use bioreactors. Because these systems offer several advantages over
traditional manufacturing platforms, there is an industry trend toward adopting
this technology. The industry migration to this new technology is causing a
training gap to form within the existing workforce and within biotechnology
training curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solano Community College is creating
curricular materials to address the single-use, disposable bioreactor gap in the
national biotechnology curricula and expanding the biotechnology program at the
college to incorporate this technology. The project is also developing short
courses for students and incumbent workers and workshops for faculty. The
project includes three components: curriculum development, implementation and
evaluation, and dissemination. The expected outcomes for this project include:
1) an overall design of educational units that can be inserted into courses that
utilize single-use cell culture technology; 2) detailed content, learning
objectives, teaching materials and instruction activities for the new units; 3)
implementation of the curriculum at the college and other institutions; 4)
workshops to disseminate the curriculum; 5) development of a web site hosting
the model curriculum and other information generated from this project; and 6)
courseware containing the course materials for
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since this project is developing curricular
materials that address an identified industry need that have not been included
in two-year biotechnology programs, it has the potential to impact many two-year
biotechnology programs across the country as the project creates exemplary
materials that can be used by other programs to teach single-use bioreactor
technology in order to meet industrial demand. The impact is being magnified
through the dissemination by BioLink, a national biotechnology consortium that
has created a community of scholars that encourages collaboration, cooperation,
and communication in biotechnology. To facilitate information dissemination,
workshops are being organized to train faculty who want to adopt this
curriculum. The project will also contribute to the national effort to develop a
technically skilled workforce for the national bio-economy.