* 1405670
* Collaborative Research:II-NEW: RUI: ROAR - A Research Infrastructure for Real-time Opportunistic Spectrum Access in Cloud based Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Danda Rawat, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2016
* USD 260,399.00

This project focuses on the development of a real-time opportunistic spectrum
access testbed for cognitive radio networks, called
ROAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information gained from this project will provide
a platform to assess maturity of spectrum-sensing technology and identify areas
that need further research for real-time opportunistic dynamic spectrum access
in a heterogeneous cognitive network environment, and will support enhancement
of our national wireless infrastructure and capacity. ROAR will have a broad
societal impact as wireless networks touch every aspect of our society. Project-
based learning will be incorporated in related undergraduate and graduate
courses to integrate research and education. Focused efforts will be undertaken
to interest underrepresented minorities (including females) in the proposed
research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will setup a cloud-based
cognitive network for real-time opportunistic spectrum access across diverse RF
bands (e.g., 9 kHz ? 6 GHz) including cellular, IEEE 802.11 a/b/g/n, IEEE
802.15.4, DSRC/WAVE and Bluetooth networks, in order to study the
implementation, evaluation and development of future wireless systems. This
project also enables experimental investigations in a number of other research
projects, including secure dynamic spectrum access design, cognitive radio
enabled opportunistic spectrum access in highly mobile vehicular networks,
primary user security emulation, energy management techniques for mobile
devices, cross-layer based protocol design, security for cyber-physical system
design, interference mitigation techniques and wireless resource management
schemes.