* 1405403
* Energy-aware Sparse Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jingxian Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 362,394.00

Enabled by the widespread deployment of wireless sensor networks and the
ubiquity of smart phones, large-scale sensing has played a critical role in many
aspects of our life, such as environment monitoring, post disaster assessment,
and biomedical sensing, etc. Such applications usually generate astronomical
volumes of data, which impose formidable challenges for efficient processing,
storage, and transmission of data. This project will address these challenges by
developing a new paradigm of energy-aware sparse sensing scheme. The proposed
scheme can significantly reduce the amount of data to be collected and processed
in sensor networks powered by extremely limited energy sources, such as devices
harvesting energy from light, vibration, or heat. The sparse sensing is enabled
by the fact that some information is more important than others, thus the amount
of collected information can be significantly reduced by sampling only the most
essential information. In addition, the sparse sensing scheme can also be used
for extracting useful information from an ocean of data that have already been
collected by a system. This is especially important for crowd-sensing
applications where a huge number of users voluntarily contribute sensing data
with their smart phones or tablet computers. The proposed research will
accelerate the wide range deployment of large-scale participatory sensing and
energy-harvesting sensor networks. Results obtained from this project can be
applied to a wide range of applications, such as disaster relief, stock market
analysis, surveillance, and pollution monitoring, etc. This research will
contribute to public safety, improve homeland security, and promote the social
and economic development of the United States.

The goal of this project is to conquer the "big data" challenge in large-scale
energy-constrained sensing applications through a new paradigm of energy-aware
sparse sensing, which dynamically and sparsely samples a random field by
adapting to the energy availability of sensors and the time-varying nature of
the monitored objects. The energy-aware sparse sensing scheme can significantly
reduce the amount of data to be collected and processed, bridge the gap between
energy supplies and energy demands in energy-constrained systems, and provide
energy-efficient and scalable solutions to large-scale sensing applications. The
specific research thrusts leading to this goal include: 1) Create a new paradigm
of dynamic sparse sensing. The dynamic sparse sensing is enabled by "information
diversity", i.e., data collected at different space locations and time instants
have different impacts on a certain design objective. Thus the number of
required samples can be significantly reduced by sampling only the most
informative data, which can be adaptively identified by learning through
previous sensing results. 2) Design energy-aware sparse sensing techniques for
systems powered by energy harvesting devices such as photovoltaic or thermal
devices. For systems with energy harvesting devices, there is energy diversity
due to non-uniform energy supplies across the sensors. The energy-aware sparse
sensing is achieved by aligning energy diversity with information diversity, so
that the limited energy resources are used to collect the most informative data.