* 1405507
* Collaborative Research: Heat-Induced Polymer Bonding of Coarse Aggregates
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Douglas Cortes, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2017
* USD 85,000.00

Plastic-bonded soils may be a sustainable method to construct more durable
roadways, render soils with higher bearing capacity and liquefaction resistance,
develop better waste isolation and soil retention systems, and build upon
environments where conventional cements yield poor performance. This research
will investigate the extent to which the strength and stiffness of a soil may be
improved for applications such as these using a technique that glues the soil
grains with recyclable, durable, and acid-resistant plastic. This research will
study the engineering behavior of coarse aggregates fused together with polymer
fines that are heated to bond the particles to make the soil mass stiffer and
stronger.

Cementation-based soil stabilization techniques typically involve the use of
mineral cementing agents (e.g., calcium-based). Although strong, these agents
are brittle and soluble in acidic environments. Furthermore, re-cementation of
de-cemented aggregates remains a challenge. The objective of this research is to
explore the feasibility of a novel cementation method that uses recycled
polymers and heat injection. Heat causes polymer particles in a soil mixture to
soften and coalesce at the grain contacts. The polymer solidifies upon cooling,
yielding a cemented soil. The result is inter-particle bonds that are non-
brittle and chemically stable under a wide range of relevant environmental
conditions. Moreover, re-cementation can be readily implemented by reheating de-
cemented grains. The research activities will include the following scope: (1)
characterize the improvement of and/or alterations in soil strength, stiffness,
hydraulic conductivity, water retention, and creep behavior attained by
polymeric bonding, (2) gain understanding of the role of soil and mixture
properties (such as mineral composition and polymer content) on the alterations
of the engineering properties, and (3) assess strength and stiffness recovery
attained by reheating debonded soil (i.e., healing). Laboratory experiments
conducted with custom-made and standard geotechnical testing apparatus modified
with acoustic emission monitoring systems will be used to implement the
research, and scanning electron microscopy will be used for micro-
characterization.