* 1405565
* Communications coordination for the Geospace Environment Modeling Program
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Peter Chi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Program is a broad-based, community-
initiated research program on the physics of the Earth's magnetosphere and the
coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the solar wind. The work
of GEM is accomplished in a series of campaigns and focus groups that solve
specific problems leading to the construction of a global Geospace General
Circulation Model (GGCM) with predictive capability. This project ensures the
efficient communications and comprehensive archiving that GEM needs to continue
its vital role in the geospace science community for the next 5 years. The
project provides archives of GEM activities that are accessible by the
scientists and students today and in the future and maintains an online forum
for information exchange and coordination of activities in the program. Finally,
the project provides access for researchers, students, and the general public to
tutorials and other educational resources present the most updated knowledge
about the near-Earth space environment.

GEM has a communications coordinator to ensure healthy information flows within
the community and to maintain an archive of the program's activities. This
project performs the tasks for the next GEM Communications Coordinator starting
from 2009, following the guidelines described in the GEM bylaws. The tasks fall
into the following four categories: (a) the electronic newsletter GEM Messenger,
(b) the annual GEMstone reports (including special reports), (c) the GEM website
GemWiki, and (d) the GEM Data Catalog.