* 1405439
* Coordination Polymer Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 411,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The project will undertake a series of systematic investigations of the
structural aspects of nanometer scale and mesoscale coordination polymer
heterostructures. The goals are to better understand how coordination polymer
networks accommodate the presence of an interface and, therefore, how interfaces
can be used to control properties. Specific studies will elucidate the nature of
structural changes induced by an interface, for example biaxial or isotropic,
and how the structural changes differ if the strain is compressive vs tensile.
The depth away from the interface that strain or structural reorganization
persists and the limits of structural parameters that allow epitaxial
relationships between the heterostructure components will also be explored.
After comparing static structures, elastic processes and how a light- or
thermally-induced structural event in one component is manifested in the other
component via the interface will be investigated. Studies will focus on
cyanometallate coordination polymers of the Prussian blue analogue family,
taking advantage of more than twenty easily accessible and air-stable analogues
based on first-row transition metals. A wide range of heterostructures are
known, allowing for systematic variation of the parameters to be studied via
control of particle size, structure, composition and component thickness. The
principal method of analysis will be X-ray diffraction, using both laboratory
and synchrotron sources. Data from X-ray scattering will be complemented by
electron microscopy and electron diffraction.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The simple promise of composite particles, or "heterostructures", is combining
more than one property in a single material. However, beyond simply adding
properties, synergy between components can lead to new behavior and new
function. When heterostructures lead to "more than the sum of the parts", it is
the interface between the constituents that causes the new properties. The goals
of the project are to learn how interfaces change the structures of a new class
of materials, called coordination polymer heterostructures, and to then develop
insights into how these heterostructures can be used to control properties.
Generalized results can inform many areas of current materials science,
including magnetism, battery technology, thermal properties of materials, gas
storage and separations, catalysis, as well as applications in bioanalysis and
biomaterials. The research tasks are designed to be platforms for graduate and
undergraduate student education, preparing them with the "21st-Century Skills"
needed to contribute to a high-technology workforce. The research activities
emphasize collaboration between disciplines, both among US institutions and with
international partners, and will make significant use of the Advanced Photon
Source, a major US multi-user facility where students receive training.