* 1405790
* II-EN:  Collaborative Research:  Large-Scale FPGA-Centric Cluster with Direct and Programmable Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Herman Lam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 687,333.00

Together with theory and experimentation, computer simulation now constitutes
the third pillar of scientific inquiry, enabling researchers to build and test
models of complex phenomena that either cannot be, or would be prohibitively
expensive to be, replicated in the laboratory. Applications range from the
practical, such as designing more efficient aircraft and effective drugs, to
basic research in understanding the molecular basis of diseases such as
Alzheimer?s. Yet computing capability is currently only a small fraction of what
is needed: detailed biological simulations are limited to small numbers of
macro-molecules; additional factors of millions are needed to simulate cells and
far more than that for larger structures. The overall goal of this work is to
give the Scientific Computing user community the capability to conduct
transformative research via scalable, cost-effective, high-performance, general-
purpose systems built from off-the-shelf components. The particular objective is
to build a compute cluster and related infrastructure that facilitates research
that advances such computer systems. The unifying technical mechanism to be
explored is the integration of communication and computation in accelerator-
centric clusters with direct and programmable interconnects.

Three fundamental issues limiting performance are computational efficiency,
power density, and communication latency. All of these issues are being
addressed through increased heterogeneity, but the last in particular by
integrating communication into the accelerator. This integration enables direct
and programmable communication among compute components. Direct links enable the
bypassing of CPU, network interface, and even device memory. Programmable
communication enables data transfers to proceed with high efficiency even under
substantial loads. The proposed infrastructure is a large-scale FPGA-centric
cluster with direct and programmable communication (DPC). This server class is
referred to as Novo-G#, where # is a place holder for DPC, because this award
will target enhancing and leveraging Novo-G, the reconfigurable supercomputer at
the University of Florida. The infrastructure will consist of the physical
hardware, but also software and configurations to be developed to enhance both
general usability and the enabled research projects. Another aspect of this
infrastructure, as with the Novo-G, is the community of collaborators who will
contribute tools, applications, evaluation, and feedback. Currently, a number of
internal and external collaborators have been identified but there are more
potential research projects?in diverse areas of applications, architecture, and
systems that will be enabled by the proposed infrastructure.

The broader impact of the enabled research is to advance the capability of
scientific computing. The technical broader impact of the proposed
infrastructure is to provide a system testbed for transformative research in a
variety of areas in Computer Science and Engineering including programmable
network components, processor/network interfaces especially for accelerators,
FPGA-based systems, applications in Reconfigurable Computing, architecture of
clusters with direct and programmable communication, and libraries and tools to
support such clusters. The community of researchers using the infrastructure
will consist of the PIs and their collaborators, but also the members of the
broader community who commit to contributing to the infrastructure. The
infrastructure will provide a platform to develop novel components for education
and outreach.