* 1405347
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does hosting arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in modular structures facilitate discrimination against cheaters?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Brian Steidinger, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 19,369.00

The majority of terrestrial plant species depend on symbiotic fungi that live
inside their roots ("mycorrhizal fungi") to both meet their mineral nutrient
demands and increase their defenses against pests and disease. However, many
strains of fast-growing mycorrhizal fungi have evolved to exploit their hosts
without providing any of these services, leaving plants with stunted growth and
increased susceptibility to environmental stress. Brian Steidinger and James
Bever of Indiana University (IU) seek to identify how plants can defend
themselves against "cheater" fungi. The researchers enhance the impact of their
scientific work through their involvement in public and minority outreach
programs. Steidinger will integrate under-represented minorities in the sciences
into his work at IU through the James Holland Summer Research Initiative (SRI).
The SRI program brings both high school and freshmen college students to IU to
participate in independent research. Steidinger will train SRI students how to
measure mycorrhizal fungi and identify fungal cheaters, providing them with
hands-on experience working in a lab setting. Further, Steidinger will recruit
IU undergraduates to assist with the experimental and data analysis portions of
the proposed research, helping them build skills they can apply towards
independent thesis work. &lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance ongoing research
by this team by providing a means to directly test model predictions using
molecular techniques, measure the impact of AMF on plant nutrition, and expand
an ongoing experiment to compare podocarps to plants that do not form nodulated
roots. In addition, the researchers will test model predictions in a comparative
study of AMF composition in a New Zealand podocarp forest. To achieve this, they
created a theoretical model that identified features of a host plant that should
increase their ability to spatially segregate and terminate resource investment
into cheater strains. Second, they developed an experimental system of
beneficial and cheater fungi to determine the effectiveness of defenses in
different plant hosts. Finally, they collected roots from a forest system in
order to determine if the defenses in their experimental system are effective
against cheater fungi in the field. Steidinger and Bever hope to discover not
only how plants defend themselves against exploitative fungi, but to shed light
on common features of plant defenses that are likely to be applicable to a
variety of mutualisms.