* 1405383
* GEM:  Modeling Ultra Low Frequency (ULF) Waves in the Near-Earth Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Robert Lysak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 06/30/2017
* USD 455,559.00

Ultra low frequency (ULF) waves are important for the transport of energy in the
near-Earth magnetosphere. This research will improve a MHD wave code and apply
it to several problems involving ULF waves in the magnetosphere. The outcome
will be a global ULF wave model that can address the specific science questions
in this proposal and provide an approach that can be applied to many other
problems in magnetospheric physics. Specifically the proposal will address three
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. The propagation and dynamics of ULF waves in the inner
magnetosphere, to understand the dynamics of the Pi1 and Pi2 pulsations found at
substorm onset and their timing at both high and mid-latitudes with respect to
driving sources in the magnetotail.&lt;br/&gt;2. The use of ULF waves to
determine the mass density of the magnetosphere through travel-time and field-
line resonance ?magnetoseismology?. &lt;br/&gt;3. The coupling of high and low-
latitude wave fields through the propagation of MHD waves through the
magnetosphere and of electromagnetic waves in the Earth-ionosphere waveguide.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will support a graduate student. The wave model will be
very useful in other magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling studies. This model
provides a missing link in our global models of magnetosphere and ionosphere
coupling and therefore is important for space weather. As result it has high
societal value.