* 1405150
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Disentangling the roles of neighboring plant density and palatability in providing associational defense against herbivory within different habitat types
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Philip Hahn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Wilson
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,565.00

Herbivory can have large effects on the survival, growth, and reproduction of
plants in nature, and the amount of herbivory on a plant can be influenced by
its neighboring plants. On the one hand, a plant with more palatable neighbors
might be eaten less if herbivores choose to eat its neighbors instead. On the
other hand, a plant with a higher density of equally palatable neighbors might
be eaten more if herbivores are more attracted to patches where food is more
plentiful. Either effect might be modified by the overall level of herbivory in
a habitat. This project will experimentally test the effects of density and
palatability of neighbors in two types of habitats where rates of herbivory
differ, longleaf pine woodlands that have or have not been cultivated in the
past. Results will increase our basic understanding of the individual factors
that underlie the indirect effects of one plant on another through herbivory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include applications
to restoration of natural habitats and to control of crop damage in agriculture.
Restoration of forests on abandoned farm fields can fail because of overlooked
factors such as herbivory, and this research takes place in a critically
endangered ecosystem of the southeastern U.S. Neighboring plants have been used
to deter herbivory in agricultural systems, and results may show how to improve
deterrence and thus yields. Findings will be presented to land managers. The
project will also train a Ph.D. student and two undergraduate students in
ecological research.