* 1405176
* CAREER:Digitally-Assisted Dynamic Power Management Techniques for Energy-Efficient Communication Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Pavan Kumar Hanumolu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 05/31/2015
* USD 397,804.00

CAREER: Digitally-Assisted Dynamic Power Management Techniques for Energy-
Efficient Communication Networks

Abstract:

The objective of this research is to develop scalable and robust system- and
circuit-architectures to realize highly reliable, power-aware wireline
communication networks. The proposed approach takes a holistic view of the
entire communication system to develop system-level dynamic power management
techniques along with highly scalable, robust, digitally-assisted circuit
architectures to improve the energy efficiency of communication links. More than
an order of magnitude improvement is to be expected.

The intellectual merit of this research is in the development of (1) a system-
level design paradigm to improve energy-efficiency of communication links by
more than an order of magnitude, and (2) digitally-assisted circuit
architectures that are immune to process variability, transistor imperfections
in highly-scaled technologies, and operation in hostile system-on-a-chip
environments. The proposed techniques are applicable to links at all levels of
the communication hierarchy and are independent of the transmission media and
circuit implementation technology.

The broader impacts of this research include lowering the energy and
infrastructure costs of communications networks of all sizes ranging from small
on-chip networks to large data centers. Such energy savings not only give a
competitive edge to the US in the global consumer electronic markets but also
will help reduce the detrimental impact of large energy consumption on the
environment. The proposed effort also increases the participation of students
from under-represented groups through active recruitment, retention, and
outreach activities conducted in collaboration with the Women & Minorities in
Engineering program at the Oregon State University.