* 1405103
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Divergence of long intergenic noncoding RNAs in Drosophila pseudoobscura, Drosophila persimilis, and their hybrids
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Carlos Machado, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,553.00

Long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) are a recently discovered group of
transcripts that have no protein-coding capacity. Although they play diverse and
important roles in the biology of complex organisms, almost nothing is known of
their origin and evolution. The goal of this project is to use next generation
RNA sequencing technology (RNA-Seq) and the vast genomic resources of the fruit
fly Drosophila to characterize the forces that underlie lincRNA sequence and
expression evolution. Analyses of variation in pure species cannot explain how
the regulation of lincRNA expression evolves, but analyses of misexpression in
hybrids provides insight into how diverse evolutionary processes shape the
regulatory process. Thus, the specific goal of this dissertation improvement
grant is to analyze the evolution of lincRNA regulation using RNA-Seq in D.
pseudoobscura/D. persimilis hybrids. Specific aims are (1) to identify the mode
of inheritance of lincRNA expression, (2) identify whether lincRNA regulatory
divergence occurs through cis or trans changes, and (3) identify whether
lincRNAs may underlie hybrid incompatibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will be the most comprehensive analysis of lincRNA evolution to date and the
first to examine lincRNA regulatory evolution in closely related species via
hybrids. It will underscore the importance of an understudied class of genes
that deviates from the central dogma of biology. This grant will support the
training of both a doctoral student and multiple undergraduates as well as
provide a summer research experience for a local high school student or teacher
from the University of Maryland's Minority Student Pipeline. The knowledge
gleaned from this work will be disseminated widely, both in national
presentations and in print. Understanding the evolution of gene regulatory
systems provides important insights into the relationship between genotype and
phenotype, which ultimately underlies our understanding of disease and the
improvement of agricultural crops.