* 1405512
* Midwest Regional Robert Noyce Connections 2014-2015:  Building Communities of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* William Hunter, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 799,420.00

The primary goal of the conference - Midwest Regional Robert Noyce Connections
2014-2015: Building Communities of Practice is to continue to strengthen a
network of peer support for Noyce Teacher Scholarship project personnel and
Noyce Scholars. This will improve Noyce program effectiveness throughout the 15
states of the Midwest region. The project goal will be accomplished through
facilitating an annual conference in 2014 and 2015 and a suite of year-round
networking opportunities for conference participants that are designed to
accomplish four objectives: 1) increase the personal connections among Midwest
Noyce project members; 2) utilize these new and/or strengthened connections to
share expertise and knowledge across Midwest Noyce projects; 3) support the
professional development of Noyce Scholars; and 4) build a community of practice
among Noyce scholars. The two conferences - which will be held in Omaha,
Nebraska October 2-3, 2014 and October 1-2, 2015 - will continue a 2009 to 2012
tradition of bringing together 250 Noyce investigators, pre-service and in-
service Noyce Scholars, school district personnel, and project evaluation and
assessment experts from the 62 active Noyce projects in Arkansas, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North
Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, and Wisconsin so that they may benefit
from each others? experiences. Year-round networking and learning activities
(e.g., online community, webinars, and workshops) will provide additional
opportunities for Noyce personnel and Noyce Scholars to continuously learn from
each other. As evidenced by the title, the theme that will unite this two-year
project is Building Communities of Practice.