* 1405610
* Investigations of the Photochemical HONO Formation Reactions of Atmospheric Importance
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Lei Zhu, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 709,932.00

This research is focused on determining the sources of nitrous acid to the
atmosphere. Nitrous acid can form hydroxyl radical, an important compound
responsible for creating the air pollutant ozone. Nitrous acid can be produced
on some environmental surfaces, in the presence of water and nitrogen dioxide.
Quantifying the relative importance of the sources of nitrous acid to the
atmosphere will improve the understanding of some of the causes of air pollution
and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
characterize and quantify photochemical sources of nitrous acid (HONO), an
important precursor to the hydroxyl radical (OH). The photolysis of HONO
significantly influences atmospheric pollutant oxidation and ozone production.
Recent laboratory studies have shown that nitrophenols formed from the dark
reaction of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) with surface adsorbed polyphenolic compounds
and the subsequent photolysis of surface-adsorbed nitrophenols may be a
substantial source of HONO. But wavelength-dependent HONO yields, from the
photolysis of the adsorbed nitrophenols, have not been characterized. This work
will quantify photochemical HONO and the OH quantum yields from heterogeneous
and gas phase photolysis reactions using laser photolysis combined with cavity
ring-down spectroscopy and determine the UV/visible absorption cross sections of
surface-adsorbed NO3 and nitrophenols as a function of wavelength using Brewster
angle cavity ringdown spectroscopy. Additional experiments will provide data on
the absorption cross sections of gas phase nitrophenols and HONO yields from
nitrate and 2-nitrophenol adsorbed on surfaces that serve as surrogates for
various environmentally relevant surfaces.