* 1405385
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Can avoidance behavior and landscape complexity explain patterns of predator coexistence in mammalian carnivores?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 13,832.00

This project explores the population dynamics of large African predators, asking
how spotted hyenas, leopards, and cheetahs are able to live with lions, given
that lions frequently harass and kill these smaller predators. Investigators
will integrate data from surveys of lions with data from camera traps to
determine how hyenas, leopards, and cheetahs distribute themselves across the
landscape with respect to lions, and how differences in habitat use enable these
species to coexist with and without lions. Understanding how predators coexist
is important for understanding how large ecosystems function. Recent research
has emphasized the profound effects that top predators can have on ecosystems;
disrupting predator populations can destabilize natural systems in unexpected
ways. The ability to predict how and why destabilization occurs is a necessary
first step to preventing the ecological collapse of ecosystems with many types
of predators. This project will engage the public through a citizen science
platform (www.SnapshotSerengeti.org) in which members of the public help
identify wild animals in photographs taken by camera traps. As anthropogenic
change drives the continued decline of large predators around the world,
research on ecosystem stability becomes increasingly relevant, as does public
engagement in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this study will
test predictions from an ongoing predator study in the Serengeti by comparing
distributions and population sizes of spotted hyenas, leopards, and cheetahs
across two South African reserves with and without lions. For example, without
lions, leopard numbers may higher or hyenas may occupy prime riverine habitats.
This type of response is expected because overlap between mammalian predators is
typically minimal; instead, suppression appears to be mediated primarily through
direct aggression and a large-scale avoidance response that displaces
subordinate species from large portions of the landscape. In traditional
predator-prey systems, this non-consumptive effect (NCE) of predation risk
creates a "landscape of fear" that can be more important for predator-prey
dynamics than actual predation. It can, for example, be the driving force behind
trophic cascades. However, the role of NCEs in driving population dynamics has
been almost exclusively investigated in small scale predator-prey systems. This
project investigates the role of NCEs in driving apex-mesopredator coexistence
in a guild of large African carnivores. The research has two aims: (1) to
compare effects of large-scale displacement in driving lion-mesopredator
coexistence, and (2) to evaluate the role of landscape structure and behavioral
avoidance at multiple spatial and temporal scales in mediating lion-mesopredator
coexistence. It is predicted that complex landscapes will facilitate fine-scale
partitioning and thus coexistence by minimizing large-scale displacement.