* 1405737
* Dissertation Research: Coadaptation of a Nursery Pollinator and its Dioecious Host Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Laura Weingartner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,681.00

This study will investigate interactions between moths from the genus Hadena
(the lychnis moth) and two divergent populations of the flowering plant species
Silene latifolia (the white campion), an established research species that is
also naturalized in the US. The S. latifolia populations vary extensively in
floral, vegetative, and life-history traits, which are likely adaptations to
dissimilar environments. The moths are nursery pollinators: adult moths
pollinate, but the larvae parasitize fruit. Interactions including moth
preferences, larval performance, and fruit damage will be examined in the
natural European habitat. This research will suggest whether the balance between
mutualism and parasitism varies among distinct environments with these nursery-
pollinator and host-plant species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
interdisciplinary research project that combines ecology, evolution, and
behavior to investigate the divergence of intricate biological interactions
between natural populations. This project will offer extensive training in
pollinator biology and ecological/evolutionary field techniques for young
graduate and undergraduate researchers. These results will also provide
empirical evidence of regional variation in plant-pollinator interactions.
Additionally, this work will suggest whether conservation efforts should
consider habitat-specific differences in the management of other pollinator
species.