* 1405882
* CI-Planning: DriveSense: A Community Resource for Large-Scale Smartphone-Based Traffic and Driving Activity Data
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Michele Weigle, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Clifton
* 07/31/2015
* USD 99,926.00

Today's smartphones contain a number of sensors (e.g., GPS, accelerometer,
camera) that can be used to reveal driver activity and traffic patterns when
carried in a vehicle. This project aims to gather a large-scale set of
smartphone sensor data from volunteers while they are driving. The data set and
the tools we will provide for analysis and access will have an impact on
multiple areas of research, including data mining, vehicular networks,
intelligent transportation systems, and traffic engineering. Our first step in
gathering such valuable data is to determine the particular types of data, tools
and scenarios that would be most valuable to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to develop the DriveSense platform, a
collection of tools for large-scale traffic and driving activity data
collection. This will be accomplished through a large-scale deployment of a free
smartphone application to collect data from a wide range of individuals,
locations, and driving situations. We divide the components of DriveSense into
platform components (software, tools) and management components (recruitment,
data management). This will provide a rich and complex data set for use by the
research community. This will support transportation research on the fine-
grained information about traffic and driving behaviors collected by various
sensors of a driver's smartphone, as well as enabling advances in more general
research into the analysis of complex, spatio-temporal
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first step is to explore, develop, and validate
specific components of the DriveSense platform in order to reduce risk involved
before beginning full-scale development. More specifically, during this planning
phase of the project, we will:&lt;br/&gt;i) Develop and validate several
components of the front-end application that will run on smartphones to collect
data. We will develop a prototype of the DriveSense App that collects data for
the Android platform.&lt;br/&gt;ii) Hold a workshop to get feedback on research
community interests and needs. The objective of the workshop is to bring
together experts from several research communities spanning computer and
communication networks, transportation systems, and data analytics to discuss
community needs and interests, challenges to be addressed, tools to be
developed, and new research problems utilizing the driving activity
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the planning phase will ensure we are
able to capture the types of data most important to the community, so that the
developed infrastructure will be of most benefit to the broader research
community.