* 1405356
* US-China Planning Visit: Increased Temperature, Ocean Acidification, and Cultural Eutrophication Effects on Phytoplankton Production and Trophic Transfer of Essential Fatty Acids
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* William Cochlan, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2016
* USD 35,986.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT

Ocean acidification, increasing temperature, and cultural eutrophication are
measurable and increasing impacts resulting from human activities. All three of
these stresses impact surface waters, where the photosynthesis of single-celled,
plant-like organisms (phytoplankton) are depended upon to support marine food
webs. This planning project aims to catalyze a research collaboration between US
and Chinese researchers to study how the combined effect of these stresses alter
the production of essential fatty acids by phytoplankton, and how these changes,
in turn, affect the marine food web. The implications are profound because
higher organisms, including humans, rely upon phytoplankton to produce these
special compounds for our nutrition. The project will be led by Drs. Mark Wells,
Lawrence Mayer, and Charles Trick (University of Maine), Dr. William Cochlan
(San Francisco State University), and Dr. Robert Bidigare (University of Hawaii)
for the US side. Our Chinese colleagues at the State Key Laboratory of Marine
Environmental Science, Xiamen University, are Drs. Kunshan Gao, Minhan Dai,
Yunwei Dong, Pinghe Cai, and Binzhang Chen. The planning proposal will focus on
using the combined chemical and ecosystem expertise of these participants along
with state-of-the-art mesocosm facilities at the Dong Shan Marine Laboratory,
Xiamen University to study how synergies among ocean acidification, increased
temperature, and eutrophication affect the nutritional quality of the
foundational food web.

Overall, the purpose of this collaboration is to elicit how the combined effects
of increasing temperature, ocean acidification and nutrient flux affect the
production and trophic transfer of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and
essential fatty acids (EFAs) from phytoplankton to zooplankton. The synergistic
effects of these stresses will impact cell physiology as well as competitive
success among phytoplankton species, both leading to alterations in the pool of
available PUFAs and EFAs to zooplankton. In turn, zooplankton (and mixotrophy)
feeding preferences will impact the trophic transfer efficiency of EFAs and the
fecundity/growth of the grazers. The project members have a combined expertise
spanning ocean chemistry, phytoplankton physiology, nutrient acquisition, lipid
production and analysis, zooplankton physiology, and the operation of large-
scale mesocosms. The objectives of the planning visit are: 1) to design an
innovative experimental study using their new, world-class floating and shore-
based mesocosm facilities, and 2) to collaboratively write joint research
proposals for submission to the US and Chinese funding agencies. The
collaboration will generate training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and will develop innovative new approaches to the use of
mesocosm technologies.