* 1405964
* Terahertz Electron Hole Recollisions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 565,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In high-energy physics, the
structure of matter is explored by accelerating and colliding elementary
particles like electrons and protons. In condensed matter physics, the
fundamental excitations are called quasi-particles. The most familiar quasi-
particles are electrons and holes in semiconductors, which can be created for
example in a solar photovoltaic cell - by light with a sufficiently short
wavelength. In this project, electrons and holes will be created by a weak near-
infrared laser with a wavelength slightly longer than is visible to the human
eye, and will be made to accelerate and then recollide with one another by a
very strong electric field oscillating nearly 1 trillion times per second (1
Terahertz). The recollision process will be studied by analyzing the spectrum
(which wavelengths are present) in the transmitted near-infrared light. This
spectrum has been shown to contain up to 18 separate nearinfrared wavelengths,
or sidebands, in addition to the wavelength of the near-infrared laser that
creates electron-hole pairs. This research will elucidate how much
quasiparticles can be accelerated without being disturbed by defects or the
motion of atoms in their host material. The proposed research may lead to faster
and more energy efficient optical communications and internet, and improved
optical clocks that are necessary in the global positioning system. This project
will support the training of two Ph. D. students, who will learn a variety of
skills that are critical to preserving U. S. competitiveness in the high-
technology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-order sideband generation, a new phenomenon
in the interaction of light with matter, was recently discovered in the PI's
research group. A relatively weak, continuous-wave near-infrared (NIR) laser at
frequency ~350 THz, and an intense laser at frequency ~0.5 THz are incident on a
thin film of semiconductor. A comb of equally-spaced sidebands is emitted, with
sharp lines at sideband frequency = NIR frequency + 2n THz frequency, where n is
an integer. Combs with up to 14 sidebands (order up to 2*14=28) above NIR
frequency have been observed. The high-order sidebands can be understood in
terms of a semiclassical model similar to one that was first introduced to
explain high-order harmonic generation, an analogous phenomenon that occurs for
atoms in intense laser fields. In high-order-sideband generation (HSG), the NIR
laser creates excitons, bound electron-hole pairs. The strong THz field ionizes
the excitons, and accelerates the resulting electron and hole into a large-
amplitude oscillation. When the electron and hole recollide, the excess kinetic
energy is carried off in sidebands above the NIR frequency. This project will
explore the onset of high-order sideband generation, whether there is a
fundamental limit on the number of observable sidebands, whether the shape of
the sideband spectrum can be controlled, and whether, in the case of a
circularly-polarized terahertz field, the polarization of the near-ir radiation
is rotated. By exploring the limits of HSG, the proposed research will elucidate
potential applications of HSG to electro-optic technologies ranging from optical
communications to optical clocks. This project will support the training of two
Ph.D. students, who will learn a variety of skills including near-ir and
terahertz optics, cryogenics, electronics, computer programming, and mechanical
and optomechanical design.