* 1405355
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Buckling Mechanics of 3D Thin Film/Shape Memory Polymer Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Jianliang Xiao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 315,494.00

Buckling and wrinkling of stiff thin films on soft substrates results in
ordered, wavy patterns on the surface. This phenomenon has been shown to have
many potential applications, such as in novel sensors and actuators, stretchable
electronics, precision metrology, optical gratings, and energy harvesting
devices. Shape memory polymers, as a class of smart materials, can memorize
distinct shapes, and can recover from the deformed shape to the original shape
by external stimuli such as heating. These salient features of shape memory
polymers, when combined with thin film buckling, can provide a unique
opportunity for creating controllable surface patterns on planar as well as on
complex 3D structures. This award supports research on the fundamental mechanics
of thin film buckling on shape memory polymers, and will develop strategies for
analysis and fabrication surface patterns in 3D hybrid material systems
consisting of shape memory polymers and metallic thin films. The results from
this work will benefit surface engineering, micro/nanoelectromechanical systems,
and stretchable electronics with applications in biomedical devices, robotics,
smart electronics, and deployable systems. Under the award the PI will provide
multidisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students, and will
actively seek participation from underrepresented groups and K-12 students.

Buckling mechanics of thin films on soft substrates has been of interest to the
mechanics community in the recent past, however, current theoretical models
assume that the mechanical properties of the substrates do not change
significantly during buckling and wrinkling formation. This assumption does not
hold for shape memory polymers, which undergo dramatic property changes during a
thermomechanical shape memory cycle. For example, the modulus typically changes
by two to three orders of magnitude; viscosity can change by ten to fifteen
orders of magnitude. The objective is to combine theoretical and experimental
approaches to develop a new theory for the mechanics of buckling and wrinkling
of thin films under consideration of large property changes during the and
associated with the instability processes. This will allow one to consider
buckling processes of thin films on shape memory polymers, with effects of time,
temperature and changes of mechanical properties accounted for. Buckling of thin
film ribbons on both 2D and 3D shape memory polymers will be studied The time
evolution of buckling patterns coupled with the evolution of 3D shape memory
polymer structures will be investigated, which will deliver 4D buckling systems
of relevant to programmable devices. In addition, this research could provide
practical strategies for fabricating complex 3D hybrid material systems.