* 1405594
* Collaborative Research: Redesigning Video Streaming Infrastructure to Systematically Reduce Mobile Device Video Display Energy Consumption in the Video-rich Era
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Chang Wen Chen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract: The objective of this research is to develop novel solutions that can
systematically reduce the energy consumption of future video-rich mobile devices
through re-inventing the entire video streaming infrastructure design.
Minimizing display energy consumption is of great practical importance since it
accounts for a very high percentage of mobile device energy consumption. The
significance of this research is that this is a new holistic approach in which
display energy reduction is exploited from the entire streaming infrastructure
point of view. Such an approach is a paradigm shift from existing schemes that
explore the energy reduction on each mobile device and shall open up new
research avenues for video streaming to mobile devices. This high-risk, high-
payoff project has broader and transformational impact beyond the research
proposed in this proposal. First, this research is well aligned with the grand
trend towards cloud-centric information technology infrastructure and will
establish a new industrial service direction on architecting future video
streaming systems. Second, the developed algorithms, source code, and
measurement results will be made available online for public and wide-range
usage, benefiting both industrial and academic researchers. Finally, the
research training to both undergraduate and graduate students shall produce
researchers and engineers with multidisciplinary experience in information
technology and computer industries.

This research aims at overcoming two fundamental drawbacks of current practice
in per-device processing: (1) highly inefficient energy saving from global
perspective since the same computation shall be repeated among thousands or
millions of mobile devices that receive the same video stream. (2) Non-optimal
display energy reduction at device level because the inherent trade-off between
saved display energy and the energy needed for additional processing is
preventing from adopting sophisticated algorithms. The intellectual merit of
this research lies in the development of a paradigm shifting design to move the
per-device local processing to data center-based global processing along with
the intelligent encoding of the video content for display energy efficient
streaming. In particular, two major research directions are carried out in this
project. To integrate display awareness into the video streaming infrastructure,
display-oriented video processing at data centers is developed first to exploit
video source characteristics and different classes of mobile devices in order
generate a family of bitstreams, each with embedded parameters for display
energy reductions at mobile devices. Then, a context-aware video adaptation at
mobile access gateways is designed to transcode the video bitstreams in order to
match device viewing environments and wireless channel status for enhanced
quality of experience (QoE). To overcome increasing number of video streams
leading to significant data storage overhead and degradation of video caching
efficiency, a syntax-aware video data deduplication at data centers is
investigated to reduce the data storage overhead. Then, a data center assisted
universal transcoding at gateways is developed to reduce video cache miss
penalty at access gateways. Finally, a solid-state data storage scheme optimized
for video caching is designed to fully exploit the potential of using flash
memory for video caching.