* 1405770
* II-EN: Collaborative Research: Positioning MLton for Next-Generation Programming Languages Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Matthew Fluet, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 224,329.00

MLton is an open-source, whole-program, optimizing compiler for the Standard ML
programming language. As with any large and mature software system, there is a
need to evaluate the design and architecture of the MLton software project, and
to make any substantive changes required for continued research and development.
This Computing Research Infrastructure project supports enhancements to position
MLton as a vehicle for research in programming-language design and
implementation. These enhancements will directly support research, while
providing students and next-generation of researchers with a software
development experience in the context of a production-level compiler, a complex
software system that draws together many themes of Computer Science education,
and encourages critical thinking. Finally, these enhancements will indirectly
support both the broader programming-languages research community and industry
software developers that use functional programming languages. The broader
impacts of the project will be in training of student research assistants at all
levels, the development of documentation and course materials for teaching
compiler-related topics using the MLton infrastructure, and the continued
support for MLton's industrial and academic users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
infrastructure enhancements will include development of type-checking and
optimization infrastructures, threading and garbage collection frameworks,
configuration and benchmarking support systems, and documentation including
course material. These enhancements will directly support research exploring
whole-program compilation of next-generation language features (such as first-
class polymorphism, generalized algebraic data types, and higher-order
polymorphism) and research exploring programming for next-generation execution
platforms (such as multi-core parallel systems, real-time embedded systems, and
cloud-based distributed systems). One significant goal is to provide a single
research vehicle that is easily configurable to scientifically compare and
contrast research results, thereby enabling researchers to make stronger claims
based on more meaningful comparisons, rather than relying on weaker claims
across multiple system stacks.