* 1405870
* High-Frequency Graphene Nanoelectronic Vapor Sensors for Micro-Gas Chromatography
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

ECCS Prop. No. 1405870&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: &lt;br/&gt;High-
Frequency Graphene Nanoelectronic Vapor Sensors for Micro-Gas
Chromatography&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Goal&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposal is to fundamentally study and subsequently pioneer a
radically&lt;br/&gt;different graphene sensing mechanism based on detection of
vapor molecules diploe moments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical Vapor sensor technologies are crucial for
several applications which can bring fundamental changes to environmental
protection and personalized healthcare. Unfortunately, current generation of
nanoelectronic vapor sensors is too slow for practical use, and the challenge
lies intrinsically in its sensing mechanism. To address this fundamental
challenge, the proposal aims to pioneer a dipole-detection based sensing
mechanism which can offer orders of magnitude improvement in both speed and
sensitivity compared to the current state-of-the-art. The success of the
proposed project will open a door to developing a plethora of vapor sensing
technologies with a broad range of applications in environmental protection,
industry safety, biomedicine, and homeland security. In addition, the knowledge
and techniques acquired through the proposed research can readily be extended to
study and detect biomolecules (such as DNAs and proteins) in the aqueous
environment. More broadly, the proposed project is highly interdisciplinary and
should advance science and technology in areas of nanomaterials,
nanoelectronics, sensing technology, and device physics. The project also
includes a prominent outreach and education program, which promotes awareness of
and interest in nanoscience and nanotechnology among K-12 and undergraduate
students. The knowledge and research findings resulting from this project will
be integrated into a number of new nanotechnology courses currently under
development that are related to carbon nanotechnology, biomedical
instrumentation, and biological/chemical sensing. This project will be further
enhanced by proactively recruiting underrepresented students, which can
significantly improve the diversity of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project is to
fundamentally study and subsequently pioneer a radically different graphene
sensing mechanism based on detection of vapor molecules diploe moments. In
contrast to the existing nanoelectronic sensors where the direct current (DC)
signal is used, this approach utilizes the graphene transistor as a high-
frequency mixer with surface-absorbed molecules functioning as an electrostatic
gate. The molecular dipole is excited by alternating current (AC) driving
voltage; the oscillating dipole in turn generates an AC conductance modulation
on the graphene transistor, which can be detected by measuring the mixing
current. By going into higher frequencies, the slow sensing response in the
conventional nanoelectronic sensor can be overcome when the AC field switching
outpaces the slow dynamics of interface states, thus resulting in 2-3 orders of
magnitude faster sensing speed (~0.1 s) and &gt;10-fold better sensitivity (~1
pg) than the state-of-the-art. The specific tasks include: 1) Fundamental study
of high-frequency graphene nanoelectronic sensing mechanism; 2) Design,
fabrication, characterization, and optimization of the proposed graphene vapor
sensors; 3) On-chip integration of graphene vapor sensor with micro-gas
chromatography (micro-GC) device. The project will generate fundamental and
detailed understanding at the nanometer scale about how molecules behave under
high-frequency excitation and how they interact with the graphene. In addition,
the integration of graphene vapor sensor array with an on-chip micro-GC device
will truly showcase the advantages of a nanoelectronic sensor that not only has
high speed and high sensitivity, but also is non-destructive and highly
compatible with on-chip fabrication/integration technologies.