* 1405722
* Moving Frames on Lattices and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gloria Mari-Beffa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1405722, Principal Investigator: Gloria Mari-Beffa

Completely integrable equations have solutions with truly remarkable properties.
A common example is the motion of traveling solitary waves in shallow waters:
even though waves tend to travel in families, in shallow waters one can observe
solitary waves that travel unchanged, seemly forever, and which are so stable
that they are unperturbed by, for example, colliding frontally with another such
wave. These are called "solitons", and among their equations we have those
governing the trailing vortices behind the tips of an airplane, smoke and bubble
rings, and others. Solitons are known to have close connections to geometry,
with some equations appearing naturally when a certain geometry is present.
(Setting an appropriate geometric background is often a fundamental step in the
resolution of a problem as a choice of geometry establishes the properties and
laws we wish to keep unchanged; like those of a 3D image in a screen.) For
example, when working in the projective plane, the natural geometry of a 3D
image in a computer, a certain motion of curves will behave as traveling
solitary waves, while they would not if considered in the usual Euclidean plane.
But images are not continuous curves, they are made of a discrete set of pixels,
and the motion of a curve is in fact the motion of a polygon. Reality is
discrete, not continuous. In this proposal we will study completely integrable
discrete systems associated to motions of polygons in different geometries,
including the projective plane. One of the tools we will use are discrete moving
frames on lattices, frames of reference that change from vertex to vertex of the
lattice, and that has an important role in invariant theory. The continuous
theory is widely known, but the discrete one is now being developed. These
frames can be applied to a very wide range of problems, including problems in
computation and imaging. One of our applications concerns the use of discrete
frames to study geometric shapes of blurry images like the ones of a cell
obtained through a Cryon-electron microscope.

In this project the principal investigator proposes to research the concept of a
discrete moving frame on a lattices, and to investigate its possible
applications. She would like to investigate the connection between continuous
and discrete versions, together with the relation between evolutions and
invariant maps on the space of polygons, on the one hand, and completely
integrable lattice systems on the other, including the possible generation of
relevant Hamiltonian structures from the difference geometry of the flow. She
will also like to investigate the relevance of discrete moving frames to the
local difference geometry of lattices and the possibility of applying algebraic
methods to produce geometrically significant invariants. Finally, she would like
to work on a real life application to study the shape of molecules from the
images obtained by Cryon-electron microscopes. The resolution of the proposal
could bring parts of Cartans geometry, Lie theory and invariant theory into
subjects where the potential of using geometric information is high. These are
very rich areas and we are proposing to develop techniques that would make parts
of it computationally accessible. The relationship between completely integrable
PDEs and the local geometry of curves and surfaces has already been established
and many aspects of integrability have a geometric interpretation as evolutions
of moving frames, perturbation of curve flows, pull back of Maurer-Cartan
connections, etc. To move from here directly to their discretization using
difference geometry is not only interesting, but it has the potential of
producing integrable discretizations of PDEs and geometrically-relevant
algebraic invariants of lattices, among others. The advantages for applied
problems are clear: if a problem displays certain symmetries, being able to
reduce it to its invariants lowers the dimension and makes them more accessible.
This is important not only for image analysis, but also for the analysis of
other data.