* 1405621
* 2014-2016 Alabama Bridge to the Doctorate at the University of Alabama-Birmingham
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Alabama-Birmingham (UAB) is the host site for the 2014-2016
(Cohort XII) BD program that supports a graduate student cohort of 12
underrepresented minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP campuses across
the nation. The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(ALSAMP) BD Activity provides extensive training in specific STEM disciplines as
well as professional development and guidance that promote peer mentoring and
leadership in the scientific community. Students receive rigorous academic and
research training experiences that support completion of the Ph.D. and the
transition to a competitive career in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants are required to attend special topic
seminars concerning graduate school&lt;br/&gt;matriculation designed
specifically for the program and procedures for applying for NSF and other
fellowships. Retention strategies are carried out by providing the best
available research experiences and resources, establishing appropriate faculty
guidance and quality mentoring and providing the support needed to accomplish
the goal of earning doctoral degrees. Students will be linked to projects such
as the NSF Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP),
Integrated Graduate Education Research and Traineeships (IGERT), the Southern
Regional Education Board Doctoral Scholars Program (SREB), Alabama Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (Alabama EPSCoR) and other STEM
graduate education programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of the two year
award period, students remaining in UAB doctoral programs are guaranteed a
continuation of the same level of financial support through a combination of
departmental fellowships and additional financial support from the university.
BD students not remaining at UAB are assisted in connecting to doctoral programs
of their choice at other institutions and securing fellowship and other support
at the selected institution. All ALSAMP BD students are tracked into STEM
doctoral degree programs and the workforce, including the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Best practices for recruitment and retention
of graduate researchers are implemented and built upon lessons learned from
previous ALSAMP BD host sites. The findings, lessons learned, and impact of the
activities are disseminated through publications and presentations at national
meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (ALSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate activity has supported
114 underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students in in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics [STEM] disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term impact of the BD activity is reflected in America's STEM workforce, both in
academia and in industrial research and development. By nurturing the future
professoriate, as well as the scientific workforce, the value added is seen in
the visibility of minorities in science and engineering, increasing
representation and providing role models and motivation for the next generation.