* 1405774
* Taming the Stability Challenge of Analog and Mixed-Signal Systems: Theory, Analysis and Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Edgar Sanchez-Sinencio, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 399,999.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Stability is one of the most critical design
concerns for analog and mixed-signal integrated circuits. Loss of stability
would produce performance degradation or even catastrophic failures. At the
analog functional block level, this project addresses the significant challenges
brought by the existence of large numbers of feedback loops constructed by
design or formed through layout parasitics. New loop-based stability metrics
will be developed to fill in the important gap left by the existing concepts of
phase and gain margins and single-loop based stability analysis methods.
Computationally efficient methods for identifying unstable loops in extracted
large analog designs will be developed. Another source of stability challenge
arrives as increasingly complex digital controls are integrated for purposes
such as performance boost and variation tolerance. Inclusion of these controls,
however, drastically complicates the understanding of design stability, which
will be addressed by developing control-theoretical methods for rigorous
stability analysis and new circuit design techniques to ensure stability.
Significant stability design challenges also exist in networks of analog
circuits that interact with each other through complex distributed loads. For
such large networks, this project will develop theory and methods that support
localized stability checking and design assurance. To bring the theory and
methods developed in this project to practice, circuit-level design techniques
that provide guaranteed stability with minimum performance degradation will be
investigated. This will entail systematic tradeoff analysis that sheds light on
the interactions between the proposed stability metrics and other design
specifications, development of novel compensation/control schemes and circuit
topologies that ensure stability with minimum overhead, and development of
design methodologies that support this new design practice.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The focused theoretical investigation and engineering research
of this project will provide excellent educational opportunities to students.
Research participation from undergraduate students and students from
underrepresented groups will be attracted. Undergraduate and graduate curriculum
will be benefited from the expected results of this project, which will also be
disseminated in the research community and industry. The impact of this work to
society is broad and significant. Analog and mixed-signal circuits become
increasingly ubiquitous and are employed in many systems including systems-on-
chips. The design of analog and mixed-signal circuits is confronted by many
challenges as design complexity grows. One of them is stability. The ability in
ensuring design stability and performing stability-constrained design
optimization will help build better and more robust circuits and may also create
new markets of electronics. Finally, the generality of the targeted work is
likely to contribute to the advancements in stability analysis and design in
other science and engineering disciplines.