* 1405697
* CSR: Medium: Pythia: An Application Analysis and Online Modeling Based Prediction Framework for Scalable Resource Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Ali Butt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 946,001.00

Computer applications that process large amounts of information are becoming
common in a variety of science domains, such as High-Speed Physics, Economics,
Genomics, Astronomy, and Meteorology. The overall goal of this project is to
design software tools and technologies to support such applications efficiently
on advanced computing systems. Moreover, the hardware that is used to implement
such advanced systems often boasts of different types of resources, e.g., a
conventional computer processor running alongside specialized graphic processing
units, and this heterogeneity presents a major challenge when running the
applications at the needed large scale. Having a better understanding of the
applications behavior on the emerging hardware is key to sustaining these
systems. To this end, the project designs and develops Pythia, software that
models and predicts how applications would behave on given hardware. This
information is then used to better utilize the resources, and achieve scalable
and high performance computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual value of this research involves three intermediate research goals.
1) Design an accurate application classifier using compile-time program analysis
that captures workflow behavior and application characteristics, and provides
detailed insights into expected runtime application interactions. 2) Design and
develop an accurate simulation model that incorporates workflow and application
characteristics into a heuristics engine to predict how the application will
perform under given conditions and resources. 3) Design a distributed, flexible,
efficient, and easy-to-use online oracle framework that captures the
infrastructure heterogeneity and integrates with live systems to predict
application behavior, which in turn can help guide application-attuned resource
scheduling and management. Completion of the project will create tools and
technologies for realization of more efficient and scalable computing systems.
This work impacts a broad range of disciplines that regularly employ high-
performance large-scale computing systems, especially for data-driven discovery.
Consequently, use of Pythia will reduce the time-to-solution for modern and
emerging applications, and therefore directly affect our way of life. The
educational activities, which include recruiting and mentoring women and
minority students, will help produce graduates with highly marketable skill
sets. The integration of the research discoveries and software tools, which will
be open source and made public, into the educational curriculum will help
capture the interest of the next generation of computer scientists.