* 1405166
* GEM:  The Role of Magnetized Electrons in Geospace Magnetic Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Jan Egedal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 188,512.00

This project is funded under the Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) program,a
broad-based, community-initiated research program on the physics of the Earth's
magnetosphere and the coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the
solar wind. The purpose of the GEM program is to support basic research into the
dynamical and structural properties of geospace, leading to the construction of
a global Geospace General Circulation Model (GGCM) with predictive
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconnection is the process by which stress in
the magnetic field of magnetized plasma is reduced by rearrangement of the
magnetic field. It is an important process in naturally occurring plasmas found
throughout a wide range of astrophysical environments. At the Earth it is the
primary physical mechanism for transport of mass, momentum and energy from the
solar wind to the magnetosphere. It is applicable to both the dayside
magnetopause and the magnetotail. Studying reconnection is difficult because it
involves a wide range of spatial and temporal scale sizes from macroscopic
(system wide) to microscopic (the electron inertial length). The only way to
include all of the physics of reconnection is to use particle in cell (PIC)
simulations and they require vast amounts of computer resources. As a result
such simulations have been limited to very simple configurations and have not
been used to study phenomena exhaustively. One simplifying approximation that is
adopted is to use ion to electron mass ratios less than 1836 (256 is most
frequently used now). In essence this means that the electrons are too massive.
Recent results have suggested that lighter electrons are more easily magnetized
by a guide (along the reconnection line) magnetic field, such that for this case
the first adiabatic invariant is conserved. This, in turn, causes a phase-
transition to a new regime where large scale electron current layers form in the
diffusion layer and these extend to the system size. Even a small (12%) guide
field will do this. The purpose of this project is to investigate this new
regime. The large scale electron diffusion region is caused by electron pressure
anisotropy. This can be accounted for with anisotropic equations of state.
Therefore a two fluid simulation code that is much more efficient than a PIC
code will be used to study the dynamics of large scale diffusion layers.
However, the results from the multi-fluid code will be validated with full PIC
simulations. The project will support the participation of a graduate student.