* 1405609
* On the representation theory of finitely generated groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Khalid Bou-Rabee, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,085.00

Groups are mathematical objects that encode symmetries. The integers are an
important example of a group that encodes the symmetries of, say, a line of
equally spaced cars on a straight highway. Linear groups, a main focus of this
proposal, are those groups that, in a sense similar to the integer group
example, encode symmetries of real life objects. Not all groups are linear, but
when you can determine that a group is linear this opens up a whole new
understanding of the group (in particular, you can apply all the tools from the
subject of linear algebra). This proposal aims to understand the grey area that
separates linear and nonlinear groups by forming numerical invariants and
obstructions that stratify this gray area. While this proposal will give insight
in the theory of groups, it also has applications to computer science and
interfaces algebraic geometry and geometric group theory. Further, the proposed
work will impact undergraduate and graduate students at the City College of New
York (CCNY) through mentoring on topics related to this proposal.

This proposal's primary focus is on the complexity of constructing homomorphisms
from a fixed group to a group of invertible matrices with complex entries. This
focus builds on previous research, where the PI explored the interaction of
Gromov's word growth and Lubotzky-Segal's subgroup growth by developing the
program of quantifying residual finiteness. This program gives a systematic
approach for studying the complexity of constructing homomorphisms from a fixed
group to any finite group (which is also linear). Further, this program paves
way for the discovery of new characterizations of fundamental properties of
finitely generated groups including nilpotency, linearity, arithmeticity, and
even finite presentability. While continuing the pursuit of quantifying residual
finiteness, the PI will augment his current research program by detailing the
behavior of homomorphisms from a fixed group into a semisimple linear algebraic
group (i.e., a special linear group). In particular, the PI seeks to determine
when Borel's theorem on free groups generalizes to other groups. This research
direction would influence the understanding of the behavior of arithmetic groups
and word maps. Arithmetic groups are central in geometry because they supply
explicit examples of manifolds. The study of word maps finds its motivation from
the proof of the Hausdorff-Banach-Tarski paradox and is intertwined with the
theory of expander graphs (a subject of great interest in theoretical computer
science). While the projects proposed are grounded in topology, they feature
methods from algebraic geometry, group theory, and number theory.