* 1405330
* Control-Theoretic Defense Strategies for Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Amir-Hamed Mohsenian-Rad, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2019
* USD 386,383.00

This project will design next-generation defense mechanisms to protect critical
infrastructures, such as power grids, large industrial plants, and water
distribution systems. These critical infrastructures are complex primarily due
to the integration of cyber and physical components, the presence of high-order
behaviors and functions, and an intricate and large interconnection pattern.
Malicious attackers can exploit the complexity of the infrastructure, and
compromise a system's functionality through cyber attacks (that is hacking into
the computation and communication systems) and/or physical attacks (tampering
with the actuators, sensors and the control system). This work will develop
mathematical models of critical infrastructures and attacks, develop intelligent
control-theoretic security mechanisms, and validate the findings on an industry-
accredited simulation platform. This project will directly impact national
security and economic competitiveness, and the results will be available and
useful to utility companies. To accompany the scientific advances, the
investigators will also engage in educational efforts to bring this research to
the classroom at UCR, and will disseminate their results via scientific
publications. The work will also create several opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students to engage in research at UCR, one of the nation's most
ethnically diverse research-intensive institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study encompasses theoretical, computational, and experimental research at UCR
aimed at characterizing vulnerabilities of complex cyber-physical systems, with
a focus on electric power networks, and control-theoretic defense mechanisms to
ensure protection and graceful performance degradation against accidental faults
and malicious attacks. This project proposes a transformative approach to cyber-
physical security, which builds on a unified control-theoretic framework to
model cyber-physical systems, attacks, and defense strategies. This project will
undertake three main research initiatives ranging from fundamental scientific
and engineering research to analysis using industry-accepted simulation tools:
(1) modeling and analysis of cyber-physical attacks, and their impact on system
stability and performance; (2) design of monitors to reveal and distinguish
between accidental and malignant contingencies; and (3) synthesis of adaptive
defense strategies for stochastic and highly dynamic cyber-physical systems.
Results will first be characterized from a pure control-theoretic perspective
with focus on stochastic, switching, and dynamic cyber-physical systems, so as
to highlight fundamental research challenges, and then specialized for the case
of smart grid, so as to clarify the implementation of monitors, attacks, and
defense strategies. The findings and strategies will be validated for the case
of power networks by using the RTDS simulation system, which is an industry-
accredited tool for real-time tests of dynamic behavior, faults, attacks,
monitoring systems, and defensive strategies.