* 1405923
* Collaborative Research: Collaborative RET Site -  Inspiring Next Generation High-skilled Workforce in Advanced Manufacturing and Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Margaret Pinnell, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2018
* USD 180,483.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard collaborative award to
support a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer
Science Site program at the University of Dayton (UD), Central State University
(CSU), and Wright State University (WSU) entitled, "Collaborative Research:
Collaborative RET Site-Inspiring Next Generation High-skilled Workforce in
Advanced Manufacturing and Materials", under the direction of Dr. Margaret
Pinnell, Dr. Leanne Petry, and Dr. Ahsan Mian. The University of Dayton will
serve as the lead institution on this collaborative Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site will target teachers from Ohio Region 10
districts eligible for School Improvement Support, and from partner schools
(Dayton Early College Academy (DECA) and Dayton Regional STEM School (DRSS).
After participation in this RET, teachers will continue their professional
development through ongoing engagement with the PIs at all three institutions
and the DRSC and will be prepared for leadership roles in their K-12 setting.
Participants will achieve long-term collaborative partnerships with the
university research community, engineering professionals, and the DRSC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a significant impact on the Dayton
area and the engineering community nationwide by promoting engineering in K-12
STEM curriculum and recruiting teachers from high-needs and urban schools. It
will also strengthen regional partnerships and collaborative relationships that
support both STEM education at all levels and advanced manufacturing and
materials development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new era of manufacturing will
require highly skilled STEM professionals. As such, educators need to inspire
youth to pursue STEM disciplines. This collaborative RET Site will leverage and
sustain a prior UD RET Site and provide a total of 54 in-service and pre-service
middle and high school STEM teachers, 18 per year over three years, with an
intensive and transformative six week real world research experience that is
thematically centered on materials and advanced manufacturing, a regional
strength and economic cluster. The Site will facilitate this immersion by
placing teachers teachers with research mentors at one of the three
participating universities to work on projects that connect with regional
strengths in advanced manufacturing and materials. The RET experience will be
enhanced through a materials boot camp, industry and laboratory tours and
extensive interaction with a wide variety of STEM professionals through the
Dayton Regional Stem Center (DRSC).