* 1405327
* Advanced Signal Processing for Smard Grid and Renewable Energy Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Xiaodong Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Modernizing the electric power grid has become a major national priority for
many countries across the globe. With the increasing penetration of renewable
and distributed energy sources along with the necessary means of energy storage
technologies, it is envisioned that the so-called "smart grids" will make the
production and delivery of electricity more reliable and more cost-effective,
and will allow consumers to make more informed decisions about their energy
consumption. The smart grid transforms the legacy grid that provides a one-way
centrally generated power flow to end users into a more distributed and dynamic
system of two-way flow of power and information. The essential concept of the
smart grid, where the intelligence will be to a large extent distributed, is the
integration of power electronics, real-time metering, digital communications,
signal processing, and control technologies into the power system.
Communications and information technology play a critical role in the smart
grid. As the power grid becomes more complex, more interconnected, and more
intelligent, large amount of data will be generated by meters, sensors and
synchrophasors. Advanced techniques for managing, analyzing and acting on such
data need to be developed. Further, as more and more renewable energy sources,
such as photovoltaic (PV) solar arrays and wind turbine arrays are deployed,
novel techniques are needed to optimize and monitor the energy generation
performance. The numerous technical challenges that accompany the future smart-
grid systems call for novel solutions. Hence it is important at this time to
perform research that addresses the theoretical aspects of smart grid and
renewable energy sources, and to acquire insights and theoretical tools that may
help propel significant advances in this field. This project focuses on three
major topics that are related to the distributed intelligence for smart grid and
renewable energy sources: (1) to develop distributed and secure nonlinear state
estimation methods for both power transmission and power distribution grids; (2)
to develop decentralized sequential joint change detection and estimation
algorithms for real-time detection and mitigation of cyber attacks in smart
grid; and (3) to develop decentralized model-free adaptive algorithms for online
optimization and monitoring of solar PV arrays, and for controlling of wind
turbine arrays, respectively. Smart grid and renewable energy sources bring
profound changes to the society and the proposed research will lead to new and
powerful techniques for grid state estimation, cyber attack detection and
mitigation, and efficient utilization of renewable energy sources. In addition
to conducting theoretical analysis, computational procedures will be developed
to facilitate the analytical work. The new concepts and algorithms developed
under ideal conditions will be tailored to operate in practical systems with
various constraints. It is expected that the proposed research will not only
enhance our understanding of the fundamental underpinnings of the complex smart-
grid systems and renewable energy sources, but also produce new and powerful
tools for future electrical power systems. By coordinating with an established
outreach program, this project will actively engage K-12 students and
traditionally under-represented groups and inspire these students to pursue STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education and careers.