* 1405641
* II-New: Secure and Efficient Cloud Infrastructure and Accessibility Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Donald Porter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 221,812.00

This project will create an experimental infrastructure for studying cloud
computing at Stony Brook University. Cloud computing is the predominant approach
for organizing and managing servers for online services such as Amazon, Google,
Facebook, and Twitter. Although cloud computing providers are rapidly expanding,
very little is clearly understood in the research literature about how best to
build and use a cloud. This disparity arises primarily from the extreme secrecy
in which cloud computing operators conduct their business, limiting the
dissemination of such knowledge to retain competitive advantage. This project
will advance the principled study of cloud computing hardware, software, and
applications, by giving researchers the ability to directly experiment with a
complete cloud infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The funding for this
project enables the purchase of a small computing cloud to be hosted in the
Computer Science building at Stony Brook University, configured to mimic a
state-of-the-art datacenter. Users of commercial clouds cannot study many
aspects of cloud system design. This project provides researchers with complete
physical access to the cloud infrastructure, enabling measurement of the
physical characteristics such as power consumption, temperature, and air flow;
access to the entire software stack will enable experimentation on cloud
resource management and hypervisor implementation; unrestricted access to the
cloud resources will enable rapid flexible benchmark and application development
and integration. Moreover, direct access to the complete cloud environment,
including the locally-developed applications and management infrastructure, will
provide researchers with full introspection that enables end-to-end studies of
cloud behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal brings together a group of
PIs who will conduct cloud-related research with a new level of empirical rigor.
Because researchers and educators at Stony Brook have a long list of anticipated
projects, the infrastructure should immediately garner heavy use. Among the
first projects will be a characterization study of virtualization on the scaling
efficiency of cloud applications, which will identify the pressing research
opportunities in cloud architecture. Another will begin at-scale measurement and
testing of lightweight virtualization techniques. This infrastructure will be
leveraged to develop and deploy a cloud-based Accessibility as a Service model
for delivering accessible digital content to people with disabilities. This
project brings together researchers working at all layers of the cloud computing
stack---creating the potential for crosscutting insights from study in a
realistic deployment with an active user community. &lt;br/&gt;