* 1405973
* Synthesis and Characterization of New Zintl Phases for Thermoelectric Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 500,002.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The development of advanced materials is widely
recognized as one of the key elements behind emerging technologies that can
potentially achieve a sustainable environment and provide adequate, clean energy
for our planet. This proposal is focused on the synthesis and characterization
of Zintl phases with potential for thermoelectric applications. Zintl phases are
a class of compounds that have already shown significant promise, changing the
landscape of energy conversion by doubling the efficiencies of devices made with
these materials. This proposal has broader impacts associated with training of
the next generation of scientists, enabling them to tackle transforming
materials needs over the next several decades. This proposal supports minorities
and women at the initial stages (high school to college (ACS SEED program) and
college to graduate school (Mentorships for Undergraduate Research Participants
in Mathematical and Physical Sciences, MURPPS), along with training graduate
students for scientific careers. Students collaborate with scientists at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory to understand and enhance the efficiencies for materials
with promise for thermoelectric applications. Students develop scientific,
social, and professional skills through hands-on training, exploration, and
dissemination of research to the broader scientific community. Fundamental
training in materials synthesis and structure-property correlations provides an
important foundation for the development of thermal to electrical energy
conversion and the advancement of multidisciplinary research aligned with
technology. The research will be presented at national and international
meetings and the findings published in peer-review journals.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Thermoelectric materials convert heat directly into
electricity or vice versa. With support of the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project focuses on
the synthesis of new Zintl phases, incorporating transition metals and earth
abundant elements in order to target a high density of states (DOS) at the Fermi
level (through partially filled d orbitals) to obtain high Seebeck effect (Power
factor) and therefore high zT. Phases will be synthesized as single crystals,
high purity powders and pellets via flux, metallurgical routes, and spark plasma
sintering. Utilizing a suite of physical characterization techniques including
single crystal and powder X-ray diffraction, SEM, elemental wave dispersive
microprobe, parallel electrical and magnetic measurements, the structure and
phase composition will be correlated with electronic and thermal transport
properties. The ultimate goal of this project is to discover new materials with
high zT for the direct conversion of waste heat into electricity. Building upon
recent results of demonstrated high zT in Zintl phases, this proposal closely
links synthetic strategies with characterization of physical and chemical
properties, thus providing efficient feedback to guide improvement of these
thermoelectric systems.