* 1405185
* Topology of non-positively curved manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Tu Tam Nguyen Phan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 128,121.00

A fundamental question of Geometry and Topology is how the global topology of a
space is determined by local geometric data, in particular, the curvature of the
space. Nonpositively curved manifolds (spaces) has been a subject where there
are a lot of rich theorems, and it has been a central object of study not only
in geometry, but also in related fields of mathematics, such as geometric group
theory and dynamics. The field, however, seems to have been abandoned in the
last two decades although there are a lot of unanswered questions, some of which
are within reach. Constructions of smooth, nonpositively curved manifolds are
poorly understood in the sense that most examples known are of a very
restrictive type, such as hyperbolic manifolds and pinched negatively curved
manifolds, which do not illustrate more generic properties of nonpositively
curved spaces. One of the aims of the proposed research is to construct more
nonpositively curved manifolds, especially with interesting properties that are
not seen in hyperbolic or pinched negatively curved manifolds. If a space is
known to have a nonpositively curved metric, one can deduce a lot about it. The
question whether a space admits a nonpositively curved metric has become of
great interest in different areas in topology. The proposed research also aims
to find topological properties shared by large classes of nonpositively curved
manifolds and topological obstructions to having a nonpositively curved metric.
Specifically, the PI will study the topology of ends as obstructions to having
nonpositively curved metrics.



The project aims to study noncompact, complete, finite volume, bounded,
nonpositively curved manifolds M. Objects to be studied are the topology of
ends, invariants of the fundamental groups of these manifolds (such as the
cohomological dimension and the action dimension), and the relation between the
topology of the end of such a manifold of the set of non-horospherical limit
points. The problem of how to distinguish which locally CAT(0) manifolds have a
smooth nonpositively curved Riemannian metric will also be studied. In
particular, in the case when M has tame ends, the question which manifold C can
occur as the cross section of each end of M will be studied extensively. In low
dimension, such as when M has dimension 4, the goal is to show that each cross
section of an end of M is aspherical by computing the second homotopy group of
the ends of M. Once this has been proven, and with the result of the
Geometrization Theorem in three-manifold theory, a classification of all
manifolds C that can occur as cross sections may be within reach, or at least
progress can be made using recent techniques of Ontaneda's Riemannian
hyperbolization procedure. The relation between the topology of the end of such
a manifold and the set of non-horospherical limit points will be studied. For
the case when M is a locally symmetric space of noncompact type, it will be
shown that the set of non-horospherical limit points is the same as the rational
Tits building using Saper's tilings. The question whether a similar phenomenon
happens in more general nonpositively curved settings will be investigated. This
project also aims to construct new examples of locally CAT(0) manifolds that do
not admit a smooth nonpositively curved metric. Obstructions that will be used
to distinguish these from smooth nonpositively curved manifolds are invariants
at infinity that come from embedded flat tori in the manifolds that are locally
linked with linking number greater than one.