* 1405606
* Turn-Key Green Astro-Comb.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ronald Walsworth, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 674,446.00

The search for exoplanets, or planets orbiting stars other than our sun, is
moving forward at a rapid pace. Progress in this field is largely driven by our
technological ability to build instruments that can measure tiny radial velocity
changes of a star's light as its planet or planets tug it towards us or away
from us, creating a tiny "Doppler" shift in the stellar spectrum revealing
orbiting companions. This technology in turn is largely limited by our ability
to calibrate our planet-hunting instruments. Calibration identifies spurious
errors that would otherwise mimic radial motion in a stationary star. The
proposal in this case aims to build an easy-to-operate calibration system that
will generate a comb of light with peak outputs spaced in wavelength, with fine
enough comb scale to significantly advance the current state of the art in
planet hunting instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calibrator being built
will be automated, and is intended for use on the HARPS-N spectrograph located
at the TNG telescope in the Canary Islands. It will be a "turn-key", easy-to-
operate astro-comb, producing outputs in the middle of the visible spectrum
(~500-620 nm), and will enable precision radial velocity measurements with
sensitivity &lt; 10 cm/s over arbitrarily long periods of time. The calibrator
will be usable by telescope operators and observers without the need for laser
scientists to be on site. The science thus enabled includes determination of the
mass of Earth-like exoplanets, direct measurements of the acceleration of the
young universe, and investigation of the constancy of fundamental constants over
cosmological time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train students
and postdoctoral researchers in scientific practices at the interface of
ultrafast optical physics and astronomical instrument building and observation.
The techniques to be developed will contribute to a wide array of
interdisciplinary and commercial applications in fields such as few-cycle
optical pulses, molecular spectroscopy, and
bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by
NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.