* 1405840
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding the eco-epidemiology of Lyme disease in the eastern United States through investigations of Blacklegged ticks host-seeking behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jean Tsao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,955.00

Bites from blacklegged ticks are the cause of most human Lyme disease in the
eastern United States. This tick is found throughout the region, whereas most
Lyme disease is reported from the Northeast and upper Midwest. Over the past
three years, field studies have revealed that this mis-match between the
distribution of ticks and disease is the result, in part, of a surprising
difference in the behavior of juvenile nymphal ticks. In the North, nymphs
looking for a blood meal often emerge from the leaf litter and climb a
convenient twig to wait for a passing mouse or bird. This puts a passing human
at risk because the nymph can attach to a sock or skirt or exposed ankle and
from there find a place to bite. In contrast, Southern nymphs rarely exhibit
this climbing behavior because they stay in the leaf litter, and so rarely have
an opportunity to attach to a passing human. This behavior appears to be
genetically determined, southern ticks continue to behave like southern ticks,
even if they have been raised in the North. But what if northern and southern
ticks breed with each other (which other researchers have shown is possible) and
how will their offspring behave? This study aims to answer that question by
raising nymphs from various combinations of parents that either share or differ
in their host-seeking behavior. The behavior of these hybrid offspring will be
observed in order to learn about the outcomes to be expected if northern and
southern ticks begin to mingle in the wild. This research question is important
because northern ticks are presently expanding southwards in several states,
including Ohio, Virginia, Illinois, and Indiana. Results from this research will
be of value to health care providers and the public.

In prior work the PIs utilized a field reciprocal translocation experiment and
found that there is a significant genetic basis to the differential host-seeking
behavior of nymphs from the northern and southern parts of their range. Overall,
the behavioral differences were so pronounced that they appear sufficient to
explain the two-orders-of-magnitude difference in Lyme disease incidence between
the northern and southeastern US. This award now allows the researchers to
address a key question raised by their prior work: what questing behavior will
be exhibited once northern and southern tick populations converge and hybridize?
And, in what way will these host-seeking traits evolve? The PIs will conduct
hybridization experiments between two northern and two southern populations,
measure the fecundity of the crosses, and quantify host-seeking behavior of the
resulting offspring in field arenas in both Michigan and Tennessee. The research
aims to predict how Lyme disease risk will change in the South subsequent to
invasion of northern tick populations into states currently occupied by southern
populations. Furthermore, this project addresses classic questions regarding the
role of genetics and environment on geographic variation of phenotypes and the
ability of such traits to evolve.