* 1405516
* Cohomological and singularity invariants via Hodge modules and derived equivalences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mihnea Popa, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,966.00

This mathematical research project concerns algebraic geometry and related
topics. Some of the problems under study in the project involve the extension of
tools of algebraic geometry using algebraic structures called Hodge modules.
Others involve checking invariance of various topological quantities under
derived equivalences. All parts of the project will have a broad range of
applications, further knowledge in the field, initiate interaction among people
of different mathematical backgrounds, and produce problems suitable for
research involvement of Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies cohomological, numerical, and singularity invariants of projective
manifolds by looking at their derived categories of coherent sheaves, and by
applying techniques from generic vanishing and mixed Hodge module theory. The PI
would like to develop a vanishing, injectivity and extension package to be added
to Saito's Kodaira-type vanishing theorem for Hodge modules, and to use this in
order to attack problems on the variation of families of varieties of varieties
of general type or Kodaira dimension zero. He is also interested in studying
generalizations of multiplier ideals coming from the Hodge filtration on
localized D-modules, and to use this for attacking a conjecture on singularities
of theta divisors. Another aim is to study singularities in the minimal model
program by establishing a connection between Saito's theory and the filtered de
Rham complex of singular varieties. In the direction of derived categories, the
main topic under study is comparison of the cohomological invariants and the
geometry of varieties with equivalent bounded derived categories of coherent
sheaves, a topic of interest both in mirror symmetry and in birational geometry.
Continuing work on the behavior of the Picard variety and of certain Hodge
numbers under derived equivalence, the PI plans to address problems like the
invariance of the canonical cohomology and the invariance of cohomological
support loci coming from generic vanishing theory. He is also interested in
studying similar questions in the singular setting, extending some previous work
in the case of varieties with quotient singularities.