* 1405912
* II-EN: Ensayo II: An Enhanced Virtual Emergency Operation Center (EOC) for Research and Training in Disaster Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* S.M. Niaz Arifin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 577,474.00

When disasters occur, they can severely impact the health and disrupt the
continuity of communities. Emergency operations centers (EOCs) are temporary
organizations that emerge to respond to disasters by bringing together dozens of
private and public organizations to communicate, coordinate, and collaborate to
ensure the continuity of the community. They have primary responsibility for
public safety under the guidelines of the National Incident Management System
(NIMS). Yet, EOCs are rarely engaged outside of a disaster situation, so there
is little empirical data to provide insight into their processes and performance
to support improvements. Observational research on such events is difficult;
experimental research is even more difficult. The goal of this infrastructure
enhancement project is to further develop an organizational simulation of an
EOC, called Ensayo, that reflects a wide variety of EOC forms. The goal of
Ensayo is not to model a disaster, but to model the organization that responds
to a disaster. The simulation will be based on an initial prototype and
developed with the collaboration of the the Miami-Dade Office of Emergency
Management and partners in its EOC. Ensayo affords not only a research tool for
academics, but also a resource for education, training and policy analysis for
communities of practice who engage in an emergency operations
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensayo II will be a reformulation and elaboration of
the Ensayo infrastructure developed with prior NSF funding, based on experiences
with the earlier project. The project has four major goals. First, Ensayo II
will evolve the architecture and functionality of Ensayo. Experience with Ensayo
has revealed the importance of crossing disciplinary boundaries (cognitive
science, human-computer interaction, computer science, organizational science,
systems engineering) in order to understand, model, and support the complexities
of an emergency management decision-making structure. Second, the system will
incorporate new collaboration and communication elements that are now found in
EOCs. For example, Miami-Dade was one of the first to formally address and
integrate into their structure a business recovery function. Third, the system
will support informational and decision modeling and tracking. Entities in an
EOC are generally guided by specific rules of communication and authority, both
from within and without. Tracking (or simulating) decisions and information flow
under various organizational stressors can provide unique predictive and
explanatory insights into the social dynamics of EOC structures. Finally, the
project will move from a prototype to an enhanced, operational research
infrastructure that can be deployed as a core, open-source project. Through
Ensayo II's improved infrastructure, researchers can investigate EOC structures
in situ and probe the micro-mechanisms that underlie EOC choices impacting
business and society.