* 1405579
* Performance of Networked Passive Radar Systems with Multiple Transmitters and Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rick Blum, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 241,373.00

The goal of this project is to demonstrate the outstanding but untapped
potential of passive radar systems with multiple transmitters and receivers.
Passive radar is a powerful approach that uses existing ambient communication
signals such as radio and television broadcasts, or satellite, cellular and WiFi
signals, to detect, image or classify objects and estimate their position and
motion. Since passive radar uses existing communication signals it can
drastically reduce cost, complexity and energy usage while being especially
important in emergency settings where one needs to quickly deploy a radar.
Through theoretical analysis, algorithm assessment, the project will demonstrate
the tremendous performance gains obtained through moderate increases in the
numbers of transmit and receive antennas for realistic radar system models.
These contributions should have significant impact to signal processing, sensor
networking, machine learning and radar systems research. As new statistical
problems will be considered, new theory developed should provide contributions
in mathematics and statistics while leading to practical algorithms and
ultimately improved radar systems for air traffic control, homeland security,
law enforcement (through-wall imaging), surveillance, ocean monitoring, weather
monitoring, and environmental monitoring. These investigations should provide
contributions relating to the performance analysis of multiple target cases in
active radar, sonar, ultrasound, acoustics and other similar active and
nonactive sensor technologies. It should encourage new applications for smart
homes, businesses and cars. This project will also offer ample opportunities for
educating graduate students, preferably from under-represented groups, in the
important cross-disciplinary areas of signal processing and energy via
coordination between this research project, classes and Lehigh's Integrated
Networks for Electricity (INE) initiative, which the PI is leading. The sensing
research in this project couples well with several activities within the INE
initiative. Research results will also be incorporated into current and future
Lehigh classes with the hope that class notes will evolve into a book and short
course on networked passive radar to provide broad educational
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimum possible performance for
realistically estimating the position and velocity vectors of objects using a
passive radar with M transmit and N receive stations will be derived for the
first time. Based on presented preliminary results for a simplified system
model, the project is expected to demonstrate the tremendous performance gains
obtained through moderate increases in MN for realistic system models. These
gains have not been observed to date and should encourage a tremendous increase
in research activity on passive radar technology with MN &gt; 1. These
contributions should have significant impact to signal processing, sensor
networking, machine learning and radar systems research. The proposed approach
will employ local/nonlocal/Bayesian/nonBayesian bounds for finite MN
performance; recent convergence results for sums of dependent random variables
to guide enlightening asymptotic analysis; carefully chosen models for
correlated reflection coefficients, correlated noise and other important
degradations; enhanced models based on electromagnetic theory; recently
developed target and clutter models; and the most promising signals of
opportunities, including MIMO communication signals which show significant
promise. The well-developed topics of multiuser/iterative detection and
interference channels will be employed to include the degradation incurred when
estimating the transmitted signals of opportunity and to account for the any
components of the direct path signals that may leak into what is thought to be
only the reflected signals. The impact of simultaneously employing several
different types of signals of opportunity and different station placements will
be uncovered.