* 1405308
* EAGER: New Methods for Genomic Analysis of Noninvasive Samples
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2017
* USD 292,778.00

The objective of this study is to develop novel methods for generating and
analyzing genome-scale data from biological samples that have been collected in
a noninvasive manner. Noninvasive samples are often the only type of biological
sample available for natural populations, especially in endangered or threatened
species, but they yield tiny quantities of low-quality DNA. Noninvasive genetic
analysis techniques have changed little in the past twenty years, meaning that
the genomic revolution has not yet arrived for species for which only
noninvasive samples are available. This study will address this problem by
producing new lab protocols for increasing and purifying the DNA yield from
noninvasive samples to a level appropriate for genomic analysis, and by
developing new software to analyze the resulting genomic data. It will validate
these approaches by comparing genomic data from noninvasive samples to data from
high-quality DNA samples, using data for a known pedigree from the well-studied
wild baboons of the Amboseli basin in East Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will result in a major leap forward in tools for studying the genomics
of many different species and sample types. Publicly available protocols and
software will be released, which can be used to investigate evolutionary and
population history in species for which such studies were previously impossible.
It will also provide societal benefits in the form of tools for assessing the
conservation status of vulnerable species. Finally, both graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained as collaborators on the project.