* 1405217
* Enumerative geometry of moduli spaces and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Davesh Maulik, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2016
* USD 190,000.00

The proposal concerns questions in algebraic geometry, which is the study of
solutions to polynomial equations and the geometric properties of the set of
such solutions. A common theme of the PI's research is the study of parameter
spaces of geometric objects and enumerative questions about them (e.g. counting
how many degree 2 polynomials satisfy certain properties). While these questions
start innocuously, they quickly become complicated and the modern approach
involves a combination of geometric ideas with techniques and conjectures from
other areas of mathematics and physics. For example, in one of the topics for
proposed research, the PI plans to investigate the relation between certain
parameter spaces and questions in knot theory; in previous work, the PI proved a
special case of such a relation, motivated by ideas from mathematical physics.
In the other research topics, the PI will study similar phenomena; in each case,
one expects fruitful feedback in both directions and hopes that new techniques
for studying these parameter spaces will develop as a consequence. In addition
to the research aspects of this proposal, the PI plans to apply support towards
mathematics education at different levels. Planned support includes outreach for
middle and high-school women, activities joint with Math for America, and
graduate-level courses and summer-school lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this proposal is to study topics in the enumerative geometry of moduli
spaces of various objects in algebraic geometry (sheaves, curves, surfaces), as
well as questions and applications coming from neighboring fields. The first
topic is Donaldson-Thomas theory, where the proposed projects involve extending
techniques based on vanishing cycles, with the goal of proving longstanding
geometric conjectures in the subject. There are also proposed applications to
the study of curve singularities and knot invariants. The second topic is
quantum cohomology of quiver varieties; here the PI, jointly with A. Okounkov,
has a long-term project relating geometric questions to constructions from
quantum groups. The third topic is algebraic surfaces in characteristic p, where
the PI plans to study the behavior of cycles in families, using the geometry of
Noether-Lefschetz degrees. In this case, the objectives are motivated by
understanding consequences of the Tate conjecture in arithmetic geometry.