* 1405248
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy and Ultramicroelectrode Studies Electrochemistry of Single Molecules and Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Allen Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 380,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is supporting the
research of Allen J. Bard of the University of Texas at Austin to continue his
development of a special type of microscope. The instrument, which uses a
technique known as scanning electrochemical microscopy, or SECM, has been
developed in the investigator's lab over a number of years and utilizes a tiny
electrified probe hovered just above the sample of interest. As this probe is
moved across the surface, electrical signals are detected through it and an
image of the sample surface revealed. The current project is investigating
various types of electrified tips, or ultramicroelectrodes, interacting with
different types of surfaces, including very soft ones. such as emulsions. The
work is having a broad impact through the direct development of new scientific
instrumentation that will find application in a wide variety of fields from
biology to manufacturing. It is having a further broad impact on the training of
the next generation of scientists through the participation of student
researchers in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central thrust of this
project is the development of further extensions of the SECM method and improved
fundamental understanding of single nanoparticle events. This is accomplished by
the detection and measurement of collisions between different types of single
nanoparticles (NPs) and a variety of electrodes. New areas of electrochemical
study in this work include: (1) Improved and advanced understanding of NP
responses; (2) Investigation of new NP systems, e.g. soft particles, by the
collision technique; and (3) Application of tunneling layers with nm-size
ultramicroelectrodes (UMEs) with the ability to characterize large molecules by
collision measurements. Knowledge gained from this work regarding the nature of
nanoparticle/surface interactions at electrodes can reveal subtle phenomena not
observable in ensemble studies, such as the effects of current density
variations across UME surfaces, motion of particles on surfaces, deactivation
effects by trace impurity adsorption, and single nanoparticle dynamics.
Stochastic electrochemistry could potentially challenge current understanding of
inner-sphere heterogeneous electron transfer, and provide a pathway to advances
in inter-conversion of chemical and electrical energy. The experiments being
carried out are providing new insights and a novel tool for the study of
emulsions, micelles and vesicles.