* 1405234
* Fundamental Investigations of Nanolaser Physics: Statistical Properties, Thermal  Stability, and Temporal Dynamics of Light Emission
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2018
* USD 349,999.00

Fundamental Investigations of Nanolaser Physics: Statistical Properties, Thermal
Stability, and Temporal Dynamics of Light
Emission&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale lasers, with dimensions smaller than
their operating wavelength, have the potential to offer unprecedented
communication, sensing, and illumination functionalities, due to their
incredibly small footprint and energy budget. However, the fundamental
properties of nanolaser light emission are poorly understood, in particular
their statistical properties. The objectives of this research are to develop a
theoretical model describing the dynamics of nanolasers based on a rigorous set
of measurements and to demonstrate electronically controlled nanolasers
operating at room temperature. These nanoscale lasers would find applications in
quantum communications and computation networks for secure communications and
for modeling of complex systems like the Earth's climate. In addition,
nanolasers have the potential for sensing bio-chemical agents in extremely small
volumes for healthcare applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
significance of the proposed effort is to further advance the fundamental
knowledge of nanoscale lasers. Nanolasers, which are formed from metallic,
insulating, and semi-conducting materials, have temperature-dependent
properties. The thermal stability of these lasers is intricately coupled to
their emission properties. Additionally, the light emission and thermal
properties generally evolve in time. Therefore, a theoretical model describing
the dynamics of nanolasers, coupled with their statistical and thermal
characteristics will be developed. The Purcell effect in quantum dissipative
systems will be investigated to describe the sub-threshold behavior in
nanolasers. Experimental objectives of this project include the design and
analysis of second and/or higher order coherence measurements tailored for
semiconductor telecom wavelength nanolasers at various temperatures.
Electrically pumped coaxial nanolasers for continuous wave operation at room
temperature will be fabricated and characterized. Results of these experiments
will lead to construct more accurate models of nanolaser dynamics.