* 1405887
* Dissertation Research: Evolutionary complexity and diversity of chemical defenses in diurnal and nocturnal fireflies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Benjamin Fitzpatrick, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,370.00

This research will provide insight into the origin and maintenance of complex
chemical diversity associated with alternative ecological strategies.
Antipredator defenses often consist of multiple parts functioning as a single
unit. Two key questions are: (1) What factors favor particular defensive traits?
(2) How are these strategies integrated into the phenotype? Chemical defenses in
fireflies provide an excellent system for evaluating these questions. Fireflies
are primarily known for bioluminescent flashing, but most also make diverse
blends of toxins that vary in chemical structure and concentration. Yet, little
is known about firefly chemical diversity, and how it-and complex traits in
general-evolve. For example, are shifts between diurnal and nocturnal activity
(and associated loss or gain of bioluminescence) accompanied by changes in
chemical defense evolution? This research will quantify the diversity of
chemical defenses across the firefly phylogeny and use comparative methods to
estimate rates of change and patterns of convergence and divergence of chemical
phenotypes.

This project will create outlets to educate the public about the ecology and
evolution of insects, nocturnal life, and bioluminescence via a favorite insect.
Moreover, drug discovery is a billion dollar business, and pharmaceutical
chemists have long recognized that evolution has produced some of the most
effective and profitable drugs ever. However, scientists still do not understand
the mechanisms behind the origin and maintenance of chemical diversity. Insight
into this question will help guide the next generation of pharmaceutical
chemistry.