* 1405175
* Qualitative analysis focused on some nonlinear systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

The PI proposes to study qualitative properties of solutions to some well-known
nonlinear partial differential equations. These equations arise naturally from
geometry, fluid dynamics, physics, chemistry, and biology. One is about the
global stability of solutions with reasonable datum to the three dimensional
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. The Navier-Stokes system of equations is
the guiding system for the dynamics of the incompressible flows. This global
stability problem is closely related to the `millennium' open question of
whether the three dimensional Navier-Stokes equations can develop a finite time
singularity from reasonable initial data. Many physical phenomena are heavily
involved with fluid flows. The understanding of the incompressible fluid flows
is certainly the first and the fundamental step. The other is the Hardy-
Littlewood-Sobolev type which arises in geometric analysis, functional analysis,
and in quantum physical problems.

The PI proposes to work on fluid flows which are axisymmetric and to derive
certain asymptotic estimate of the solutions. This is a possible way to show
that for an axisymmetric smooth initial data with compact support the
corresponding solution is globally well-posed (and thus develops no
singularity). This project also explores other ways of studying the local and
global structures of axisymmetric Navier-Stokes equations as well as the full
Navier-Stokes equations and seek applications in related research fields. For
the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev type systems, classification of solutions leads to
discoveries of new structures of well-known nonlinear partial differential and
integral equations arising from the mathematical and physical sciences.
Liouville type theorems, with the Lane-Emden conjecture as a special case, are
widely used for establishing various forms of a priori estimates for solutions.
This is the core of nonlinear analysis of differential and integral equations or
systems. The essential uniqueness are closely related to certain physical bound
states and their quantization. Deriving new and intrinsic estimates point-wise
or in integral forms, and getting asymptotic estimates of some key integral play
central rules in this project. On both problems, the PI emphasizes on finding
new and intrinsic connections of seemingly independent phenomena and on
providing some new angles to the problems. The proposed research projects also
actively involve graduate students and young mathematicians. And it provides a
solid training for them in mathematical analysis, physical modeling and
numerical simulation. The ongoing informal seminar `analysis of nonlinear
partial differential equations' that meets weekly to train the graduate students
and junior faculty members is also an important part of the project.