* 1405224
* Reconciling substrate specific differences in the carbon isotope excursion marking the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Reinhard Kozdon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 313,679.00

Model predictions and long-range forecasts for future climate change are partly
based on studies of geologic records of past global warming events. One such
global warming event occurred ~55.8 million years ago and is referred to as the
Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum (PETM). Study of geologic records around the
world has shown that surface temperatures warmed 5-8Â°C, biochemical processes
were altered, and the global biosphere was profoundly perturbed during this
time. However, the most distinctive hallmark of the PETM is a precipitous
decrease in the stable carbon isotope (13C/12C) ratios of terrestrial and marine
carbon-bearing materials. This carbon isotope excursion (CIE) has been
documented at numerous locations across the globe, and its ubiquity signals the
rapid release of massive quantities of isotopically light carbon (12C) into the
ocean-atmosphere system. The source of this carbon is still debated, but the
most parsimonious explanation invokes the dissociation of massive quantities of
sedimentary methane hydrate along continental slopes. The fact that this ancient
global warming event is closely linked to a major perturbation to the global
carbon cycle uniquely qualifies the PETM as an analogue for future climate
change driven by current societal practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key piece of
evidence for estimating the amount of carbon emitted during the PETM is the
magnitude of the CIE, yet it has long been recognized that different carbon-
bearing substrates yield different CIE magnitudes. For example, the CIE reported
from terrestrial records (soil nodules and land plant remains) is about twice as
large as indicated by measurements of marine sediments. This discrepancy is
vexing because gases are readily exchanged across the air-sea interface so that
the physiochemical state of the surface ocean should equilibrate with the
atmosphere on time scales virtually instantaneous by geologic standards. Hence,
the magnitude of the CIE in terrestrial and surface-ocean records should be
similar, yet this is not borne out by published records.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of marine PETM records are derived from
the stable isotopic compositions of tiny (&lt;1 mm) calcite shells grown by
planktic foraminifera, an extant group of amoeboid protists with a rich fossil
record. The preponderance of planktic foraminiferal shells in deep-sea sediments
has made them a preferred substrate for studies using geochemical analyses to
reconstruct past ocean/climate change. However, a problem plaguing such records
is that post-depositional processes on the seafloor can alter the original
chemical compositions of foraminiferal shells, thereby biasing stable isotope
records used to reconstruct past climate conditions like those that prevailed
during the PETM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Wisconsin Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometer (WiscSIMS) laboratory, novel in situ techniques have been developed
for measuring stable isotope ratios in tiny (~10 micrometers) targets in calcite
samples. This approach permits the identification and analysis of subdomains
inside foraminiferal shells that are less affected by chemical alteration and
therefore provide a more accurate record of past climatic conditions. Currently,
these stable isotope measurements cannot be performed by any other technique.
First results from a pilot study indicate that the CIE magnitude recorded within
these well-preserved subdomains in planktic foraminiferal shells is actually
twice as high as previously reported and thus highly congruous with the CIE
magnitude in terrestrial records. This project focuses on obtaining a more
accurate measurement of the CIE magnitude. Determining the true magnitude of the
CIE is important because it will (1) better constrain the amount of carbon
emitted, (2) provide a more realistic testing ground for assessing the viability
of proposed sources of the carbon input, (3) improve our ability to gauge
climate sensitivity to greenhouse gas forcing, (4) help identify feedback
mechanisms within the climate system that either amplify or attenuate global
warming, and (5) make it possible to better calibrate biotic (terrestrial and
marine) responses to environmental change driven by rapid carbon input. This
project will benefit the graduate education of a young female scientist, and
provide infrastructure support for the WiscSIMS laboratory where transformative,
cutting-edge analytical technologies are being developed.