* 1405273
* CSR: Medium: Self-organizing Cyber Substrates: Exploring a Modular Computing and Communications Architecture for Structural Health Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Rigoberto Burgueno, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

Many physical structures, including airplane wings, bridges, wind turbine
blades, dams, and buildings, are subject to the development of fractures over
time. Detecting these problems early is essential to preventing major
catastrophes. A promising approach is to install sensors that continuously
monitor and report on the structure's integrity. However, adoption has been
limited because of several limitations in current technology, including a need
for frequent battery replacement for battery-powered sensors, limited
interrogation range of passive sensors, and a separate communication subsystem
usually involving radio frequency sensor networks. This project aims to remove
these barriers by exploring a set of new technologies, including mechanical
energy harvesting and ultra-sound communication using the substrate of the
structure itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term vision of this research is
to develop a transformative self-organizing embedded system design paradigm that
facilitates convergence of self-powered computing, self-powered networking and
structural health monitoring into "cyber-substrates", that can "sense", "feel"
and "diagnose" impending catastrophic failures. The approach is based on a new
integrated sensing, signal processing, and communication chipset, which
scavenges both strain and vibration energy from the substrate to which it is
attached or embedded into. Energy is accumulated in a capacitor for computing
and communications. These chips are capable of enough local signal processing to
detect events indicative of failures, so that their communication requirement is
reduced to sending a single bit per event to a logging device. Key innovations
in this project are in the areas of: 1) embedded computing hardware for sensing,
event classification, and signal processing with ultra-low power budgets, 2)
packet-less and through-substrate pulse networking for extreme energy economy,
3) energy scavenging from the substrate structure, 4) binary computation models
for structural health evaluation and event predictions, and 5) smart embedded
software for self-organizing integration of all the above elements. All these
components are designed around the core theme of binary information framework
which is heavily leveraged for power optimization in sensing, communication, and
global inference algorithms for structural processing. Education and outreach
activities include involvement of diverse graduate, undergraduate and high
school students in the research, and development of a new interdisciplinary
graduate course in structural health monitoring.