* 1405748
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Studying Social Identity after Migration through Artifact Style of Everyday Objects
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2014,06/30/2016
* E. Charles Adams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 9,249.00

The primary objective of this research is to understand the nature of social
identity in communities that have experienced migration events and how the
process of aggregation affects the differential expression of social identity on
public and private scales. Given the present day extent of migration and large
scale movement of people on a global scale, insight into how integration does -
or does not take place - is of direct practical relevance. Archaeological
examples permit such an examination within an extended time
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Dr. E. Charles Adams,
Claire S. Barker will explore the relationship between social identity, artifact
style, and communities of practice in the late prehispanic U.S. Southwest. This
research will investigate how the style associated with methods of manufacture
can be an indicator of social identity. During the A.D. 1200s and 1300s, large-
scale migration and aggregation into large settlements occurred throughout the
U.S. Southwest. During this period of demographic upheaval, people were coming
into contact and living with different, socially distant groups. Such a
situation would bring diverse individual and community identities into contact
and, potentially, conflict. This project will focus on three broad issues. How
powerful was the process of social integration in aggregated communities? How
does the social identity expressed through everyday household objects differ
from the social identity expressed in objects that were used in public contexts?
Is identity differently expressed at sites that experienced differing degrees of
migration and aggregation? These issues will be explored through analysis of
style in corrugated cooking pottery dating to the 13th and 14th century from the
sites of the Homol'ovi settlement cluster located in Northeastern
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In archaeology, the study of social identity and
cultural practice through ceramics largely has focused on decorated pottery.
However, the importance of studying utility wares is often overlooked. By
studying these issues through analysis of everyday objects, the detritus of
commonplace domestic activity, the proposed research will demonstrate the value
of the everyday for understanding the social lives of people and communities. By
focusing on one settlement cluster and the sites contained therein, this project
will approach identity formation and maintenance from a micro-regional, multi-
scalar perspective that will produce a nuanced understanding of the effects of
migration and aggregation on the expression of social identity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use collections held by the Arizona
State Museum. Stewardship and preservation are among the most important
principles of archaeological scholarship; in situ archaeological sites and
artifacts are irreplaceable. By making use of existing archaeological
collections, this project both preserves the in situ archaeological record and
increases the attention given to the collections residing in the Arizona State
Museum. This research will improve the availability of the information housed in
these collections by collecting new data and synthesizing previously unpublished
data. Further, this research will focus on sites and material culture associated
with the ancestors of the modern Hopi tribe. A better understanding of the
migration history of the Homol'ovi settlement cluster and the social processes
that operated within and between the sites in the Homol'ovi settlement area will
be significant both to scholars and to descendent communities. Finally, this
research will contribute to a better understanding of migration, aggregation,
and the processes of social integration, relevant to all societies, past and
present.