* 1405173
* New Adaptive Dynamic Programming Structures From Neurocognitive Psychology and Graphical Games
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Ali Davoudi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 370,514.00

This project brings together a top control engineer with a cognitive
neuroscientist, in order to design a new family of control designs which would
replicate and explain key capabilities of living brains which have never yet
been achieved in engineering (or in the models used in computational
neuroscience). This new work builds on previous work by Frank Lewis, in
developing adaptive controllers (RLADP) which can maximize performance over
time, in the face of nonlinearity and challenges which require foresight, such
as the management of power grids. Here, the group will try to explain and
replicate how brains can also handle challenges which require them to learn how
to structure time, with multiple levels of decision with multiple time horizons,
and how to handle complex structure in space, as we need to in managing complex
infrastructure networks. These two challenges essentially address two of the
three gaps between today's best RLADP and the highest capabilities of the mammal
brain. The new fundamental design work will feed into ongoing laboratory work in
the control of electric power microgrids, which are important as building blocks
for future electric power distribution networks capable of coping with large
penetrations of plug-in hybrid cars or rooftop solar and the like.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous work is reviewed in the Handbook of RLADP,
from IEEE/Wiley, edited by Lewis and Liu. Spatial complexity will be addressed
by considering optimal control of systems defined over graphs, such as power and
communication networks. Game theoretic extensions, related to issues of
distributed or collective intelligence, will also be considered. The work will
also build on work by co-PI Levine on models of mechanisms in the brain
involving the emotional gates in the amygdala and deliberative decisions in the
anterior cingulate cortex.