* 1405966
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does fine-scale habitat variation shape genomic diversity within populations?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Andrew Gloss, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 19,671.00

To a casual observer, it is obvious that individual organisms of the same
species often differ from each other in many traits. When methods to quantify
genetic variation emerged half a century ago, researchers discovered a
remarkable degree of genetic differences among individuals as well. While many
theories have been proposed to explain why there is so much genetic variation,
the relative importance of different processes that could generate this pattern
still remain controversial. This project tests the hypothesis that a large
amount of genetic variation within populations is maintained when individuals
are spread across environments that vary at a fine spatial scale, with different
alleles (alternate forms of a gene) favored in different environmental
conditions. Specifically, whole genome sequencing will be used to examine how
levels of genetic variation differ in plant-feeding insects allowed to live and
feed on a single species of plant (non-variable environment) versus multiple
plant species (variable environment) in laboratory experiments. Additionally,
genome sequencing of insects from natural populations will be conducted to infer
if feeding on multiple plant species maintains genetic diversity within insect
populations in nature. The goal of the project is to determine not only the
extent to which environmental variation can maintain genetic variation within
insect populations, but also which genes allow insects to adapt to diets
consisting of different plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic variation in
natural insect populations enables rapid adaptation to novel diets or
environments. These rapid adaptations, which can allow insects to acquire
resistance to insecticides and feed on pest-resistant crop breeds, can have
dramatic consequences for agriculture and public health, since insects are major
crop pests and vectors of human disease. The goal of this project, understanding
how genetic variation in insects is generated and maintained, is important for
predicting when and how rapid adaptation occurs in insects. In addition,
knowledge gained from this project will have broad relevance for understanding
the outcomes of species interactions in natural ecosystems, as insects comprise
half of all terrestrial animal species on Earth. Lastly, researchers will mentor
undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups in science
in the collection, interpretation, and public communication of data from this
project.