* 1405537
* Existence and Uniqueness Questions in Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Nicolaos Kapouleas, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2017
* USD 227,869.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1405537, Principal Investigator:
Nicolaos Kapouleas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential Geometry is an important
field in Mathematics closely related to other fields of Mathematics and Physics,
for example Topology, nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, and General
Relativity. In order to understand and develop the theory in Differential
Geometry it is necessary to have a sufficient supply of examples of the
geometric objects under consideration. Finding such examples is usually a
difficult problem. A method which has been very successful because of its
generality and flexibility is the gluing methodology for constructing solutions
to partial differential equations, using singular perturbations and known
solutions on part of the domain of a problem. Although enormous progress has
been made in this direction already, the subject seems to have a long way to go
because there are many fundamental questions which are still completely open.
Further progress requires much more development of the methodology and
application to new questions. The principal investigator plans to continue
developing the subject further as discussed next.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First
steps in this agenda will concentrate on advancing the principal investigator's
program for desingularization and doubling constructions for minimal surfaces in
Riemannian manifolds. Other gluing constructions will be pursued with various
collaborators: Constructions for Einstein manifolds and Ricci solitons in four
dimensions with Simon Brendle and on some projects also with Frederick Fong.
Constructions for Constant Mean Curvature hypersurfaces with Christine Breiner.
Constructions of special Lagrangian cones with Mark Haskins. On free boundary
problems for minimal surfaces in the unit ball with Martin Li. Constructions for
coassociative four-manifolds with Jason Lotay. Constructions for self-shrinkers
for the Mean Curvature flow with Stephen Kleene, Niels Moller, and David Wiygul.
He also plans to pursue some more collaborations on projects related to doubling
and desingularization constructions with Christine Breiner, Jacob Bernstein,
Stephen Kleene, F. Martin, W. Meeks, Niels Moller, and David Wiygul. Finally,
the principal investigator plans to work, alone or with his collaborators, on
some uniqueness/characterization/nonexistence questions related to or motivated
by the above constructions.