* 1405769
* Ginzburg-Landau type problems in superconductivity and cell motility
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 284,000.00

This project is at the interface of mathematics, physics and biophysics. It is
concerned with the theory and applications of Ginzburg-Landau (GL) type
equations. These equations are among the most fundamental nonlinear partial
differential equations because they describe a wide range of phenomena in nature
from phase transitions, superconductivity, and superfluidity to liquid crystals
and motility in biosystems. The project consists of two parts, with mathematics
of GL type equations being the unifying theme. The first part is primarily
motivated by the quest for energy-efficient materials that comprise a foundation
for a new generation of superconductivity-based microelectronics. In practical
applications the current passing through a superconductor creates magnetic
vortices that move, dissipate the energy, and thus result in power loss. This
poses the problem of immobilizing the vortices, known as the problem of vortex
pinning. The second part is motivated by the problem of motility of eukaryotic
cells on substrates. The study of cell motility has been a classical subject in
biology for several centuries, dating back to the celebrated discovery by van
Leeuwenhoek. Cell motility is an important ingredient of many biological
processes, e.g., epithelial cells crawling across open wounds aid in their
healing. The investigator develops mathematical techniques to address these
fundamental problems in physics and biology. Graduate students are trained as
part of this project.

The project consists of two parts unified by the ideas and asymptotic methods
of multiscale analysis applied to GL type PDEs. First, the investigator studies
pinning and vortex phase separation in superconductors, with focus on the study
of a novel terraced vortex structure that appears due to the subtle interplay
between extremal values of physical parameters (such as the magnitude of the
magnetic field, size of pinning sites, and size of the superconducting sample).
A two-parameter asymptotic problem that models the vortex phase separation
phenomenon in superconductors with a large number of very small columnar defects
is considered. Then the homogenization techniques of Gamma-convergence suitable
for the interplay between the energy concentrations due to vortices and strong
spatial variations due to defects is developed. Second, the investigator studies
in a rigorous asymptotic framework a phase field model with volume constraints
that describes cell motility. The phase field function solves a scalar GL PDE
(Allen-Cahn) with an additional term that provides a gradient coupling of this
field with another governing field that satisfies a vectorial parabolic PDE. The
sharp interface limit in the presence of volume conservation constraints is
studied. A feature of this system is the gradient coupling that leads to an
equation of interface motion driven by curvature and a novel nonlinear term. Due
to this coupling, previously developed classical viscosity solution techniques
and recent Gamma-convergence techniques for gradient flows cannot be applied, so
new methods are developed.