* 1405829
* CI-EN-Collaborative Research: Supporting Research and Teaching for Next-Generation Search Engines in Lemur
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,636.00

Many previous successes in information retrieval (IR) research have been based
on open source software and test collections supported by university groups.
This project will extend open-source search engine software developed by the
Lemur Project to support major emerging research areas that are important for
the development of the next generation of search engines that will run on
mobile, speech-based platforms and be capable of learning and adapting to
individual users. We will also add new capabilities that support large-scale
collection of material from social media and common text mining tasks. These
extensions will also be an important part of training graduate students in
computer science in these critical new research areas.

The impact of machine learning, natural language processing (NLP), and social
media on IR research has been significant and continues to grow. Machine
learning techniques, in particular, have been instrumental in helping to develop
ranking functions that involve linear or non-linear combinations of many
representation features of queries and documents. The enhancements we will
provide in Lemur to support ongoing research in these areas include tools for
training parameters, defining and incorporating new features, learning-to-rank
methods that are relatively easy to use and well-integrated with the other
components of the search engine, and integration with NLP and data mining
toolkits. These enhancements, and the architectural changes to support multi-
pass searching and flexible query processing, are not available currently in any
open source search engine or IR toolkit.

For further information, see the project web site at the URL:
http://www.lemurproject.org/.