* 1405508
* GOALI: Crack Repair of Irradiated Stainless Steel by Friction Stir Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2018
* David Gandy, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2018
* USD 304,999.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research to uncover the mechanisms of sigma phase and chromium
carbide formation in friction stir processed austenitic stainless steel. An
Eulerian finite element approach will be used to predict temperatures, strains,
and strains rates in the stir zone so that fraction recrystallization can be
predicted for different tool speeds and feed rates. The modeling work will be
combined with experiments to test the hypothesis that sigma phase and chromium
carbide formation can be minimized or eliminated when friction stir processing
is done under conditions that avoid dynamic recrystallization. Phase
identification will be performed on processed specimens by electron backscatter
diffraction and by transmission electron microscopy for model validation. Hot
cell experiments on irradiated stainless steel will test a second hypothesis
that friction stir processing can be done without causing helium cracking in the
heat affected zone of the stirred region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide fundamental understanding of the role of recrystallization on sigma
phase and chromium carbide formation in friction stir processed austenitic
stainless steel. A new approach for repairing stress corrosion cracks in nuclear
components will emerge from the fundamental research results. As current fusion
welding processes cause helium cracking during repair of components that have
been irradiated for twenty or more years, this new approach has the potential of
overcoming a major technical challenge in maintaining our fleet of aging
reactors, which is critical to the national energy infrastructure and the
economy. Additional societal benefits include the education of students who will
be prepared to contribute to the nuclear industry, and an outreach program
working with high school teachers on new curriculum development, aimed at
encouraging female students to pursue careers in science and engineering.