* 1405225
* GEM:   Mode Conversion and Kinetic Alfven Waves at the Magnetopause and Their Effects in the Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Yu Lin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2018
* USD 460,367.00

The transport of mass and momentum into the magnetosphere from the solar wind
remains an important but incompletely understood problem. This proposal will
study wave-induced particle diffusive processes as a transport mechanism at the
dayside magnetopause. In particular the team will investigate the processes
involved in the conversion of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) fast mode waves to
kinetic Alfven waves (KAWs). The conversion to KAWs may be an effective
mechanism for transport. The processes involved here may be very important in
laboratory and astrophysical plasmas as well as at the magnetopause. This
research has an important element of basic plasma physics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will be to use hybrid simulations
(kinetic ions and fluid electrons in self-consistent electromagnetic fields) to
investigate mode conversion in a local boundary layer. The team will investigate
1) the 3-D nonlinear physics of mode conversion, 2) the physics of mode
conversion due to self-consistently generated foreshock compressional waves, 3)
the observed signatures of mode conversion and the dependence of mode conversion
on interplanetary magnetic field ( IMF) and solar wind conditions, 4) the
differences between KAWs due to mode conversion and those due to reconnection
and 5) the impact of KAWs on the ionosphere through Poynting fluxes and field
aligned currents. Comparison will be made between the simulation results and
THEMIS observations in the magnetosphere and DMSP observations in the
ionosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will support a graduate student.