* 1405715
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Determining the drivers of annual methane emissions in temperate wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,330.00

Wetlands are the largest natural sources of the potent greenhouse gas methane.
Production of methane in wetlands can be fueled by a range of carbon substrates,
including organic matter recently derived from plant material and organic matter
that has been stored in the soil for many years. The relative contributions of
old and young carbon substrates to methane emissions are not well constrained
but may impact whether wetland ecosystems accelerate or mitigate future climate
changes. This project will use field measurements and controlled laboratory
experiments to determine seasonal changes in the carbon sources that fuel
methane production in a wetland in the Sacramento Delta, California; formerly
the largest region of freshwater wetlands in the western United States. The
study site is characteristic of highly seasonal temperate wetlands. Natural
gradients will be used to explore ecological and meteorological drivers of
methane dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide rare and
valuable data on seasonal variation of carbon sources for methane production in
a wetland environment. The work will also take place in the broader context of
wetland restoration in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, California, where 150
years of land drainage has led to extreme land subsidence, very large greenhouse
gas emissions, and a range of other hydrological and ecological issues. Public
and private agencies will be engaged to translate the scientific results of this
project into information for public stakeholders and agencies concerned with the
future of the Delta. A specific outcome of collaboration will be to provide
assistance with the development of a wetland restoration protocols to quantify
and minimize methane emissions in delta ecosystems.