* 1405123
* Reversible Covalent Crosslinking of DNA to Befuddle Its Repair
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Steven Rokita, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 459,486.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding
Steven Rokita of Johns Hopkins University for research aimed at increasing our
understanding of the way in which our cells react to toxins in the environment.
In particular, the investigators are looking at how cells repair damage those
toxins might inflict. One way the damage occurs is through a process known as
DNA alkylation, in which small chemical groups are added to the molecules that
make up genes. Food preservatives, natural flavorings and even drugs can induce
DNA alkylation. The current project is designed to assess the biochemical
consequences of toxins that interact reversibly with DNA. The reversibility of
the deleterious interactions between these molecules and DNA creates the
possibility that the effects of the toxins are amplified and may overwhelm the
repair capacity of cells. To study the process in detail and identify the most
dramatic effects of the reversibility, a series of model compounds is being
prepared and tested for each step of the DNA repair mechanism. This work is
having a broader impact on scientist's ability to evaluate the toxicology of
substances prior to their market release. It is having a further impact on the
training of the next generation of scientists, both undergraduate and graduate
students, by encouraging them to recognize and pursue problems that transcend
the traditional barriers between organic chemistry and biochemistry and are
important for the human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
structural determinants required for efficient diffusion of covalent cross-
linking within duplex DNA are being identified. This is being accomplished
through the synthesis and evaluation of quinone methide intermediates that
express a range of reaction kinetics and DNA affinities. The principles gleaned
from this first activity will be used for challenging enzymes responsible for
DNA repair with reversible and dynamic cross-links. The entities formed during
each step of cross-link repair will be mapped by diagnostic fragmentation and
separation using electrophoresis and chromatography. Initial attention will be
directed to isolated DNA and then progress to nucleosomes and finally embrace
the complexity of crude cell extracts.