* 1405210
* Stochastic Controls, Portfolios, and Competing Particle Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ioannis Karatzas, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 590,342.00

In recent years good progress has been made in identifying instances of simple,
descriptive conditions on observable characteristics of large equity markets,
under which it is possible to outperform the market using simple portfolios
based solely on observables. Nevertheless, a satisfactory general theory has not
emerged yet: Is there a "canonical" way to understand the existing examples? Are
they special cases of a much more general construction? Under what conditions is
such arbitrage possible over arbitrary time horizons, and what is the "best
possible" such arbitrage under specific market structures? The investigator and
his collaborators study these issues and their connections to stochastic
analysis and partial differential equations. They also study stable competing
particle systems, that is, multidimensional diffusions interacting through their
ranks in a manner giving rise to invariant measures that are in broad agreement
with stability properties observed in large equity markets over decades. The
stochastic analysis of such systems presents interesting challenges, such as the
solvability of the stochastic equations that implement such diffusions; the
study of multiple collisions, of their associated collision local times, of
their invariant distributions, of time reversal; and the estimation of
parameters in the resulting models for practical implementation. Furthermore,
they work on stochastic optimization problems of the control and stopping type
in the presence of unobservable parameters, modeled in a Bayesian framework by
means of random variables with known prior distributions and continuous
updating. This work has implications for the adaptive sequential detection of
change-points, for signal processing, for finance, and for other fields of
application where learning about unknown parameters, and dynamic system
optimization, have to take place simultaneously and in real time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies problems in stochastic controls,
portfolios, and competing particle systems. These include: &lt;br/&gt;+ The
study of relative arbitrage in stochastic portfolio theory -- where one seeks
simple, descriptive conditions that allow for arbitrage relative to a large
equity market, and then tries to describe the nature of the most efficient such
arbitrage; &lt;br/&gt;+ The related study of the distribution of the time-to-
explosion for diffusion processes; &lt;br/&gt;+ The study of stochastic
differential equations with "singular" (generalized) drift, determined by local
time; &lt;br/&gt;+ Problems of stochastic control or stopping under partial
observations ("adaptive control"); and &lt;br/&gt;+ The study of (rank-based)
systems of competing Brownian particles, whose dynamics at any given time depend
on the empirical measure of their configuration.