* 1405116
* Collaborative Research: CCSS: D2D Wireless Networks: An Interference Nightmare or Resource Allocation Auspice
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Geoffrey Ye Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2017
* USD 184,662.00

Mobile data traffic has dramatically increased in recent years with the
emergence of smart devices. Device-to-Device (D2D) communications are expected
to become a key feature supported by next generation cellular networks with
advantages of: 1) extended coverage; 2) offloading in cellular networks; 3)
improved energy efficiency; 4) enhanced throughput and spectrum efficiency; and
5) creation of new services. Interference management is of key importance for
deployment of D2D networks. Although D2D communications bring improvement in
spectral efficiency and system capacity, it also causes interference to the
cellular network as a result of spectrum sharing. Thus, efficient resource
allocation and interference coordination must be addressed to guarantee a target
performance level of the cellular communications. This project constructs a
distributed and cross-layer framework to turn the interference challenges into
dynamic resource allocation auspice. The fundamental results to be obtained from
this project will enable transformative techniques that can lead to improved
performance of the next generation wireless networks. The results will be
publicly available through publications and open source software release. The
research results will be integrated into the existing combined education and
research effort. Furthermore, the education component will equip both
undergraduate and graduate students with the skills needed to contribute to the
field of wireless networking. Outreach activities will be directed to high
school students and increase the participation of women and minority in science
and engineering. As such, the broader impact resulting from the proposed
activities is also reflected through the integration of research and education
for the training of future wireless workforce.

The proposed activities are primarily targeted at constructing the new D2D
networks, and then uncovering the design challenges, tradeoffs, and requirements
for cross layer resource allocation approaches. Major intellectual merits in our
proposed research thrusts are: 1) Resource Allocation with Underlay D2D
Communication in Cellular Networks: Innovative resource allocation schemes are
proposed to maximize the overall network throughput while ensuring quality-of-
service. The proposed schemes consist of techniques, such as admission control,
power control, and matching potential D2D partners, and then conduct joint
cross-layer optimization for both D2D users and cellular users. 2) Game
Theoretical Distributed Scheme: A variety of game theory approaches, such as
reverse iterative combinatorial auction and Stackelberg game, are adopted for
dynamic opportunistic resource allocation. Furthermore, the equilibrium of the
game is investigated, and the approaches are designed for the game equilibria to
be close-optimal compared to the optimal solutions. 3) Joint Consideration with
Femtocell: Since femtocell/smallcell networking and D2D networking are two major
research directions pushed by cellular service providers, open access is
designed for femtocell together with D2D LTE-Advanced networks in order to
optimize network connectivity, coverage, system performance, and balance. 4)
Context Aware Network: a context aware framework is optimized for resource
management in D2D networks, which is aligned with LTE-direct. Ultimately, the
proposed interdisciplinary and cross layer framework will provide a blueprint
towards building new perspectives on future wireless network design.