* 1405479
* P2C2: Role of Westerly Jet Transitions in East Asian Paleoclimate
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* John Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 464,138.00

Paleoclimate evidence shows that rainfall over heavily-populated regions of East
Asia is susceptible to change. Recent cave speleothem records from China going
back a quarter of a million years convincingly show that the climate over East
Asia underwent large and abrupt swings during this time period. These
oscillations occur at multiple timescales, from a few hundred to tens of
thousands of years, and they are tied to distinct and varied forcings on the
global climate system during Earth's climate history. The standard
interpretation of the speleothem records is that the East Asian summer monsoon
intensified or diminished during these oscillations. However, this description
is qualitative, and does not factor in the complex behavior of today's East
Asian climate which exhibiting both abrupt temporal and spatial shifts as it
progresses through the season, in particular from Spring to Meiyu rains, and
from Meiyu to Summer rains.

This research explores the hypothesis that changes to the north-south position
jet stream impinging on the Tibetan Plateau are the underlying cause of the
abrupt climate changes in the past. Emerging dynamical studies of the modern
East Asian climate suggest that it is the latitudinal position of the jet
relative to the Plateau that determines the rainfall seasonality -- when the jet
is South of the Plateau, it is in a Spring rainfall regime; when it goes just
North, then Meiyu; and when the jet goes well North of the Plateau, Summer. The
hypothesis provides specific predictions that can be tested for different past
climate scenarios, in particular during the so-called Dansgaard-Oeschger events
recorded in ice core records over Greenland; and changes to insolation from
changes to the Earth's orbital configuration.

The jet transition hypothesis will be tested using three complementary
approaches: i) Examination of the association between jet streams and East Asian
rainfall changes in state-of-the art simulations of two particular past climate
scenarios (mid-Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum) by various modeling groups
around the world; ii) Idealized climate model simulations using a high-
resolution atmospheric general circulation model necessary for resolving the
fine-scale features of East Asian climate; iii) Investigating the modern climate
data and high-resolution simulations of 20th century climate to see if similar
jet-rainfall relationships hold for climate changes over this historical period.

This project involves international collaborations with scientists from Taiwan
and China, and supports a graduate student at UC Berkeley. Public lectures on
paleoclimate changes (with focus on East Asia) will be offered at the Lawrence
Hall of Science, using the "Science on a Sphere" (SOS) setup for climate data
visualization.