* 1405171
* NeTS JUNO:  Collaborative Research:  ACTION:  Applications Coordinating with Transport, IP, and Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Malathi Veeraraghavan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Today's Internet is significantly over-provisioned for a number of reasons,
e.g., to absorb traffic bursts, to handle the extra (rerouted) load when
failures occur, and for long-term traffic growth without frequent upgrades in
the field. This overprovisioning adds significant capital costs to the Internet.
The ACTION project enables adaptation of the Internet to changing needs and
demands by dynamically adjusting its "optical highway" capacities based on
network resource utilization. The project name ACTION stands for "Applications
Coordinate through Transport Interfaces with Optical Networks," implying that
the capacity of the Internet optical highways is a time-adjustable commodity,
which can be intelligently controlled by the applications via specially designed
interfaces. For example, part of the optical spectrum can be freed on highways
with low traffic volume and either reassigned to other highways where needed or
switched off to conserve energy. Such flexible highways are achieved by
combining WDM (Wavelength Division Multiplexing) Flexible Grid technology in the
metro-core with DSCM (Digital Subcarrier Multiplexing) technology in the
campus/access. The ACTION research activities will culminate in a final
demonstration on the Japan Gigabit Network-extreme (JGN-X) test-bed. The ACTION
project will actively engage undergraduate students in Senior Thesis and Design
Projects, recruit women and under-represented minorities by leveraging the UVA
Center for Diversity in Engineering and the UTDallas long-standing relationship
with CONACYT (National Council for Science and Technology of Mexico). Findings,
documents, links to publications and software will be disseminated through a
wiki-based Web site. All instructional materials developed will be made
available at TeachEngineering.com.