* 1405937
* II-NEW: A Reconfigurable Multi-Cell Research Platform for Massive Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

Mobile data usage is skyrocketing thanks to the popularity of smartphones and
tablets. Wireless network carriers are scrambling to increase their capacity by
acquiring spectrum and deploying more base stations. Multiple input, multiple
output (MIMO) technologies have been widely recognized for their potential to
significantly improve the spectral efficiency of wireless communication. In
theory, the capacity of MIMO grows with the number of antennas. Because mobile
devices are form factor-constrained, the majority of research has focused on
placing many antennas on base stations, with aggressive proposals calling for
hundreds of them. Such effort has created three pressing needs in wireless
research platforms. First, there is a need for base stations with many antennas
so that there is flexibility in how antennas are used, both for communication
and experimental measurement. Second, there is a need for a network research
platform in which emerging ideas that deal with inter-cell interference can be
experimentally studied. Finally, there is a need for a network research platform
with adequate and distributed computing resources to address the computational
requirement and systems challenges of implementing advanced MIMO technologies.
This project will develop ArgosNet, a reconfigurable multi-cell research
platform that will meet the above three needs. ArgosNet will not only allow
cutting-edge ideas for using MIMO to be experimentally tested under realistic
settings, but also enable the teaching of them with a real-world experimental
deployment.

ArgosNet has three completely programmable key components: (i) a configurable
number of base stations each of which can have up to several hundreds of
antennas, (ii) battery-powered mobile terminals, (iii) a server cluster that are
connected with the base stations with high-throughout, precisely synchronized
backhaul. Real-time, wideband communication between base station and terminal
will be supported for UHF and 2.4/5 GHz. Base stations will be precisely
synchronized via the backhaul and will cooperate to fully support network
functions such as handoff and localization. ArgosNet will be digitally and
mechanically reconfigurable with a default configuration of three outdoor base
stations each with 108 antennas. It can be easily reconfigured to have fewer
base stations each with more antennas or more base stations each with fewer
antennas. The research platform will be a new infrastructure deployed on the
campus of Rice University. The project will develop an open-access repository
with the complete hardware and software design for ArgosNet?s many-antenna base
station, as well as examples and a toolkit for rapid prototyping with ArgosNet
so that other researchers can build similar research platforms at their own
organizations.