* 1405740
* II-NEW: RIBBN - A Research Infrastructure for Backscatter-Based Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,512.00

The ?Internet of Things? (IoT) vision requires tiny, intelligent, battery-less
devices communicating with one another. However, reliance on power-hungry,
active radios for communications has been impeding progress in realizing this
vision. The proposed research infrastructure enabled by this project is geared
towards enabling a paradigm shift resulting in realization of systems wherein
radio-less backscattering devices communicate directly with each other as
opposed to an active radio based device (like in traditional reader-tag based
RFID systems). This award helps design and develop the Research Infrastructure
for Backscatter-Based Networks or RIBBN that responds to this need for an
integrated experimental platform which is both flexible and programmable at
every layer so that new protocols and systems can be developed and evaluated.
Use of RIBBN should help researchers and manufacturers to adopt RIBBN-based
evaluation in their workflow while developing new designs faster and at a lower
cost, thereby helping RFIDs make more inroads in the marketplace. On the
educational front, RIBBN hopes to contribute to courseware development, summer
projects of local high school students, and the WISE (Women In Science &amp;
Engineering) program in the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;RIBBN
is unique in that it enables experimental research on a new paradigm for future
IoT systems by providing three essential capabilities in the same platform ? 1)
backscatter-based tag-to-tag communication, 2) on-board sensing and 3)
computational ability. RIBBN is developed as a modular as well as programmable
platform. It enables a design and experimentation with new tag architectures and
protocols in a unified, open, reference system. RIBBN promotes and enhances
research in several areas including (1) development and evaluation of various
protocols in both lower and upper layers, (2) power harvesting, (3) security and
privacy issues in backscattered tag-to-tag communications, (4) relevant signal
and information processing methods, and (5) Internet of Things. The proposed
effort leads to a setup that we refer to as the RIBBN Lab, an organized testbed
facility for conducting research on backscatter-based
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;