* 1405108
* EAGER: Exploration of Magneto-Electric Hexaferrite Thin film Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Carmine Vittoria, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2015
* USD 77,747.00

Summary: DC voltages required for currently used ME bulk hexaferrite materials
are in the range of 100V to 2000V for observing any significant ME effects.
These required high voltage conditions imposed are impractical for CMOS based
devices in lieu of low power consumption and smaller size requirements. Thin
film-based devices are expected to consume very low power and are easy to
integrate with existing CMOS devices. To enable better performing highly
versatile modern wireless communication systems, phase shifters, filters,
sensors and/or medical instrumentation, there is dire need for single phase ME
hexaferrite thin films with high crystallinity and magnetoelectric effects.
Recently, PI has fabricated and characterized single-phase thin ME hexaferrite
films on sapphire substrates with minimal defects. Preliminary characterization
results indicated the feasiblility to fabricate a low voltage (<1V) operational
ME hexaferrite device with thickness ~100nm without sacrificing the percentage
of magnetization changes that are present in their bulk counterparts. To achieve
this it is proposed (i) to design, fabricate and characterize various capacitive
thin film devices with in plane and out plane geometry, (ii) to fundamentally
study the effect of substrates (conductive buffer layer) on the growth mechanism
of the thin films, (iii) to study the effect of the film thickness on the
performance of the devices, (iv) to explore methods for low temperature (CMOS
compatible) growth of thin ME hexaferrite magnetic films and (v) to
fundamentally study systematically pathways for achieving 100% magnetization
changes in these films.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research outcome is to fabricate thin
hexaferrite films on conductive buffer layers that can be readily incorporated
into CMOS resulting in low power operation voltage tunable magnetic devices. Two
device configurations for characterizing the ME effect in these thin films are
explored which will form the basis for various ME-based devices. The proposed
research will result in a fundamental understanding of the impact of conductive
buffer on the growth and resultant magnetic characteristics of thin film
hexaferrites. Through improved lattice constant matching between the conductive
buffer layer and the grown ME crystal it is expected to achieve a single crystal
ME thin film resulting in an enhanced ME linear coupling. The outcome of this
project will provide a pathway for realizing single crystal ME hexaferrite thin
films leading to a significant increase (~30-50%) voltage induced magnetization
changes which have extensive applications. Furthermore the fundamental
understanding gained through this proposed work will lay the foundation for a
hexaferrite thin film controlled growth process.

Broader Impact: The proposed research, if successful, can result in significant
breakthrough in the realization of novel magneto electric devices and interfaces
in the Magnetic/CMOS applications such as planar inductors, duplexers in
cellular phones, single chip phase-locked-loop frequency trans-receivers, GPS
(global positioning system) and DCS (digital cellular system) mobile
communication, loaded CBS (cavity-backed system) antennas for commercial
airborne platforms. The outcome of proposed research will be incorporated into
PI's graduate and undergraduate course on "Magnetic Microelectronics' which
entails IC circuits for wireless communications. The PI's will introduce ME
concept in daylong event on "Building Bridges" held by NEU twice a year in which
high school students in the New England area are exposed to ongoing advanced
research through simple demonstrations. We will also introduce the outcome of
the proposed research in the outreach activity "Nanodays" program sponsored by
the Museum of Science, Boston.