* 1405466
* Constructing subgroups in hyperbolic groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Danny Calegari, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2020
* USD 396,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1405466, Principal Investigator: Danny
Calegari&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups are the mathematical objects that formalize
the idea of symmetry. These can be symmetries that mix different scales
(recursive symmetries that describe the growth of trees), or that describe the
aggregate behavior of vast numbers of similar objects (ideal gases, efficient
markets). A complete understanding of groups is forever beyond our reach -- they
exhibit phenomena of arbitrary complexity, and the simplest questions we can ask
cannot be answered in the "worst case." But in the *generic* case the situation
simplifies enormously. Techniques developed by the principal investigator with
his collaborators allow one to construct subgroups of generic groups with a
great deal of control, and to certify that these subgroups have any number of
desired properties. The aim of this project is to extend these techniques to
broader classes of groups, to allow more flexibility in the constructions, and
to implement these theoretical tools in practical software. A key idea is to
transplant and construct objects from topology and geometry -- namely
*hyperbolic* geometry in dimension 2 and 3 -- into the generic combinatorial
world, where a priori one would not expect to find them. The familiarity of
these transplanted products provides the necessary leverage to break up the
ambient group into understandable pieces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of
this project is to develop tools to construct, to certify and to organize
certain classes of quasiconvex subgroups in hyperbolic groups, both in the
generic case (i.e. random groups, in various models) and in general. The
subgroups we are concerned with should be groups that we understand (i.e.
fundamental groups of closed surfaces or compact acylindrical 3-manifolds), and
their properties in the ambient group should have short certificates (which are
the key to their construction in the first place). The principal investigator
aims to build on techniques developed with various collaborators to construct
such surface subgroups and acylindrical 3-manifold subgroups in various classes
of hyperbolic groups, with the view to attacking Gromov's surface subgroup
question, and various generalizations and specializations of this question.
Techniques developed to construct objects in random groups can be adapted to
general hyperbolic groups, where "randomness" of the ambient group is
substituted for "degrees of freedom" in the method of construction. Finally, the
author expects to implement these constructions on computer, proving their
practical utility as a tool to understand specific classes of groups, beyond the
theoretical insights they provide.