* 1405156
* Development of methodological framework for effective deployment and operational optimization of flexibly automated production and service systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Spiridon Reveliotis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 333,091.00

Development of a methodological framework for the effective deployment and the
operational optimization of flexibly automated production and service
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest for an ever increasing level of
automation is a prevailing trend in many sectors of the modern economy, ranging
from the contemporary production systems and their supporting material handling
systems, to the various intelligent transportation systems that are currently
employed or contemplated for the future transport needs, to the internet-based
workflow management systems that have been proposed for the mechanization of
various routine operations taking place in service sectors like banking,
insurance claiming, and the backend transactions of contemporary logistics
systems. However, the existing theory for supporting the deployment and the
real-time management of such automated operations in the aforementioned
application contexts is challenged by the operational complexity and the large-
scale nature of these applications. Hence, the proposed research program seeks
to develop a novel methodological framework that will address the currently
perceived needs with respect to the aforementioned task. More specifically, the
successful implementation of the proposed program will enable a more streamlined
and a more robust deployment of the sought automating capability and it will
help in materializing the operational flexibility and efficiency that have been
contemplated for the corresponding environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
methodological standpoint, the proposed research program will abstract the
aforementioned operations as a class of resource allocation systems (RAS) that
must be controlled for operational safety, behavioral correctness / logical
consistency, and eventually performance. More specifically, the proposed
research program will leverage the existing theory of RAS supervisory control
developed by the PI and his collaborators, and it will complement this theory
with the necessary performance-oriented control / scheduling theory that will
lead to the complete development of a real-time control framework for the
considered RAS. The proposed developments will also be based on an effective
integration of qualitative and quantitative DES theory in the context of the
existing RAS, and they will further provide pertinent approximating schemes that
can support an effective and systematic trade off between the operational
efficiency of the derived control policies and their computational tractability.
In fact, it should be noticed that the pursued methodology for the
aforementioned integration of DES qualitative and quantitative control in the
context of the considered application is a substantial contribution to the field
of DES theory itself, since, historically, and in an effort to effectively
manage the underlying analytical complexities, these two major DES areas have
evolved on parallel tracks. Also, when viewed from the standpoint of scheduling
theory, the proposed research program seeks to develop effective and efficient
scheduling policies for what can be perceived as stochastic networks with
blocking, a topic that has not been extensively investigated by the current
scheduling theory due to the involved complexity. On the other hand, it is
expected that the aforementioned grounding of the proposed research on
qualitative and quantitative DES analysis and the effective integration of these
two areas, will provide the necessary analytical and computational tools for the
effective management of this complexity.