* 1405497
* Laser-based Fabrication of Metal Nanocomposite on Flexible Substrate for Flexible Electronics with Enhanced Durability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Benxin Wu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 06/30/2015
* USD 298,434.00

This award supports a study on a laser-based fabrication process to fabricate
metal nanocomposites onto flexible substrates. The research objective is to
fundamentally understand laser-material interactions and materials' responses
during the laser-based metal nanocomposite fabrication process, and mechanical
and electrical properties of the fabricated metal nanocomposites. The goal is to
establish the metal nanocomposite (fabricated through the laser-based process)
processing-structure-property relations. Research work to be performed includes
time-resolved measurements on the metal nanocomposite fabrication process,
physics-based modeling, characterization of fabricated metal nanocomposite
structures through scanning electron microscopy and other techniques, and
measurements of the metal nanocomposites' mechanical and electrical properties.
The research is expected to provide an improved understanding of laser-material
interactions and materials' responses during the laser-based metal nanocomposite
fabrication process onto flexible substrates, and the metal nanocomposites'
mechanical and electrical properties. It is expected that with suitable
manufacturing process conditions, the nanocomposites may potentially enhance the
durability and reliability of metallic components of flexible electronics, which
may potentially have a broad impact on many applications of flexible
electronics. This research on laser-based fabrication of metal nanocomposites
provides a good opportunity for graduate student training, and some materials
relevant to this research will be included in a graduate-level class taught by
the principal investigator. It is expected that research results will be
disseminated through approaches such as research papers.