* 1405826
* II-New: A Programmable Data-Driven Testbed for Sustainable Buildings Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 595,012.00

Today's buildings consume nearly 40% of the total energy, and 75% of the
electricity, produced by the United States. Consequently, the use of computing,
sensing, and communication to make buildings smarter and greener by reducing
their energy usage, costs, and footprint has become increasingly important. Many
research questions arise when using computational techniques for making
buildings smarter and greener. For example, how do we ``green'' buildings by
integrating renewable sources, such as solar and wind, into the building energy
management system? How do we reduce energy usage by automating error-prone
manual tasks, such as turning down a thermostat? Unfortunately, current research
is this area faces two key barriers: lack of access to energy usage data from
real buildings, and an inability to conduct experimental research in live
buildings due to reasons of safety and comfort. This project focuses on
alleviating such barriers by building infrastructure to collect anonymous energy
usage data from real homes for research purposes, as well as building a
programmable mock building to enable experimentation with smart energy
management algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a
programmable data-driven test-bed to enable a range of research and education
activities focused on sustainable buildings. Our test-bed will be comprised of
two components: a data collection component to instrument a large number of real
buildings of various types (e.g., single family homes, multifamily dwellings,
apartments, public housing and small office buildings) to gather anonymous fine-
grained actual energy usage and operational data at scale; and a programmable
smart building component that comprises programmable power sources and
electrical loads to enable a variety of energy management mechanisms to be
evaluated in safe and repeatable manner inside a ``mock" smart building. The
test-bed will enable a variety of novel research and education activities like
designing intelligent load management techniques and strong user incentives for
adopting such technologies; integrating renewables and energy storage into a
smart building's energy management mechanisms; using learning and modeling to
drive analytics of energy data to derive rich insights, as well as the design of
privacy mechanisms for smart grid technologies, such as smart metering; and,
using the platform for hands-on education and outreach to a broad
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interested researchers in this field will have
access to realistic data sets and a test-bed to conduct empirical research in
collaboration with local electric utility. As a result, the research enabled by
the test-bed has the potential to directly impact the operations and efficiency
of a real utility's grid management. There is a significant community component
to share anonymized data from our instrumented buildings, as well as the design
specifications with the broader research community. &lt;br/&gt;