* 1405993
* Mod p and p-Adic Aspects of Modular and Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Joel Bellaiche, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 206,598.00

Since it was initiated by the famous Indian mathematician Ramanujan more than a
century ago, the arithmetic theory of modular forms has become a major field of
mathematical research that plays a central and unifying role in our modern
understanding of number theory and algebraic geometry (motives) and has
connections with various fields of mathematics. The simplest and oldest reason
for which modular forms are useful to those other fields is that many sequences
of integers of interest in number theory, combinatorics, algebra and
representation theory, algebraic geometry, and theoretical physics have the
surprising property that their generating function satisfies a functional
equation that makes it a modular form. Hence the study of the arithmetic
properties of these sequences becomes a part of the study of arithmetic property
of modular forms. In particular, to study divisibility or congruence properties
of those sequences modulo a prime number p, one must study the theory of modular
forms modulo p.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a new approach to this
fundamental study, based on the determination of the structure of the big Hecke
algebras acting on space of modular forms modulo p, and the existence of a
Galois pseudo-representation attached to every modular form, not necessarily an
eigenvector for the Hecke operators. This approach should allow for a systematic
theory of congruences between the coefficients of weakly holomorphic modular
forms, not only producing, as was often the case isolated examples of
congruences, but leading to a complete classification of such congruences. It
will also allow to completely describe the asymptotic behavior of coefficients
of holomorphic modular forms modulo p, which is only known in certain very
particular cases as of now, and, in the more mysterious case of weakly
holomorphic modular forms, to better understand the "chaos" that conjecturally
lurks behind these congruences, in particular leading to the proof of several
outstanding conjectures concerning the reduction modulo primes p of the
partition function. A second aspect of the project, which is distinct from the
first but uses similar tools, aims at proving important cases of the Bloch-Kato
conjecture relating special values of L-functions of motives and Selmer groups,
and at developing the theory of p-adic L-functions. In the long run, those two
aspects should be reunited into one very large theory of universal families of
automorphic forms in mixed characteristic, including at the same time the
Galois, L-functions, and coefficients aspects.