* 1405723
* CI-P: Collaborative Research: HomeSHARE - Home-based Smart Health Applications across Research Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Kelly Caine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,967.00

This award supports planning for the "Home-based Smart Health Applications
across Research Environments" (HomeSHARE) test bed, intended to be a
geographically-distributed, in-situ test bed to design, develop, and evaluate
pervasive home-based technologies. Addressing the growing societal need to
support an aging population, researchers continue to create innovative home-
based systems to support older adults as they age in-place. However, researchers
find it hard to assess how generally useful systems will be because they lack
resources, access to diverse populations and research infrastructure. The work
supported by this award will identify the next steps to developing a robust
infrastructure to support better research in this area, leading eventually to
better home-based systems for aging in place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the research objectives of this planning grant are to identify the needs of
various CISE research communities for a HomeSHARE testbed with respect to
hardware, software, data sharing and coordination mechanisms. The PIs will work
with researchers to better understand what technologies are required for a
standard, baseline HomeSHARE installation, what technologies may be needed
beyond the proposed baseline package for specific projects, what processes
should be in place to add technologies to a subset of homes, and how the PIs can
make each HomeSHARE site as self-sufficient and easy to maintain as possible. To
determine and validate these requirements, the PIs will facilitate workshops at
top conferences in pervasive healthcare, ubiquitous computing, human-computer
interaction, software engineering, machine learning, privacy-enhanced
technologies, and gerontology to identify research community needs and work with
experts in each domain to confirm findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
proposing an initial test bed of 100 homes, the PIs will address the issues
around sustaining such a test bed over time, as well as growing the initial
HomeSHARE test bed in the future. HomeSHARE will be informed by best practices
in industry and academia to ensure that researchers can easily utilize the test
bed and results can be shared for replication and further analysis. This award
supports planning HomeSHARE for a single target domain, aging-in-place, to allow
for common, shared parameters for the recruitment of participants across
multiple research studies, but the creation of this test bed will inform other
CISE home-based research efforts and accelerate the pace of discoveries and
their implementation as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
HomeSHARE planning activity include professional development opportunities for
researchers who take part in HomeSHARE planning workshops, and cross-
disciplinary outreach to gerontology research communities. If implemented, the
HomeSHARE test bed itself will have a positive societal impact by supporting
development systems for the next generation of older adults to age in place,
thus improving the quality of life for older adult participants. The supported
research has the further potential to increase economic competitiveness for
health care, to increase diversity of the STEM workforce by attracting members
of underrepresented groups by providing research opportunities with real-world
impacts, and to provide innovative interdisciplinary educational opportunities.