* 1405834
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic Systematics and Biogeography of Iguanodontian Dinosaurs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Karen Poole, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 17,531.00

Iguanodontian dinosaurs are a diverse group of herbivores that range from small
to large ?duck-billed? hadrosaurs reaching 30 feet in length. The group
persisted for nearly 100 million years and is known from every modern continent.
The evolution of iguanodontians crossed many major anatomical boundaries,
including those of size (small to huge), locomotion type (bipedal to
quadrupedal), and feeding style (small-toothed croppers to plant-processing
machines with hundreds of teeth). To make sense of these evolutionary changes
this study seeks to understand the diversification pattern, or phylogeny, of
their evolution. To this end, fossils of all known species of iguanodontians
will be examined to study their changing anatomy through time. A matrix of all
observed anatomical changes will be compiled and examined using computer
algorithms to determine the most likely phylogenetic relationships among
iguanodontians. The evolutionary relationships will then be used to examine
their geographic distributions through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hypothesis
of the evolutionary relationships of iguanodontians will create a framework to
study their biology, such as changes in size, locomotion, and feeding mechanics.
This study will also test methods for including species known only from juvenile
specimens in the phylogenetic analysis; this will have potential widespread
application to other groups. Finally, patterns in iguanodontian biogeography
(evolution through time and space) will inform a better understanding of the
biogeographic patterns of Mesozoic vertebrates.