* 1405232
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The origin and evolution of a sexually selected trait
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Molly Schumer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,937.00

Some organisms exhibit traits that seem likely to hinder their survival, such as
bright colors or elaborate tails or fins. Counterintuitively, these traits can
actually facilitate an organism?s success because they can increase their
ability to find mates. In swordtail fish, males have evolved an elongated fin,
or ?sword? that helps them attract mates. Females of many swordtail species
prefer males with the sword ornament, but females of one species have evolved a
disdain of the sword. This project will investigate which genes are responsible
for producing the sword ornament. Once the genes responsible for producing a
trait are identified, population genetic methods can be used to determine the
strength of selection on these genes in different species. This project will
also test hypotheses about when and how the sword originated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genetic basis of traits and the strength
of selection on these traits is important in a number of biological fields
including evolutionary biology and biomedical research. In addition, this
project will collaborate with the Princeton Prison Teaching Initiative to bring
ongoing research into the classroom and give students hands-on experience with
data analysis and interpretation. This grant will also support the development
of educational resources for K-12 instructors to help students learn about
genetic and evolutionary processes.