* 1405413
* A compositional approach for performance certification of large-scale engineering  systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Andrew Packard, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 470,469.00

A compositional approach for performance certification of large-scale
engineering systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major problem for safety-critical
engineering systems is to certify the required stability and performance
properties using analytical and computational models of the physical system. The
existing methods for such certification are severely limited in their ability to
cope with the number of physical components and the complexity of their
interactions in today's large-scale systems. The project addresses this problem
with a compositional approach that derives system-level guarantees from key
structural properties of the subsystems and their interactions, rather than
tackle the system model as a whole. The first objective is to develop tools that
automatically detect useful properties of the subsystems and their
interconnection, and to exploit these properties to simplify the task of
performance certification. To select important subsystem properties, recently
developed techniques for large-scale optimization are employed. Likewise,
efficient algorithms from graph theory and computational algebra are leveraged
to detect symmetries in the interconnection of the components, leading to
further simplification. The second objective is to advance the aforementioned
compositional approach to "hybrid" systems in which a supervisory control
algorithm is able to switch from one mode of operation to another. The task is
then to develop switching strategies to prevent the system from reaching states
that are deemed "unsafe". One of the educational contributions of the project is
the development of a desktop robotic system that mimics the logrolling game in
which two players aim to stay on a floating log while attempting to cause the
competitor to lose balance. This system embodies fundamental problems that are
of great interest across a wide range of application areas and provides a test
bed for new control algorithms, such as switching strategies between several
modes (defensive, aggressive, short-term survival, etc.). A further educational
contribution is a graduate course on the theme of this project that is being
developed by the principal investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
scalable tools for verification is a major problem for safety-critical
engineering systems in which the number of physical components and the
complexity of their interactions are continuously increasing. This project
addresses this problem with a compositional approach that exploits key
structural properties of the subsystems and their interconnection topology,
rather than tackle the system model as a whole. The first objective is to
develop tools that automatically detect critical properties of the subsystems
and their interconnection. This will be accomplished by exploiting symmetries in
the interconnection topology to reduce the size of the numerical problem for
performance certification and by employing large-scale optimization tools, such
as the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM), to select the most
important subsystem properties. The second objective is to advance the
aforementioned compositional approach beyond traditional performance criteria
and system models. The new tasks include safety verification where the goal is
to ensure that no trajectory enters an undesirable set, and designing switching
strategies for hybrid systems to maintain safety. The combination of the
proposed compositional approach and modern computational tools predicated on
semidefinite programming offer great potential to overcome the existing
dimensional barriers for these problems. The PIs are developing a graduate
course on the theme of this project. A further educational contribution is the
development of a desktop robotic system that mimics the logrolling game in which
two players aim to stay on a floating log while attempting to cause the
competitor to lose balance. This system embodies fundamental distributed control
problems that are of great interest across a wide range of application areas and
provides a testbed for new algorithms, including those resulting from the
proposed research.