* 1405526
* Cooling Rate Correlation between Microstructural Phases and Part Dimensions for EBM-Fabricated Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Ryan Wicker, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2017
* USD 198,142.00

This award supports fundamental research on the electron beam melting process,
an additive manufacturing technology that builds three-dimensional shapes out of
powder metals. The layer-by-layer fabrication process promotes distinct
microstructural features dependent on cooling rates that are affected by part
dimensions, among other factors. Mesh and foam cellular structures are a
particular benefit of additive manufacturing and can be used to improve or
increase the strength-to-weight ratio of production parts in the aerospace and
other industries. Previously, these mesh and foam cellular structures fabricated
by electron beam melting using a titanium alloy contained a titanium martensitic
brittle phase that, hypothesized in this research, can be avoided by controlling
the cooling rates during fabrication. Cooling rates will be measured with a
multi-wavelength pyrometer to obtain point-specific, layer-by-layer part
temperatures; and the smallest part dimensions that can be fabricated without
compromising mechanical properties and microstructural architectures will be
determined.

Research results and dissemination of these results will provide recommendations
and strategies to the broad additive manufacturing and metals fabrication
communities to avoid the occurrence of brittle microstructures regardless of
part dimensions. The lack of the titanium martensitic brittle phase will allow
freedom in the design of parts containing mesh and foam cellular structures
without compromising mechanical properties, which will provide an unprecedented
benefit for using additive manufacturing technologies to directly fabricate next
generation metallic components. The research will be performed at the University
of Texas at El Paso, a minority serving institution with a Hispanic-majority
student population, providing an unparalleled experience for the students
involved in the program in the growing field of additive manufacturing.