* 1405619
* Establishing uniform solar energy output during periods of cloud obscuration  through joint design of optical and energy converter systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Raymond Kostuk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,447.00

Establishing uniform solar energy output during periods of cloud obscuration
through joint design of optical and energy converter systems&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The impending climate and fuel crises will adversely affect the
quality of life and security of society. In order to prevent this problem from
occurring, renewable energy solutions must become a larger percentage of the
existing energy supply. However, at the current time the amount of solar energy
generated electricity from conventional photovoltaic systems varies a great deal
during the day due to atmospheric fluctuations such as obscurations from clouds.
The proposed work provides a path to solving this problem by reducing the effect
of solar intermittency on the output of photovoltaic systems. This will be
accomplished through a design methodology that integrates the characteristics of
photovoltaic and thermal energy converters, local and regional solar
illumination conditions, and optics to optimize the solar conversion system
temporal uniformity and overall output power. The systems will use several types
of photovoltaic cells to increase solar conversion efficiency, thermal
converters that respond more slowly to cloud obscuration to dampen variability,
and optical techniques to increase utilization of the available sunlight for
both types of converters and to optimize the overall system electricity output.
This design process will lead to the production of higher quality renewable
energy that will be more useful to utility companies for electrical grid
applications. In addition to the technical benefits, the proposed work provides
opportunities for new engineering students to learn the essentials of solar
energy component and system design. Students are eager to become involved
solving climate and energy problems and this project offers excellent
opportunities to educate and train them for research and the work place. In
addition, reliable, low cost solar energy systems will allow use on Native
American reservations and in third world countries where electrical power is not
readily available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to develop a novel holographic light management methodology that
integrates different types of solar converters to provide more useful electrical
power from the solar resource. In particular, holographic light management
techniques will be used to optimize the output of hybrid photovoltaic/solar
thermal converters to mitigate the effects of daytime solar intermittency on
photovoltaic (PV) system performance. This will be achieved by developing light
management designs that provide: full spectrum utilization, high efficiency PV
spectrum splitting, and solar thermal conversion for short term energy storage.
In addition, holographic configurations will be examined to allow operation of
high efficiency spectrum splitting PV systems during diffuse illumination
conditions to further extend the energy yield capability of PV systems. Solving
these two problems will significantly increase the energy capacity factor of PV
systems. The potential contributions of this work include: 1) development of a
holographic light management methodology that integrates imaging and non-imaging
optical design, holographic and conventional optics, PV cell and solar thermal
converter parameters, and local and regional solar illumination data to design
systems for full solar spectrum utilization that mitigate daytime atmospheric
intermittency effects on electricity output; 2) design, fabrication, and
evaluation of holographic optics that control concentration ratio, spectral
bandwidth, and geometrical form factor for optimum solar energy conversion under
direct sunlight illumination conditions; and 3) development of high efficiency
spectrum-splitting holographic systems for operation with diffuse illumination
conditions. These contributions will lead to renewable energy systems that can
be used more reliably by utility companies and greater insertion into the
electrical grid. This in turn will diminish the negative effects of fossil fuels
on the climate and provide a better quality of life for the Nation and World's
population.