* 1405959
* II-New: RIVER: A Research Infrastructure to Explore Volatility, Energy-Efficiency, and Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Haryadi Gunawi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,013,432.00

With the end of Moore's Law, all computing systems (smart phones, watches,
laptops, and even the cloud) of the future must intelligently manage energy,
parallelism, and even trade reliability and lifetime for increased computing
performance and storage capacity. This daunting task involves decision making in
real-time (milliseconds), in a system with many devices (billions of
transistors), and very complex behavior (100 million line software) with
consequences for performance or lifetime as much as 100-fold. The Research
Infrastructure to explore Volatility, Energy-efficiency, and Resilience (RIVER)
at the University of Chicago will create a scientific vehicle that enables
research on this critical management problem for applications that underlie
extraordinary information access and intelligent behavior we depend on in
today's information systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RIVER project will design
and create an observable, controllable computing system (a research
infrastructure) where reliability, lifetime, power, volatility, parallelism, and
performance can be varied across as wide a range as 10,000-fold. Under flexible
software control, the system will support power capping, clock speed scaling,
and enable deep customization of solid-state storage. All of these properties
will be supported with fine-grained control and complemented by extensive
detailed monitoring. Research results will involve new ways to control and
intelligently manage computing performance and lifetime with quantitative
improvements as large as 100-fold; such large change may be breakthrough
capabilities for those applications in the new reality of hardware technology.
The RIVER project will advance computer systems, software, algorithms, and
applications research. Because of the broad societal importance of computing,
the potential impact of these core capabilities could touch many aspects of
government, education, and commerce. The RIVER system and tools will be used in
undergraduate and graduate classes, thus exposing them to realities of future
computing, and will be shared with other universities to maximize impact.