* 1405344
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Sociopolitical Complexity in Northern Mesopotamia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Max Price, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 18,358.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to understand the interactions between
the governing and the governed in traditional state level societies. The central
question focuses on the strategies taken by the latter to maintain economic
independence during periods in which centralized authority increases.

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Meadow Max Price will study how relations
between different segments of society affected agricultural decision-making in
early complex societies. He will do this by examining changes in pig husbandry
practices in northern Mesopotamia (modern day Syria, southern Turkey, and
northern Iraq) over the period during which the first states emerged (6500-2100
BC). This research will shed light on how the actions of state and bureaucratic
elites influenced the economic decisions of non-elite urban residents and vice-
versa.

Ancient northern Mesopotamian leaders and their bureaucrats maintained control
over many aspects of the economy in order to fund state expenses. In the case of
the animal economy, they controlled sheep, goat, and cattle herds in an attempt
to corner the market on meat and other animal products. However, it is apparent
from ancient Mesopotamian texts that they did not control pig husbandry. In
addition, pigs grow and reproduce rapidly, making pork a particularly useful
food source for non-elite citizens, especially in urban centers, where the
control over meat distribution was at that time greatest. Pork would have been
particularly important in periods during which leaders increasingly used their
control over agricultural production to increase their power at the expense of
the non-elite. In these cases, pigs would have acted as insurance against the
unreliability of bureaucrat-controlled meat sources. The hypothesis of this
research, therefore, is that pig husbandry intensified when and where
centralized political power was at its greatest.

In order to investigate how non-elite agriculturalists altered pig husbandry
practices in response to changing political circumstances, Price will employ a
range of archaeological analytical techniques. He will study collections of
animal bones and teeth from 15 archaeological sites, which are currently curated
in museums in the United States and Turkey. The methods he will employ are
designed to reconstruct ancient husbandry practices by looking at changes in pig
feeding, breeding, and penning practices over time. In addition, he will conduct
archaeological excavations at the site of Tell Surezha in northern Iraq
(Kurdistan region), where a long history of human habitation will provide
important data on changes in husbandry practices early on in the process of
state formation.

This research has broader impacts beyond those relating to improving the
archaeological and anthropological understanding of the impact of early states
on the non-elite majority. It will include public outreach at the Peabody Museum
of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard University. Price has presented and will
continue to present his research to museum patrons of all ages, helping to
educate the public about daily life in ancient societies. Additionally, the
excavation component of this research, which takes place in the Kurdish region
of northern Iraq, will provide training to local archaeology students in modern
recovery and analytical techniques. Training the new generation of Iraqi
archaeologists is imperative in order to help prevent looting and the
destruction of archaeological sites and cultural heritage.