* 1405635
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sex-biased dispersal: mechanisms and consequences in changing environments
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Mathew Leibold, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 13,772.00

One of the biggest challenges that ecologists face is making accurate
predictions about how the natural world will change over time. As humans
continue to alter landscapes, it is important to understand how organisms will
respond to these changes and how resilient the natural world will be. Scientific
research in this area serves a practical purpose, for gauging the potential
costs of growth and expansion, while it advances fundamental understanding of
the natural world. This project will develop a novel approach to examine how
organisms respond to change that will provide greater nuance and predictive
power for a diverse organisms facing wide-ranging environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersal is an important process that affects the ecology
and evolution of organisms but the consequences of individual variation in
dispersal ability are not well understood. One particularly common form of
intraspecific variation in dispersal occurs between males and females of a
species, and this project will investigate how sex-biased dispersal affects the
persistence of metapopulations in changing environments. Previous studies by the
authors have found that adult female and larval odonates, commonly known as
dragonflies and damselflies, are highly constrained by their environment, while
adult males often dispersed into unsuitable habitat. This suggests that biases
exist for both dispersal distance and for habitat choosiness. In order to
investigate the specific behavioral mechanisms behind this differing dispersal
behavior, a reciprocal transplant experiment will be performed. Emerging adult
odonates will be raised in artificial mesocosms, captured and marked, then
released at mesocosms containing unsuitable habitat. Settlement of marked
individuals close to the release location, regardless of the environmental
qualities of that habitat, will suggest that dragonflies are not choosy in their
dispersal behavior, but rather settle close to home. This behavior has important
consequences in changing environments. By linking pattern, mechanism, and
generality, this project will be providing more evidence of the ecological
importance of gender-biased dispersal and of individual variation more
generally. The project will significantly advance training of a doctoral student
by providing the opportunity to test newly-developed models with field
experiments. The investigators will present results to the public through
existing programs such as Science Under the Stars, Travis Audubon Society,
Capital Area Master Naturalists, and the Austin Butterfly Forum - local
organizations committed to raising public awareness of natural communities.