* 1405906
* CI-P: Computer System Failure Data Repository to Enable Data-Driven Dependability Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 65,891.00

Dependability is a requirement for computer systems; however,
research&lt;br/&gt;on dependable systems is hampered by a lack of real and
publicly&lt;br/&gt;available failure data. This can result in productive paths
of&lt;br/&gt;research being closed to most researchers and,
conversely,&lt;br/&gt;unproductive research being performed due to faulty
assumptions about&lt;br/&gt;the manner in which real systems fail. The goal of
this project is to&lt;br/&gt;plan a collaborative effort to collect, curate, and
provide public&lt;br/&gt;access to failure data for large scale computer systems
through a&lt;br/&gt;community repository. One challenge is that failure data
is&lt;br/&gt;considered sensitive by the owners. The ultimate goal of this
project&lt;br/&gt;is to collect the data from some of the NSF-funded
large&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure projects, such as NEES, LIGO, XSEDE, and
NRAO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this planning project is to
collect requirements&lt;br/&gt;from potential praticipants (both users and
contributors of data sets)&lt;br/&gt;and seed a prototype repository with data
sets from two of the largest&lt;br/&gt;and latest clusters at Purdue. The data
sets will comprise static&lt;br/&gt;information, dynamic information about the
workloads, and failure&lt;br/&gt;information, for both planned and unplanned
outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact in the project will be achieved
through the&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of the data sets to a wide variety of
researchers, and&lt;br/&gt;perhaps even, practitioners. The datasets will let
people run their&lt;br/&gt;campus clusters more efficiently, i.e., with fewer
failures, at higher&lt;br/&gt;utilization and energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;