* 1405135
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Quantification and Characterization of the Production of Methane in Living Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,645.00

Previous studies into the production of methane in living trees suggest that
trees have the potential to be a globally significant source of methane, which
is an important greenhouse gas. Wood-rot inside living trees is known to be
common, but the production of methane from this rotting material has not been
considered in global methane budgets. Using a collaborative kit-based sampling
effort, gas will be collected from living trees, dead wood, and debris, in
western conifer forests and results evaluated in the context of forest
management approaches that maximize carbon storage and hence limit methane
production. A great deal of attention has been focused on forests and their role
in mitigating the potentially catastrophic impacts of global change on the
health of millions of people worldwide. For forest management to be as effective
as possible at carbon capture, it is imperative that a better understanding of
the fundamental dynamics of forest-climate interactions is developed. The
quantification and characterization of methane emission from upland forests that
will be undertaken in this project can inform climate modelers and forest
managers about the potential role of tree-methane emission in carbon cycling.
Beyond generating needed data, the work will fund both graduate and
undergraduate research experiences. Specifically, the funds will extend the
dissertation of a 4th year doctoral student and be used to facilitate
undergraduate research experiences with a four-year college of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In upland, hardwood-dominated, eastern US
forests, the occurrence of distinct species-level patterns in methane production
potential suggests that the highest methane production rates drive substantial
through-bark emission to the atmosphere. Initial flux estimates suggest that the
magnitude of this methane source could be on the same order as the upland
forest, soil methane sink. The extent to which this applies to forests more
broadly is not known, as the physiology of tree species in eastern hardwood
forests in the US may be particularly conducive to the development of
substantive wood rot inside living trees. The physiology of coniferous species,
however, can limit the spread of rot within living trees and so their potential
to produce methane through this rot pathway could be much lower. Based on the
methods used to measure methane production in eastern hardwood trees, the
investigators will conduct paired field and laboratory studies in western US
coniferous forests. Specifically, using a distributed, collaborative, kit-based
sampling effort, gas will be collected from living trees, dead wood, and debris,
in western conifer forests. In addition, wood samples will be collected across a
chronosequence and placed in static chambers to assess the magnitude of methane
flux. A subset of these debris samples will be subjected to microbial community
analysis to relate observed methane flux rates and internal methane
concentrations to microbial dynamics in living trees and downed dead wood.