* 1405303
* Theoretical Spectroscopy and Thermodynamics for Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kristjan Haule, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education directed towards a transformative
acceleration of progress in our understanding of complex materials, which show
prominent competitions of quantum mechanical effects such as strong electron
interaction, magnetism and superconductivity. For simpler materials for which
the physical properties can be accurately represented in terms of a system of
independent particles in the presence of an average potential, methods based on
Density Functional Theory have enabled large-scale simulations of realistic
systems with high accuracy. For materials in which electrons interact strongly
and the "independent-particle" picture is not as reliable, the so-called
Dynamical Mean Field Theory method has enabled practical and accurate
calculations of their basic properties. This project is aimed at developing a
number of new theoretical tools, which can be used in combination with
electronic structure tools based on Dynamical Mean Field Theory to enable
theoretical prediction of material properties without using empirical
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable the construction of a
predictive framework for describing the physical properties of materials in
which electron-electron interactions play a very important role. The tools and
codes developed in this project will allow one to theoretically characterize
complex materials, which will lead to improved scientific understanding of
quantum many-body effects, and will provide a basis for harnessing such effects
to develop functional materials such as strong magnets and novel
superconductors. The educational component of this project involves the training
of the next generation of scientists in an interdisciplinary environment at the
intersection of theoretical physics, computational physics, and materials
science. The PI will also be involved in public outreach activities by mentoring
and providing summer research experiences for high school students through the
Liberty Science Center in New Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To search for new materials with enhanced physical
properties it is crucial to develop capabilities for computational
characterization of a material. This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education directed toward developing a number of
theoretical spectroscopic tools, which can be used in combination with
electronic structure tools based on Dynamical Mean Field Theory to enable
theoretical prediction of material properties using first principles methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spectroscopic tools to be developed will be used for
(i) computing dynamical structure factors measured in neutron spectroscopy
experiments, (ii) predicting the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter
in unconventional superconductors, (iii) Auger spectroscopy, which can be used
to measure the strength of correlations and to theoretically estimate the
strength of the Coulomb interaction, (iv) Raman spectroscopy which can identify
the low frequency excitations of the solid, and (v) computing the free energy of
a solid for studying phase transitions at finite temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable the construction of a predictive
framework for describing the physical properties of correlated materials. The
tools and codes developed in this project will allow one to theoretically
characterize complex materials, which will lead to improved scientific
understanding of quantum many-body effects, and will provide a basis for
harnessing such effects to develop functional materials such as strong magnets
and novel superconductors. The educational component of this project involves
the training of the next generation of scientists in an interdisciplinary
environment at the intersection of theoretical physics, computational physics,
and materials science. The PI will also be involved in public outreach
activities by mentoring and providing summer research experiences for high
school students through the Liberty Science Center in New Jersey.