* 1405747
* NeTS: JUNO: Cognitive Security: A New Approach to Securing Future Large Scale and Distributed Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 04/30/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Authentication is the first step in securing a networked application.
Traditional authentication relies on cryptographic algorithms that verify users
identify based on certain pre-configured secrets. In a world with "trillions" of
mobile objects ("computation in everything") rigorous key management techniques
are difficult, the traceability of pre-configured secrets is compromised, and
crypto-based authentication schemes become
ineffective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate an alternative
approach, referred to as cognitive security, to address this compelling problem.
Cognitive security aims to supplement the crypto-based solutions with unique,
unforgeable, and robust credentials that are inherent to the network entities
such as mobile devices and users. For example, a location claim can be verified
by a location "fingerprint" constructed from the ambient radio signals presented
at the said location at the said time. A user's identity can be verified by
knowledge the verifier learned from the user's online social networks. These
credentials are physical properties of the mobile devices or knowledge naturally
known to the users, which do not have to be pre-configured or remembered.
Mechanisms will be developed so that these credentials can be collected or
learnt through the normal network operations and be used to securely verify a
device or a user's identity or claims. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
international collaborative project, between US and Japan. The project will
involve multiple areas of information technology, including security, wireless
communications and networking, and machine learning. Cognitive security is a
promising new approach to mobile network security where the security of the
device or secrets stored in the device cannot be guaranteed.