* 1405226
* Stress State, Strain History and Microstructural Effects in Ductile Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ahmed-Amine Benzerga, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 286,251.00

Ductile fracture is a ubiquitous mode of failure in metals and some polymers
whose main function is load bearing. Predicting material failure is essential to
many engineering applications, including those in transportation, energy and
manufacturing. Current understanding of ductile fracture is based on a theory of
microvoid growth which is unable to rationalize the type of failures observed in
various manufacturing or penetration processes, or the fracture of
technologically important, lightweight materials. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development or robust
models and simulation tools of ductile fracture in structural materials under
loading conditions for which yet no satisfactory solution exists. As one
potential benefit, the research outcomes will aid in the development of strong
and tough lightweight materials in transportation vehicles, which will
ultimately lead to less fuel consumption and reduced emissions with a positive
impact on the environment. The outreach activities will create an
interdisciplinary and international research environment for both undergraduate
and graduate students through interactions with French and Qatari laboratories.
In addition, the developed simulation software will be made available to
researchers and engineers through a GNU licensing process. The PI plans to
document the results in a monograph on the subject
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most challenging problems the mechanics
of materials community presently faces is the prediction of failure in advanced
metallic materials, particularly at low stress triaxiality where seemingly
important effects of the third stress invariant have been noticed. So far, the
community has responded to this challenge by developing empirical failure
criteria or ad hoc extensions of existing void growth models. The Lode parameter
(L) and the stress triaxiality both are considered. The present research will
help answer important questions such as: (i) What is the origin of the Lode
effect? (ii) How to apportion the intrinsic effects of the Lode parameter (L)
among void nucleation, growth and coalescence? (iii) How to quantify the
extrinsic (or apparent) effect of L on the occurrence of plastic instabilities?
Answers will be provided using a micromechanical modeling approach that is true
to the physics of the fracture phenomena at the governing length scales. A
computational implementation of the model will be conducted and the model
prediction will be tested against available and newly acquired experimental
data.