* 1405713
* 2014 Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte Solutions Gordon Research Conference and Seminar, February 16-21, 2014, Ventura, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2014
* Darrell Velegol, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2014
* USD 30,000.00

1405713&lt;br/&gt;Velegol&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help support a technical conference
entitled 2014 Colloidal, Macromolecular and Polyelectrolyte Solutions: Toward
Active Materials Gordon Research Conference and Seminar. The conference, which
will be held February 16-21, 2014 in Ventura, California, will bring together
about 180 leading academic, industrial, and governmental researchers,
postdoctoral students and graduate students to present their research in colloid
and polymer science. The theme of the conference this year is active matter,
which is a relatively new field in soft matter physics and engineering. Active
matter refers to particles, colloids, polymers, and other objects that can
generate movement, which makes them especially interesting to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of
the conference is timely. Active matter includes materials are important in
naturally occurring systems such as certain biological cells and other
biological structures, as well as in the design of new products such as
encapsulated drugs, gels, surfactants, and polymer composites. Researchers from
a wide variety of disciplines and institutions will benefit by participating in
the conference. The conference will be preceded by a special one-day seminar
that will provide training and mentoring for students conducting research into
these interesting materials. Throughout the seminar and conference, poster
sessions, panels, and other events will give students opportunities to present
their work, interact with leaders in the field, and receive insight and guidance
to advance their career development. The organizers are making special efforts
to attract participants from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
science and engineering.