* 1405204
* Was Subantarctic Dust a Major Driver of Past CO2 Variability?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 398,482.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The scarcity of iron in seawater can limit the
amount of carbon exported from surface to deep waters in areas of the global
ocean where the concentration of major nutrients is high, yet phytoplankton
growth is low. Of these, the Southern Ocean is the region where variations in
iron availability have the largest effect on Earth?s carbon cycle through its
fertilizing effect on marine ecosystems. The PIs propose to measure biological
productivity and dust flux at five sites spanning the breadth of the
Subantarctic Pacific, including one high-resolution site to reconstruct
variability of these parameters across abrupt climate change events. These
reconstructions will allow the PIs to test whether or not variations in dust
flux and changes in biological productivity are correlated in the Subantarctic
Pacific as they are in the Subantarctic Atlantic. If they are, results will
support current estimates of the iron fertilization effect on lowering CO2.
However, if they do not find evidence for iron fertilization in the South
Pacific, then the estimated impact of iron fertilization on ice-age CO2 cycles
must be reduced and other non- iron fertilization related processes would need
to be invoked to account for lower glacial CO2 levels. The results of this study
could transform understanding of the role of the Southern Ocean in regulating
atmospheric CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project
will foster a strong international collaboration and will train a postdoctoral
researcher and two undergraduate students. This research will assess the past
response to natural variability of iron input in the largest sector of the
Southern Ocean.