* 1405109
* Understanding the Interaction of Moving Liquid Drops on Solid Surfaces and the Role of a Surface Modulus in Solid-Liquid Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Thomas Ho, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 129,106.00

Friction, lubrication, and wear between two moving surfaces in contact with one
another are important in applications ranging from car engines to non-stick
coatings. Typically, when two surfaces are pressed together with increasing
force, the lateral force required to slide the two surfaces apart increases.
Recent work has discovered cases where this is not true, i.e., as the two
surfaces are pressed together with increasing force it becomes easier to slide
the surfaces apart. This unexpected behavior has been observed in the case for
some liquids sliding in contact with select solid surfaces. Since liquid
lubrication on solids is a critical component of many systems (i.e., oil
lubricating a car engine), understanding this effect could be of great benefit
technologically and to society. The goal of this project is to better understand
the behavior of liquid drops on surfaces and to develop a better method for
predicting the forces exerted on a liquid-solid surface when it is in motion. A
new property for describing the interaction of has been proposed, namely
interfacial modulus. The work will be used as the basis for a number of
educational outreach activities to high school students and to provide research
experiences for undergraduate students including a focus on students from under-
represented groups.

Tribological science teaches that lateral frictional force increases as the
contact area between two surfaces increases and that frictional force is
proportional to normal force. However, recent work by this research group has
uncovered a system that violates this basic principle. It has been demonstrated
that for some liquids on a solid surface, lateral force decreases with normal
force despite the fact that the contact area between the two surfaces increased.
The discovery was enabled by a new instrument, the Centrifugal Adhesion Balance
(CAB), that allows for independent control and measurement of the normal and
lateral forces for two surfaces in contact. A systematic study will be conducted
whereby the relationships between surface chemical and physical properties to
the interfacial modulus and to surface damage will be established for a set of
model fluid/solid systems. Surface roughness is expected to be a critical
parameter and a range of nanostructured surfaces are included in the study.