* 1405558
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Graphene NEMS Switch ESD Protection for Low-Power ICs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ya-Hong Xie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2017
* USD 301,638.00

ECCS Prop. No. 1405059

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Graphene NEMS Switch ESD Protection
Circuit for Energy-Efficient ICs

Award Goal Developing graphene-based mechanical switches as a future reliability
solution to electrostatic discharge failures to next-generation energy-efficient
integrated circuits

Nontechnical Abstract Aside from the performance, reliability is the key
concern to any integrated circuits (ICs) and systems. Electrostatic discharge
(ESD) failure is regarded as one of the most significant reliability problems to
ICs and electronic systems, which results in billions of dollars of revenue
losses each year to the electronic industry. Essentially, no electronic systems,
including smartphones, tablets, personal computers, television sets, wireless
routers, implantable biomedical devices, etc., may survive the market without
proper and robust ESD protection measures in place, because the inevitable ESD
surges represent a live threat to any electronic products due to damages in real
world. As microelectronics technologies continue advance as represented by the
aggressive scaling down of its feature sizes and higher integration level, the
decade-long traditional ESD protection solutions utilizing active electronic
devices can no longer be acceptable because the inherent parasitic effects
associated with any ESD protection devices will significantly degrade the
performance of ICs and systems. For example, the leakage current associated with
an ESD structure will become relatively too high for the next-generation energy-
efficient electronic products. A completely new ESD protection concept is
proposed and revolutionary graphene-based mechanical switch structures will be
developed in this work as a potential ESD protection solution. Because of its
mechanical nature, the graphene switches will provide adequate ESD protection to
ICs without inherent leakage current, which shall enable next-generation energy-
efficient ICs and systems that, in plain language, translates into lower power
consumption, hence, longer battery time for an electronic product. If
successful, the novel graphene switch ESD protection solution shall make
immediate impacts to the humanity by helping to create a greener society. The
UCR-UCLA collaboration will boost interdisciplinary research between Electrical
Engineering and Materials Science beyond the campus boundaries. The academic-
industrial collaboration plan will have great social impacts, including
technical and economic benefits to the American Microelectronics industry.
Integrated research-education activities are proposed to expose students to
contemporary micro/nano-electronics reliability research and the
Microelectronics industry, as well as to train technically and globally
competent workforces for the America. Underrepresented minority students are
encouraged to involve in related research activities.

Technical Abstract Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) failure is becoming the most
devastating reliability problem to integrated circuits (IC) and systems as IC
technologies advance into nano scale, which requires on-chip ESD protection.
Meanwhile, emerging nano technologies also requires adequate ESD protection to
enable reliable real-world applications. For decades, traditional ESD protection
relies on PN-junction-based structures, which no longer work for energy-
efficient ICs and nano electronics. Particularly, ESD-induced leakage becomes
increasingly intolerable to ultra-low-power and high-reliable ICs, such as
energy-efficient ICs for green systems including mobile electronics and
extremely-reliable implantable biomedical devices, etc. Graphene, with super
electrical and thermal conductivity, as well as thin layer and mechanical
strength, is ideal for making a new breed of ESD protection structures. The
investigators at the University of California propose a revolutionary graphene
NEMS (nano electromechanical system) switch ESD protection concept as a
potential integrated design-for-reliability (DfR) solution for green ICs to
address the emerging on-chip ESD protection challenges. This research will 1)
develop Graphene super ESD line discharger for energy-efficient ICs, 2) develop
Graphene NEMS switch ESD protection mechanism and structures for ultra-low-power
ICs, 3) develop CMOS-compatible Graphene ESD protection structure fabrication
process, and 4) develop Graphene-based ESD protection device models for IC
design demonstration. The novelty is to take full use of graphene ballistic
electrical and thermal transport properties, and super mechanical strength
feature, to achieve zero-leakage, low-parasitic and robust ESD protection for
next-generation energy-efficient ICs.