* 1405643
* CRI: RUI: CI-EN: Infrastructure to Enable Mining and Analysis of Open Source Software Engineering Artifacts
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Megan Squire, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,028.00

This NSF CRI supported Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project will
integrate, expand and enhance several distinct data sources currently used by
three research communities: those who study Free, Libre, and Open Source
Software (FLOSS), the larger empirical software engineering research community,
and researchers engaged in data mining and text mining. The project will fully
integrate existing data commons with several other popular data sources being
used by these research communities. This integrated and enhanced data commons
will continue to serve as a valuable opportunity for undergraduate research
students and under-represented groups to participate directly in FLOSS and
software engineering research. The tools will be collaboratively developed by
the team and freely licensed for others to use and build upon. The project will
ultimately benefit society by enabling an increased quantity and quality of
research on how FLOSS is made, as well as better research in areas beyond FLOSS,
such as commercial software engineering and data/text mining. The research
community will also continue to be a model for sharing scientific
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further expansion of FLOSS will include
collecting, storing, and curating new text artifacts from the software
engineering process, enhancing the suite of text mining software tools,
specifically to search and analyze these new artifacts inside the data commons.
The new focus will be on the use of graph databases for understanding networks
of software developers, document-oriented databases such as a NoSQL key-value
store with map-reduce for querying unstructured text. The data/text mining
enhancements will allow empirical software engineering researchers and data
miners to finally have access to high-quality, very large collections of real
communication artifacts, and the tools to analyze them and share results. The
text data collected will be some of the largest curated collections of semi-
structured and unstructured text available anywhere for public use, including
new data sources never collected before.