* 1405909
* Magnetic Excitations in Magnetically Ordered Superfluids
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 382,026.00

This project supports the study of a new kind of "superfluid" (a spinor Bose-
Einstein condensate) which not only flows without resistance (one of the
characteristics of superfluids) but also presents magnetic order (like a bar
magnet). This superfluid is made up of an atomic gas that is cooled to extremely
low temperatures and confined by a so-called "optical tweezer trap" (created by
laser light) within a vacuum chamber. The researchers supported by this project
will examine the magnetic characteristics of this gaseous material, and also
clarify ways in which the magnetism and superfluidity of this material influence
one another. The broader goal of this work is to help understand materials
better, in particular those materials where the theory of quantum mechanics
plays a dominant role (such materials can be expected to be increasingly put to
use, particularly when they involve short length scales such as in the
microelectronics industry). Toward this goal, the magnetic superfluid studied
here is a useful test subject, one for which all of the basic physics underlying
the material properties is believed to be known, and to which one can apply very
precise and sensitive measurement techniques. The project will take place at a
public University, and will support the training of graduate students in that
setting.

The project is focused on three specific aims. The first is to characterize
magnons in magnetically ordered superfluids. These magnons are the elementary
magnetic excitations of these materials. A variety of approaches, many based on
directly imaging the propagation of magnon waves, will be used to measure the
magnon energy, damping, magnetic moment, and nonlinearities, and also to clarify
the role of long-range magnetic dipole interactions. The second aim of this
project is to study the condensation of magnons within ferromagnetic
superfluids, related to the phenomenon of magnon condensation in solid-state
magnetic materials. The third aim is to study the influence of spatially varying
magnetization (spin textures) on mass currents and spin currents. This work will
study differences between the study of scalar superfluids and magnetically
ordered superfluids, with the goal of identifying the basic processes in the
hydrodynamics of spinor Bose-Einstein condensates (something one might call
"superfluid magnetohydrodynamics").