* 1405491
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional response and  predator prey interactions between cheetahs and gazelles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Anne Hilborn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,085.00

Predation is one of the most important controls on the abundance of wildlife.
Key to understanding how predators regulate the abundance of their prey and
maintain their own numbers is knowing how predators change their behavior
according to the prey they encounter. For example, predators might largely
ignore rare types of prey and so help conserve them, simply consume all types of
prey in proportion to their abundance, or reach an upper limit of consumption of
very abundant prey, leaving them relatively free to multiply and dominate
further. This project will refine our understanding of how predators respond to
the abundance of prey by asking how responses differ between male and female
predators and how threats from larger predators may change the behavior of
smaller ones. In most cases, these questions are nearly impossible to answer
directly because it is too hard to observe individual hunts in the wild, or
because humans have exterminated predators. This project will take advance of a
case where the researchers have developed methods to follow wild hunts in a
largely intact system, predation by cheetahs on gazelles in the African savanna.
The results of this project will expand the scientific basis for wildlife
management in Africa and North America, improve conservation through outreach to
the public, strengthen international collaboration, and train a U.S. Ph.D.
student.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Functional responses of predators determine how
the abundances of both predators and prey increase and decrease in nature. This
project will deepen our understanding of rates and efficiencies of predation in
nature by studying differences within a species of predator, in particular the
potential for different responses in males and females to the density of prey
that they encounter and to threats from larger predators as they hunt. The
project will take advantage of a system where it is possible to follow
individual predators in a habitat where large populations of wildlife still
remain, cheetahs preying on gazelles in the savanna of Serengeti National Park
in Tanzania. Researchers will watch hunts by individual cheetahs for several
days each and combine these observations with historical data to discover how
age of cheetahs, social grouping of cheetahs and gazelles, and threats from
lions determine the rates at which female and male cheetahs kill prey. The
project will use social media to educate the public about cheetahs, which are
listed as a vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List. Researchers will deliver
talks on conservation of wildlife to tour groups, safari drivers, and college
students.