* 1405939
* II-New: A Cluster of Nodes with 32 Cores and 256-GB Memory to Enable Many-Core Systems Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Antony Hosking, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 286,300.00

Research and education in many-core computing systems are of importance to the
NSF CRI program as well as to the research community. This project targets
performance, energy consumption, and scalability of many-core systems, which are
important for the computer industry. The team is committed to releasing the
research artifacts of the project as open-source software to be used by the
research community as well. This project will benefit graduate student research
and help educational activities in undergraduate and graduate curricula. The
project will support outreach activities sponsored by various centers at Purdue
University via the involvement of the team in Purdue Computing Research
Institute's High Performance Computing workshops, for example.

This infrastructure will support research and education efforts in multiple
areas: computer architecture, compilers, high-performance cloud computing, and
run-times for managed languages. Computer architects will explore optimizations
for performance, programmability and power of many-core architectures, on-chip
networks, and disk optimizations. Compiler writers will explore shared memory
optimizations and their scalability targeting shared-memory applications for
distributed memory machines, and techniques to transform seemingly irregular
memory access patterns into regular and parallel computations and memory
accesses. Run-time researchers will pursue parallel garbage collection of large
garbage-collected heaps and associated scalability issues. High performance
computing researchers will explore the performance overhead of virtualization
and cloud computing for cluster workloads, along with mechanisms for reducing
overhead.