* 1405078
* Massively Parallel Nanolithography Using Localized Electron Emission
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2018
* USD 429,603.00

Optical lithography is the critical enabling process of transferring fixed
geometric patterns on a mask to wafers to make semiconductor chips and other
nanotechnology products. Current tools cost more than 50 million US dollars
each, and the costs for masks far outweigh those for tools. Yet, to increase
chip capabilities to match Moore's law, tools will soon become too costly for
both industry and scientists. Also, the current process cannot meet the long-
term demand to produce faster chips with more functions. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a new
lithography technology. Results from this research will strengthen the U.S.
manufacturing foundation for future information-technology growth and profoundly
impact applications in high-performance computing, data storage, communications,
healthcare and energy. This award will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering research and create an education pipeline
in a multidisciplinary and collaborative environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron beam writers can direct pattern
semiconductor chips at very high resolution without the need of expensive
photomasks but only in low throughput. Practical throughput is possible only by
using millions of parallel electron beams. Researchers have been unable to find
a robust method to generate a massive number of beams with satisfactory
brightness and uniformity. This research is to address this challenge and enable
massively-parallel electron-beam lithography by transforming the team's recent
breakthroughs in nanoscale optics into a low-cost nanomanufacturing scheme. This
technology uses a novel device to focus optical energy at nanoscale and locally
excite electrons to form massively-parallel electron beams, which can be used to
perform maskless lithography in mass quantities. The research team will
investigate the fundamentals of localized electron excitation, build a proof-of-
concept device and study device response, and implement the device into their
scalable nanomanufacturing platforms to demonstrate lithography over a large
area.