* 1405847
* II-New: Seeing the Future: Ubiquitous Computing in EyeGlasses
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Jay Aikat, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 613,623.00

This project is building a prototype ecosystem in which a collection of people
can interact in an environment with the envisioned personal augmented reality
(AR) device of the future research. The provided hardware serves as a platform
for understanding and building of the ecosystem for personal AR devices that a
user can ask "Where did I put my keys?" and get an instantaneous response from
his/her eyeglasses. The envisioned system can also remind people to take
medicine, create a collaborative reconstruction of an environment incorporating
the perspectives of multiple people, or an app that enables one to shop for any
item seen while walking down the street. All of these applications and more
could be enabled by personal ubiquitous hands-free visual devices that have
total awareness of the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
hardware to enable research in developing technologies for personal AR systems
that are unencumbered, ubiquitous, and can be used hands-free, with a wide
field-of-view display overlaid to the user's view of the surroundings. Such
devices would enable the development of societally and commercially beneficial
applications such as assistance tools for physicians. The prototyped hardware
and software components are supporting the research to reach these goals. The
collaborative projects enabled by the prototypes are also studying unique
research questions, including enhancing everyday life activities, health care
management and training, as well as computer science research questions such as
distributed interactive computer vision, distributed computing, energy/power
management, security, and privacy. Broader impacts include developing
applications for the disabled, tools for healthcare management, and elderly
assistance.