* 1405814
* Structure of the Nucleon and Few-Body Nuclear Systems with Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Gerassimos Petratos, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 570,000.00

This award supports a nuclear physics experimental project at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Newport News, Virginia. The goal of
the experiment is a better understanding of the internal quark and gluon
structure of the proton and neutron constituents of nuclear matter. The proposed
research will provide fundamental information on the momentum distributions of
the quarks inside the nucleons of the helium-3 and tritium atoms, using a new
method of comparing directly measurements of inelastic electron scattering from
helium-3 and tritium nuclei. This method is complementary to experiments done in
the past at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, which showed the existence
of point-like "partons" inside the nucleons, by scattering electrons from
hydrogen and deuterium nuclei. The new method will eliminate inherent
theoretical uncertainties in the Stanford method. The results will test long-
standing predictions of the Quark Model of the nucleon, and of Quantum
Chromodynamics, the theory describing the interactions between quarks and
gluons. In addition, a new proposal will be prepared for a measurement of
elastic electron scattering from the tritium nucleus, which will provide
critical information for the development of a "standard model" describing the
structure and dynamics of the simplest, lightest nuclei in nature. The project
is expected to make significant contributions to the advancement of basic
nuclear physics science, and to graduate education and training by offering
doctoral dissertation topics on related science and instrumentation, which
provide experience needed for careers in education, medical physics, homeland
security, high technology, and national laboratories research.

The project will make use of a tritium, helium-3, and deuterium target system
under development at Jefferson Lab, and magnetic spectrometers in the Hall A
facility of the Lab. Unpolarized electrons with energy up to 11 gigaelectronvolt
will be scattered from the above nuclear targets. For the inelastic
measurements, scattered electrons will be detected with the electron High
Resolution Spectrometer and a refurbished BigBite Spectrometer. The ratio of the
measured cross sections for tritium and helium-3 will determine reliably the
ratio of the neutron to proton structure functions, and subsequently the ratio
of the probability distributions for an up quark compared to a down quark in the
nucleon. The ratio of the tritium and helium-3 cross sections to the deuterium
cross section will provide additional information about the effect of the
nuclear environment on quarks in the nucleon. A comparison of the effect for
these two mirror nuclei is considered to be essential for a full explanation of
this effect. For the elastic measurements, the hadron High Resolution
Spectrometer will be also used for detection of tritium recoiling nuclei. The
two tritium form factors will be measured up to large momentum transfers by
means of a Rosenbluth separation. This group will play a major role in all
aspects of the project, namely the i) refurbishment, checkout, and calibration
of the BigBite spectrometer, ii) preparation of all experimental apparatuses to
be used, iii) acquisition of the experimental data, iv) data analysis, and v)
publication of the results. The graduate students involved will be exposed to
and gain expertise with both hardware and software development.