* 1405550
* RI: Medium: Computational Models, Interaction Mechanisms, and Planning Algorithms for Semi-Autonomous Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Claudia Goldman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

Autonomous systems offer transformational impacts on society as they help reduce
human labor, decrease risks and costs, and improve productivity and efficiency.
They have been deployed in a wide range of domains from household products to
space exploration vehicles. In many areas, however, there are still considerable
barriers to the deployment of fully autonomous systems. These barriers range
from technological to ethical and legal issues. Examples include driving a car,
robot deployment in search and rescue operations, automated farming, and robotic
surgery. When full autonomy is not feasible, it is often desirable to automate
parts of the entire process. This project offers a comprehensive study of
planning for semi-autonomous systems -- systems that are capable of autonomous
operation under some conditions, but may require manual control in order to
complete the task at hand. Planning for semi-autonomous systems is challenging
because it must account for the different skills of the human operator and the
automated system, the communication between them required to facilitate smooth
transfer of control, the uncertainty about human responsiveness, engagement
level and readiness to take over control, and the possibility of human error in
interpreting or following the plan.

The project takes an interdisciplinary approach that addresses the computational
challenges together with the challenges that rise whenever the human is in the
loop. With a focus on semi-autonomous driving as the primary domain, research
activities include: designing general-purpose graphical models to represent the
problem of collaborative control of semi-autonomous systems; developing
effective methods to represent and earn competence models of the actors;
developing efficient decision-theoretic planning algorithms that exploit
heuristic search and reachability analysis to create the shared plan; developing
algorithms to compute vital statistics and runtime feedback about the shared
plan; developing ways to capture models of situation awareness and human errors,
and factor them into the planning process; and creating a set of challenging
scenarios and test problems for planning in semi-autonomous systems. Evaluation
of the approach is conducted using several testbeds including two realistic
driving simulators.