* 1405119
* CIF: Medium: Polar Coding for Data Storage: Theory and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Warren Gross, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

During the information age, in which we now live, the need for reliable
transmission and storage of digital data is of paramount
importance.&lt;br/&gt;What makes such reliable transmission and storage possible
are error- correcting codes, first conceived by Claude Shannon over 50 years
ago.&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of the channel polarization phenomenon and the
associated invention of polar coding is, without doubt, one of the most original
and profound developments in the theory of error-correcting codes in the past
decade. Polar codes provably achieve the capacity of any memoryless symmetric
channel, with low encoding and decoding complexity, thereby providing the first
constructive solution to the problem posed by Claude Shannon in 1948. This
remarkable result has engendered enormous interest in harnessing the potential
of polar coding in practice. The objective of this project is to advance the
theory of polar codes and to bring these codes much closer to the practice of
data storage. Thus the investigators study not only certain theoretical aspects
of polar codes, but also their implementation in VLSI circuits and their
incorporation in data-storage technologies. In view of the increasing demand for
reliable, high-capacity data storage, driven by applications ranging from
consumer electronics to massive data warehouses, this research has significant
potential for economic and societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
present project addresses a number of fundamental problems related to channel
polarization, polar code design methods, and performance of polar decoding
algorithms. Specifically, the problems considered include the
following:&lt;br/&gt; (1) Polarization speed and polarization kernels for a
variety of channels;&lt;br/&gt; (2) Performance analysis of list-decoding
algorithms for polar codes;&lt;br/&gt; (3) Integration of polar codes into joint
detection and decoding&lt;br/&gt; architectures for magnetic recording
channels;&lt;br/&gt; (4) Design of non-binary polar codes for solid-state
memories with&lt;br/&gt; asymmetric errors and rewriting constraints;&lt;br/&gt;
(5) Realization of polar coding technology in high-speed,&lt;br/&gt; low-power
VLSI circuit implementations.&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of these challenging
problems requires new methods and ideas on the interface between information
theory and coding. Understanding polar coding architectures for data-storage
systems has implications for a broad range of communication channels. The
results of this research are also relevant to other scientific disciplines and
engineering technologies that are being revolutionized by the polarization
phenomenon, including source coding, secure communications, network information
theory, randomness extraction, and compressive sensing. On the other hand,
hardware implementation fosters an interplay between algorithmic invention and
VLSI design, pushing the frontiers of circuit technology. The project
furthermore provides an excellent opportunity for graduate students to engage in
multi-disciplinary research and to interact with partners in the data-storage
industry.