* 1405927
* CI-EN: Enhancing and Supporting a Community-Based Data Analysis, Visualization, and Provenance Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Juliana Freire, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,962.00

Increasingly, scientific breakthroughs are being enabled by advanced computing
capabilities that allow researchers to explore growing volumes of digital data.
Unfortunately, the infrastructure to design and conduct computational
experiments has not kept pace with our ability to gather and generate data,
leading to an unprecedented situation: data exploration is now the bottleneck to
discovery. In this project, we will build infrastructure to streamline data
exploration that supports a wide array of modern computational resources and
tools, as well as enable transparency and reproducibility of scientific
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the successful VisTrails
open-source system. VisTrails provides unique support for data-intensive
research, a comprehensive provenance infrastructure, and a user-centered design.
The system has been applied to a broad range of disciplines, including
environmental science, physics, and bioinformatics, both for research and
educational efforts. With a view towards expanding the impact of the VisTrails
system to the computer science community, we will extend it in three significant
directions, notably: add support for multi-threaded and parallel execution and
programming frameworks such as Mapreduce; improve the extensibility of the
system through support for Java libraries as well as flexible mechanisms for
scripting; and design new infrastructure to simplify the creation and packaging
of reproducible experiments. These improvements will enable new research
opportunities by providing a platform for computationally-demanding experiments
and supporting for large-scale data analysis, as well as for provenance
research. In addition, we hope it will contribute to a broader adoption of
verified reproducibility in computer science publications.