* 1405694
* CI-New: An Open Speech Data Repository for Medical Prediction and Assessment of Neurological Disorders
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Patrick Flynn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 668,643.00

This community research-infrastructure project will establish a repository of
speech data and voice-processing algorithms to support research aimed at
detecting neurological disorders by analyzing speech. Existing techniques to
detect neurological disorders are costly or difficult to use in primary medical
services. However, neurological disorders often leave a fingerprint in voice and
speech production, suggesting that speech signal analysis could provide clinical
information to predict certain diseases, diagnose illnesses and assess disease
progression or the effectiveness of treatment regimens. Voice-based assessment
would have significant advantages including low cost, minimal intrusiveness and
ease-of-use. Supporting research aimed at better understanding the link between
neurological conditions and speech production to enable new diagnostic tools can
have immense benefits. For example, understanding the changes in speech and
voice caused by diseases such as Parkinson's disease, cerebellar demyelination
and stroke, may provide information for early detection of onset, progression
and severity of these diseases. However, such diagnostic tools are still out of
reach because of three closely related problems: (1) the lack of an in-depth
understanding of the relationship between neurological disorders and phonation
and (2) the small and incomplete sets of voice samples used in existing studies,
and (3) the lack of voice capture, processing, and analysis tools and algorithms
that enable neurological assessment. This project will provide infrastructure to
address the final two problems in order to enable research to address the
first.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes (1) design, rollout, and
management of a repository of voice samples; (2) collection of a large number
voice samples and medical data from subjects across all parts of the population
using a mobile- and web-based crowdsourcing approach, and (3) design,
implementation, evaluation and distribution of a set of analytical tools that
will provide a unified approach to how speech is analyzed and interpreted. The
resulting collection will be a major advance over existing studies that are
based on only a few subjects or that do not include subjects from a variety of
ages, genders or co-morbidities. The repository and accompanying processing
tools will enable research in the area of phonation on the impact of
neurological conditions on speech, leading to improved diagnostic and assessment
tools. The PIs will also rely on the proposed work for extending their outreach
and educational efforts, including mentorship of minority and high-school
students, supervision of undergraduate researchers, and the design of current
courses based on the proposed repository.