* 1405753
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of thermal ontogenetic plasticity and adaptation in native and invasive fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Nann Fangue, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,215.00

Rapid changes in environmental conditions due to global climate change are
already having profound effects around the world, and are expected to become
more common in the future. Understanding the roles of tolerance, plasticity and
adaptation to high temperatures is paramount to forecasting organisms? responses
to climate change and making informed conservation management decisions. Our
project combines ecological, physiological and genomic approaches to enhance
understanding of thermal tolerance mechanisms and developmental plasticity in
two sympatric fishes, the endangered endemic delta smelt (Hypomensus
transpacificus), and the invasive inland silverside (Menidia beryllina). Using
this approach, we will compare genes and physiological pathways used to cope
with thermal challenges for these species, offering insight into which fishes
will be ?winners? or ?losers? in the future, warmer world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most fishes are ectotherms, and global climate change is
predicted to have dramatic impacts on their biodiversity and distributions. Our
work will greatly enrich the understanding of the mechanisms of thermal
tolerance in fish adapted to variable temperature environments, and the ability
of native and invasive species with sympatric distributions to cope with climate
change. Thus, this research will significant contribute to both the fundamental
understanding of evolutionary ecological questions as well as issues relevant to
conservation management.