* 1405547
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: UC Berkeley's Context-Based Research Experience for Community College Faculty
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Sharnnia Artis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 490,380.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of California-Berkeley, entitled, "RET in Engineering
and Computer Science Site: UC Berkeley's Context-Based Research Experience for
Community College Faculty", under the direction of Dr. Eli Yablonovitch and Dr.
Sharnnia Artis.

This RET Site builds on the intersection of science, engineering, technology,
and education and will support a total of 30 STEM faculty members (10 per year)
from local California community colleges in the San Francisco Bay Area to
undertake independent research at a variety of engineering-related research
laboratories associated with the University of California, Berkeley, and to
transform the research concepts into curriculum that is linked to technology
applications with societal benefits and employment potential. Informed by RET
best practices, each summer, the community college faculty members will
participate in a 9-week experience. This experience will include an 8-week
independent research project in an engineering group in which faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students are active, available, and
involved; and a 1-week team-based curriculum development experience, in which
both experiences are placed in the context of a technology application that
community college students find exciting, engaging and viable for a future
career. During the next academic year, immediately following the faculty's
summer experience, follow-up will include webinars, implementing their course
module, demonstrating their course module at the RET Site's Context-Based
Curriculum Development Workshop, and publishing the curriculum online.

The RET Site programmatic effort will foster community college teachers'
understanding of the process of research by engaging in authentic, in-depth,
engineering-related research experiences in innovative and cutting-edge topics,
such as alternative energy, cyber security and industrial internet, green and
sustainability manufacturing, and wearable medical devices. As a result,
teachers may in turn engage their community college students in technology-
driven education activities through context-based curriculum developed during
the research experience. The RET Site will also contribute to research in
science and engineering education by providing data on how research experiences
influence teachers and their teaching in community college classrooms.

The teacher participants will return to their home community colleges with new
skills and tools to teach new scientific and engineering principles in
technology contexts that students can relate to and hopefully, will aspire to
participate in. Thus, the broader impact of this Context-Based RET Site lies in
the potential of increasing engagement and persistence and thus, eventually the
retention rate, among community college students majoring in STEM, particularly
among entry-level community college students. Given the demographics of
community colleges, the RET Site should also contribute to increasing the
understanding of math, science and engineering concepts, skills and careers
among women and underrepresented minority students. Additionally, this program,
especially with its post-program Context-Based Curriculum Development Workshop,
will further cultivate and sustain a vibrant network of community college
teachers, faculty, postdoctoral, and graduate student researchers with the
potential of long-term collaborative partnerships.