* 1405054
* Collaborative Research:  GEM:  Modulation of Plasma Waves by Thermal Plasma Density Variation in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Wen Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 02/28/2017
* USD 84,270.00

The Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Program is a broad-based, community-
initiated research program on the physics of the Earth's magnetosphere and the
coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the solar wind. The work
of GEM is accomplished in a series of campaigns and focus groups that solve
specific problems leading to the construction of a global Geospace General
Circulation Model (GGCM) with predictive capability. This project will
contribute essential results to this goal pertaining to understanding the role
of plasma waves in energizing and transporting particles and plasma in the near-
Earth space environment. In addition, the project supports the research of an
early-career tenure-track faculty member and contributes to the research
training of another early-career female scientist and a graduate student.

This investigation utilizes both spacecraft observations from THEMIS and Van
Allen Probes and the HOTRAY wave ray-tracing computer code to study the
modulation of plasma wave intensity by thermal plasma density variations in the
inner magnetosphere. The specific science questions to be addressed include: (1)
How do thermal plasma density variations cause modulation in the intensity of
chorus, hiss and magnetosonic waves? and (2) How do the waves excited by these
density variations affect radiation belt and ring current? The investigation is
relevant to the GEM Focus Groups on "Storm-Time Inner Magnetosphere-Ionosphere
Convection", and "Scientific Magnetic Mapping & Techniques".