* 1405100
* Analysis and CR Geometry in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andrew Raich, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 133,318.00

A basic object of study in every calculus class is the derivative: it is a
quantity that describes the rate of change of a function. For example, the
derivative of position is velocity, and in economics, the code word for
derivative is marginal. The derivative is a foundational concept in mathematics
and the basis for much of the application of mathematics to physics and the
other sciences, economics, and statistics. In applications, equations often
contain functions and their derivatives. Such equations are called differential
equations, and they describe the world: Newton's Laws of Motion, Maxwell's
equations for electromagnetic radiation, Schrodinger's equations in quantum
mechanics are all examples of differential equations. The derivative has a
straight forward generalization to complex valued functions, and it is called
the complex derivative in this situation. In order for the complex derivative of
a complex valued function to exist, however, the function must satisfy a
particular differential equation. In other words, complex differentiable
functions have extra structure, and this extra structure provides far-reaching
applications to a wide variety of subjects, including every areas of
mathematics, engineering, physics, chemistry, and economics. This proposal
investigates complex differentiable functions of several variables. Adding in
additional variables creates significant new challenges, but the applications to
mathematics and science are numerous and varied, and, as the PI believes,
profound.

In several complex variables, understanding the dbar-Neumann and Kohn
Laplacians is a major driver of research questions. The PI and his collaborators
will examine questions in the both the pseudoconvex and nonpseudoconvex
categories. Together with Phillip Harrington of the University of Arkansas, the
PI will prove existence and regularity results for the dbar-Neumann and complex
Green operators on nonpseudoconvex and/or unbounded domains. These questions are
beyond the scope and tools in the bounded pseudoconvex case for technical
reasons, and the PI will develop new approaches to tackle these questions. In
the pseudoconvex case, solvability is well-understood, and the questions instead
focus on the relationship between the type of the boundary and the regularity of
solutions. In the finite type case, the PI and Albert Boggess of the University
of Arizona have an ongoing collaboration to establish pointwise estimates for
the complex heat kernel on quadric submanifolds. There are few examples which
are accessible to direct computation, and quadric submanifolds provide a large
such class, including examples of higher codimension, all of which have a
formulas that can be exploited. Quadric submanifolds have a very regular
curvature structure, and the PI is also interested in the regularity of
solutions to the (tangential) Cauchy-Riemann equations in the exponentially flat
case. He has an ongoing collaboration with Khanh Tran of the National University
of Singapore to establish L^p and Holder bounds for the Bergman and Szego
kernels as well as the dbar-Neumann and complex Green operators.