* 1405754
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: An Open Platform for Internet Routing Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,05/31/2015
* Russell Clark, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 05/31/2015
* USD 51,164.00

The path that data takes across the Internet from its source to its destination
is a critical determiner of the service quality that a user experiences. The
path is controlled via routing, which is influenced by traffic engineering and
policy. Therefore, routing problems--instability, failures, circuitous paths--
have a critical impact on performance. Despite these issues, researchers and
network operators have difficulty studying Internet routing. Available vantage
points provide little visibility into how the networks interconnect, making it
difficult to assess the resilience and performance of existing paths. On top of
this limited visibility, researchers lack means to experiment with alternate
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure developed by this project will
allow researchers and network operators to observe Internet paths and to
experiment with alternate approaches to routing. The infrastructure consists of
two synergistic tools: Transit Portal allows an experimenter to make route
announcements that influence current routing, and Reverse Traceroute allows the
experimenter to measure the resulting paths. The PIs have used early versions of
the infrastructure to improve Internet performance, reliability, and diagnosis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project opens the infrastructure to use by the
networking community and in classrooms, providing a basis for understanding and
improving the Internet. The key components are 1) increasing the number of
Transit Portal sites; 2) adding support for Transit Portal experiments that join
fully emulated networks to the actual Internet; 3) upgrading and hardening the
Reverse Traceroute code so that it is useable by the broader community; and 4)
improving experiment workflow by scheduling and reusing measurements more
efficiently.