* 1405904
* CI-EN: Helping Home Network Research to Seattle On Access Routers (SOAR)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Justin Cappos, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2018
* USD 704,979.00

The Internet is an indispensable part of society today, but many of the details
about how well it operates are poorly understood. This project will support and
enhance the Seattle community testbed, one of the tools supporting
experimentation for measuring and understanding the Internet. The Seattle
testbed allows researchers the ability to safely run experiments on real user
devices and networks and gives experimenters access to thousands of devices
around the world. End users must decide to 'opt-in' by installing the Seattle
software on their tablet, smartphone, or other computing device to participate
in Seattle. Via enhancements to the Seattle platform, the project will improve
the ability of researchers to understand smartphone and future network
environments as they exist in the Internet today, so that they may improve the
Internet and design better networks in the future.

This project will support the continued growth and development of the Seattle
Testbed. The programming APIs of the Seattle sandbox will be enhanced to add
support for IPv6, reading device sensors, and multi-homing. It will also improve
support for NAT traversal, mobility, and similar code on the platform. Several
scalability and stability issues with the platform will be addressed, including
automated build testing and similar practices. The project will also more
explicitly expose the community-driven development model at the project's core
to make it easier for outside groups to participate in Seattle development and
to also address the long-term sustainability of the Seattle code-base.