* 1405637
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Ontogeny of Defense in Tropical Rainforest Trees: Leaf Secondary Metabolites across Canopy-Understory Gradients of Resources and Stressors
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,068.00

This goal of this study is to examine how air pollution in a tropical forest
affects the way in which plants produce a special class of chemicals in their
leaves. Because plants cannot run from the insects seeking to eat them
("herbivores"), they produce these chemicals as a means of defense. The spice
rack at a supermarket offers but a taste of the staggering diversity of plant
defense compounds; tens of thousands have been cataloged, with many more still
undescribed. The variety of chemical defenses arises from the fact that
herbivores and pathogens have evolved resistance to particular defenses. Thus in
what has been called an evolutionary arms-race, plants are constantly under
pressure to evolve new defenses, while consumers are constantly under pressure
to get around them. Tropical forests contain the highest diversity of plants and
herbivores on the planet, so it is no surprise that these forests also contain
the highest diversity of plant chemical defenses. Not just an artifact of the
number of species in tropical forests, the diversity of plant chemical defenses
is thought to be a central factor in both producing and maintaining tropical
forest biodiversity. Thus, any large-scale alteration of the chemical landscape
of a tropical forest may have wide-ranging effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Air
pollution, particularly ozone pollution, may constitute just such a landscape
alteration. The focus of this study is ozone, which is produced as a result of
fossil fuel combustion or biomass burning. In areas of the tropics where these
activities are concentrated, ozone levels have been recorded above thresholds
for impacts on leaf defense chemistry observed in other ecosystems. In temperate
ecosystems, ozone pollution has been found to affect both the concentrations of
defenses within leaves and the ability of herbivorous insects to locate
appropriate host plants. Ozone affects the production and stability of certain
chemical compounds more than others, so ozone pollution in a chemically diverse
tropical forest is likely to affect some plant and herbivore species more than
others. Based in a forest adjacent to the heavy shipping traffic of the Panama
Canal, this study will investigate how the defense chemistry of an array of
tropical tree species is affected by ambient ozone levels. Specifically, it will
test how oxidative stress, foliar secondary metabolites, and herbivory interact.
It will do so by mapping ozone levels in a forest and conducting a 2x2 factorial
ozone and light manipulation experiment to assess how these variables affect
production of foliar secondary metabolites.