* 1405911
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary genetics of cellular and biochemical adaptation in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Brandon Cooper, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,274.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary genetics of cellular and biochemical
adaptation in Drosophila.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kristi L.
Montooth&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Brandon S.
Cooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms experience
variable environments in both space and time. Variation in factors like
temperature and toxic compounds can cause natural selection that results in
adaptation to local conditions. At the mechanistic level, these adaptations
involve changes in physiological and cellular processes in response to the
environment. This research will use techniques from molecular biology,
analytical chemistry, genetics and physiology to evaluate the impact of
environmental temperature on cell membranes, and of environmental toxicity
(e.g., ethanol) on the activities of three enzymes in the ethanol detoxification
pathway. Specifically, the research aims to test the prediction that variable
temperature environments favor the evolution of cell membrane remodeling, and
that efficient detoxification of ethanol depends on interactions between the
three enzymes in this pathway. These data will then be used to construct new
evolutionary models that help predict the responses of organisms to changing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide opportunities for
undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in the sciences to
participate in the research. Outreach to elementary school children at a
disadvantaged school, where only 70% passed the state proficiency test for
science, will increase scientific literacy. The co-PI collaborates with the
local elementary school teachers, providing experiences for the students in
basic science and teaching the process of scientific inquiry. Projects will be
developed enabling teachers to improve science education at their school.
Because this research evaluates the evolution of organismal responses to
changing temperatures, the results will also enable the PI and co-PI to provide
a better understanding of how organisms respond and adapt to changing
environments. Further, the populations of flies collected and constructed will
be made available to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;