* 1405221
* Quantum Transport in Twisted Van Der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Pablo Jarillo-Herrero, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 532,788.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Van der Waals materials resemble a
layered deck of cards: they are made of individual sheets which are weakly
bonded to their neighbors. In this last decade it was discovered that these
individual sheets can be peeled off to produce a one-atom thick material. This
highly surprising discovery was first made with graphite to isolate single
atomic layers called graphene. Since then this technique has been applied to a
range of materials to isolate new forms of 2-dimensional layered crystals. When
isolated in this way, it has been found that the thin layered sheets take on new
properties which can be useful for a wide range of electronics applications. At
the forefront of this research is the creation of van der Waals
heterostructures, which are made by combining thin layers from different
materials to create entirely new structures with novel functionality. This
research project explores how the properties of the combined structure can be
altered by "twisting" the structure, i.e. by changing the rotational alignment
between adjacently stacked layers. Twisting one layer with respect to another
can drastically affect the coupling between the two layers, resulting in widely
different electronic properties for the combined structure. In this way the
properties of the new electronic material can be tuned for different purposes
such as for the study of exotic quantum phenomena or to obtain novel quantum
nanodevices with new electronic and optical properties. This project will be
accomplished as part of a broadly integrated program aimed at building a
collaborative and open scientific community, mentoring the next generation of
scientists, and communicating physics to industry leaders and the general
public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stacking of 2d crystalline layers to form van
der Waals heterostructures constitutes a new paradigm for creating designer
electronic materials. The range of possible electronic phenomena is especially
rich due to the sensitivity of interlayer coupling and Coulomb interactions to
the rotational alignment between layers, or twist angle. The research objective
of this project is to understand the interlayer physics that determine the
properties of twisted van der Waals heterostructures and to build upon this
understanding to engineer novel quantum circuits. The proposed research
objective will be achieved through the nanofabrication and transport measurement
of van der Waals heterostructures made from stacking atomically-thin layers of
graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. The success of this project will result in
an understanding of the effect of interactions within van der Waals
heterostructures due to interlayer coupling and electron-electron interactions.
Moreover, electron-electron interactions are expected to give rise to new
highly-correlated ground states and novel edge state configurations such as the
fractional quantum spin Hall effect. This project will probe these novel many-
body states in twisted van der Waals heterostructures and explore their
potential for realizing building blocks for future topological-protected quantum
circuits. This research may also result in new quantum coherent electronic
devices, and will be of importance in assessing the potential of van der Waals
heterostructures to become a component in future nanoelectronics and quantum
information technologies.