* 1405129
* Investigation of Surface Integrity induced by Cryogenic Processing of Biomaterials for Improved Functional Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Ibrahim Jawahir, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This grant provides funding for research on quantitative understanding of the
integrity of surfaced produced by cryogenic processing of metallic biomaterials
during severe plastic deformation (SPD) processes. Engineered surface layers
will be produced in selected biomaterials, with preferred nano/ultrafine grain
structures, increased hardness and compressive residual stresses, etc., for
improved functional performance in biomedical implants and other manufactured
components. Cryogenic machining and burnishing processes will be developed to
produce surface layers with nano/ultrafine grain structures in selected
biomaterials to provide improved wear and corrosion resistance, and compressive
residual stresses to offer greater fatigue life. Major project tasks are: (1)
Systematic experimental study of the integrity of surfaced produced by cryogenic
processes to establish the influence of processing parameters on hardness, grain
size and residual stresses; (2) Testing of cryogenically-processed components to
quantify performance improvement, especially corrosion and wear resistance and
fatigue life; (3) Development of hybrid predictive performance models using
numerical and analytical methods; (4) Development of optimization methods for
performance improvement; and (5) Model validation and refinement. If successful,
this project will lead to predictive performance models for novel cryogenic
manufacturing processes to provide optimal process parameters for producing
functionally-superior products from biomaterials. Improved wear and corrosion
resistance and enhanced fatigue life are among the most desirable product
performance measures expected from optimally designed and performed cryogenic
processes. Optimally produced superhard surface layers from cryogenic processing
will have the potential to replace hard coating in some applications. The
anticipated project findings will also have the potential for producing
components in other manufacturing applications for improved performance and
life, especially in aerospace and automotive sectors. Significant health and
environmental benefits can also be achieved from the implementation of cryogenic
processes, which are clean, toxic-free, and pose no adverse health effects.