* 1405767
* II NEW:  Infrastructure to Support Research in Network-Aware Data-Intensive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 708,357.00

The rise of data centers, large spaces filled with interconnected computers,
have allowed for the rapid, flexible and efficient provisioning of the Internet
services on which society depends. However, data centers are power hungry.
Collaborative experimental research at the intersection of sophisticated
computing infrastructure and data-intensive applications shows promise in
increasing the flexibility and power efficiency of data centers. The rapid
emergence of new technologies such as Software Defined Networks are enablers of
new strategies for placement of computing tasks within a cluster, taking into
account factors such as load and power efficency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
computing research infrastructure project provisions computer and software-
defined networking (SDN) equipment, metered rack power distribution units,
software, and toolkits to establish a programmable, multi-purpose, network and
power-aware cluster systems test bed at Clemson University. The infrastructure
fills a gap of resources, and supports fundamental and applied research on
experimental networking and scalable data-intensive computing system in areas of
programmable networks to support data-intensive computing, application and data
placement strategies for data-intensive applications, evaluation of software
infrastructures to support data-intensive applications, and performance and
power measurement, modeling, and analysis. The project provides advanced
infrastructure to at least 300 graduate and undergraduate students at Clemson
University. The system provides an environment for supporting projects in the
highly successful Clemson Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site program
in Data-Intensive Computing, which has recruited students from more than 20
states including Puerto Rico. The system also supports collaboration with
industrial partners and is an enabling factor in a collaborative relationship
between Clemson University and Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.