* 1405546
* Collaborative Research:  Testing the hypothesis of an orbital forcing of southwestern North America climate over the past 500,000 years
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Matthew Lachniet, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2018
* USD 334,529.00

Climate scientists have long documented the strong control of Earth's orbital
variations on the waxing and waning of the ice ages. Thirty years ago, an iconic
climate record from Devils Hole, Nevada, seemed to suggest that Great Basin the
climate of the Great Basin of the western United States was out of step with the
orbital rhythm, warming after glacial periods before what would be expected from
changes in the Earth's orbit. Now new evidence places Great Basin climate
variations back in synchrony with orbital variations, and shows that climate
warmed and cooled with the amount of solar radiation reaching the northern
Hemisphere during summer over the last 175,000 years. Radiometrically-dated
stalagmites from Great Basin caves have the potential extend the record back to
500,000 years before present. These cave deposits record variations in climate
in a broad region over and upwind of the cave sites. As such, they are ideally
suited to test for an orbital control on Great Basin climate, and will allow
comparison to sea surface temperature records in the Pacific Ocean, and to the
Devils Hole calcite record. This project will also facilitate long-term climate
projections for the southwestern United States based on known future orbital
variations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis that will be tested
in the course of this project is that southwestern paleoclimatic change was
paced by Milankovitch (orbital) forcing, through changes in northern hemisphere
summer insolation altering atmospheric circulation dynamics over the
northeastern Pacific Ocean region. The research team will generate high-
resolution oxygen isotope analyses of precisely-dated stalagmites from caves
across the Great Basin region, and determine whether or not oxygen isotope
variations align with variations in northern hemisphere summer insolation over
the past half million years. Oxygen isotopic analyses will be carried out at the
University of Nevada Las Vegas, and uranium disequilibrium dating at the
University of New Mexico. The research team will include several students from
both lead institutions as well as an undergraduate-serving institution, Cornell
College (Iowa). The researchers and students will also create cave educational
materials for sharing with local caving groups and governmental agencies.