* 1405746
* High-Dimensional Covariance Estimation via Convex Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Jacob Bien, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,001.00

Modern technologies allow researchers to measure an unprecedentedly large number
of attributes regarding the subjects of their study. An important question in
many applications is how one can infer from such data the underlying
relationships between these attributes. Such an objective can be expressed
through a fundamental construct in the field of statistics known as the
covariance matrix. Using classical statistical techniques would require one to
collect data on a prohibitively large number of subjects to reliably estimate
this matrix. In this work, novel statistical methods will be developed that
allow researchers to make sound inferences by making better use of their data
given the limited number of subjects they have available. The methods developed
will be applicable in a wide range of fields. For example, in biology, one can
infer the structures of massive networks of genes based on a small number of
samples. Beyond being an end in itself, the covariance matrix is a key
ingredient in many common statistical procedures. Thus, by developing the
ability to reliably estimate it from small numbers of subjects, this work will
enable the use of many other methods that would otherwise be unavailable to
researchers. Application areas include disease diagnosis, basic biology, sensor
networks, and social networks.

The research program will focus on high-dimensional covariance estimation and
capitalize on the strengths of the convex framework to develop novel statistical
methodology. This work will involve developing efficient algorithms, thoroughly
investigating the properties of estimators and algorithms through a combination
of theory and simulation, and applying methods to real datasets. The research
focus is in two main areas: (A) In certain applications, the variables have a
known ordering. Such structure suggests the use of a convex penalty not
previously applied to covariance estimation. This work will carefully study
using such a penalty to estimate both the covariance matrix and the inverse
covariance matrix. (B) Estimating a covariance matrix as a simultaneously sparse
and positive definite matrix is a natural goal, and yet the standard penalized
likelihood approach is not convex. This research will develop convex-
optimization-based estimators that still make use of the likelihood. For all
projects, software will be produced, made freely available online, and
maintained so that other researchers can benefit from its use.