* 1405674
* CI-EN: SystemOnTPTP - Online Services for Automated Theorem Proving in Classical Logic
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Geoffrey Sutcliffe, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 57,219.00

Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) is concerned with the development and use of
systems that automate sound reasoning: the derivation of conclusions that follow
inevitably from facts. This capability lies at the heart of many important
computational tasks, e.g., formal methods for software and hardware design and
verification, the analysis of network security protocols, solving hard problems
in mathematics, analysis of social systems, inference for the semantic web etc.
Despite increased usage of ATP, the complexities of preparing problems in a
logic, installing and executing appropriate ATP systems, and extracting useful
information from the ATP system's output often present a barrier to using ATP.
The software infrastructure, which have been available to the community for
almost a decade now, overcomes these barriers by providing online services for
ATP in classical logic. The NSF CRI program will help to upgrade the hardware
that hosts this infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system has three
components: first, it provides tools for preparing ATP problems, it then
provides services that are used to solve ATP problems, and finally the service
provides tools for analyzing the output and the solutions. All three components
are available through interactive web interfaces for humans, and application
programming interfaces. The hardware consists of a server used for building and
testing ATP systems and tools before they are made available, and a compute
server used to service requests from users. The hardware upgrade will make it
possible for the system to continue to offer the most recent versions of ATP
systems and tools, while maintaining the necessary performance and response
levels.