* 1405101
* Evolutionary origins and proximate mechanisms of parenting in complex social systems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Jill Mateo, Lincoln Park Zoo
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2015
* USD 197,512.00

This Fellowship award to Lincoln Park Zoo (LPZ) provides a unique venue to
engage the public in research and conservation. The project also facilitates
conservation and science education in schools. The Fellow gives talks at grade
schools, focusing on how apes help us understand human behavior, plus threats
apes face in the wild and how to help. This research is dominated by women and
underrepresented minorities, providing students with visible role models as they
view presentations. As a field scientist the Fellow helps students understand
the breadth of scientific inquiry, an important component of early science
education. This research also supports scientific training and conservation
education of Rwandan nationals, who work as lab personnel and research
assistants. Their training qualifies them for the emerging scientific workforce
in a developing country. Many Rwandans do not realize the gorillas and their
ecosystem are unusual and highly valuable. Employees quickly come to understand
the importance of protecting this resource, and educate others in the community.
Findings are regularly featured in LPZ's diverse public outreach domains and
integrated with LPZ's education initiatives at all levels. Results also reach
500,000 per year people via Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International's social
media resources. These two venues help the public better understand the
implications primate physiology and behavior have for understanding human
behavior, connections between different fields of scientific inquiry, and the
value of behavioral sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes non-
invasively collected hormonal data from the mountain gorilla population
monitored by the Karioke Research Center in Rwanda. Hormone results are
integrated with behavioral and genetic data to test hypotheses about the
proximate factors affecting male-immature relationships in mountain gorillas, a
socially flexible great ape. Current understanding of evolutionary origins of
the hormonal correlates of male parenting comes from a small group of socially
monogamous species. The scientific literature has few papers on hormonal
regulation of such relationships in multi-male social systems, and studies about
the hormonal correlates of male parenting behaviors come to different
conclusions. The research program is interdisciplinary, incorporating behavioral
sciences, genetics, and endocrinology. All work takes place at the Lincoln Park
Zoo's Davee Center for Epidemiology and Endocrinology.