* 1406282
* A Conference on Progress and Factors That Contribute to Closing the STEM Achievement Gap
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Sharon Robinson, American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2015
* USD 72,820.00

The American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education (AACTE) will host a
conference with a special focus on closing the achievement gap through the
preparation of effective science and mathematics educators and collaborative
interdisciplinary partnerships. The book "Closing the Achievement Gap from an
International Perspective: Transforming STEM for an Effective Education" will be
used to highlight innovative interventions other countries have implemented to
address the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) achievement
gap. Co-authors of the book will be invited to participate in the conference
along with scientists, teacher educators, and policy makers to discuss effective
strategies for closing the STEM achievement gap. The strategies will inform the
future direction of educator preparation in developing effective science and
mathematics educators and improving PK-12 STEM education. The objectives of this
proposed conference are to: (1) review current research on the achievement gap
in mathematics and science with a focus on school-related variables that
adversely affect outcomes from low-income and minority students; (2) discuss
teacher quality and effective teaching in STEM; (3) identify effective
strategies and models that promote equity in education and close the STEM
achievement gap; and (4) build collaborative, interdisciplinary partnerships for
addressing the U.S. achievement gap in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference
participants will identify social and cultural barriers that contribute to
persistent education inequities and achievement gaps in STEM and discuss
effective education policies and innovative initiatives that select countries
have applied to promote progress in narrowing STEM achievement gaps. During the
conference, a panel discussion will take a systematic view of the subject,
beginning with a cross-national analysis of teacher qualifications and the
achievement gap that spans 50 countries with special interest in the United
States, Canada, Mexico, England, Turkey, China, Japan, Brazil, Singapore, Korea,
South Africa, and Australia. Through an examination of international models of
system-changing initiatives that promote gains in STEM achievement for minority
and low-income populations, conference panelists will explore lessons learned
and effective strategies from other countries that are potentially transferable
to the American education system.