* 1406496
* Dissertation Research: Sick in the city? Hosts and parasites in urban and non-urban habitats
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Rachel Hanauer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 20,275.00

As cities grow larger and more species of animals make their homes in urban
habitats, it becomes increasingly important to understand the effects of city
life on animal health. Parasite infections can have significant impacts on
animal survival and physiology, and urban habitats may change parasite
infections in several ways. For example, urban habitats may change both the
stressors that animals experience and their immune resistance to parasites.
However, little is known about parasites in urban vs non-urban populations of
vertebrate animals, including how they affect animal health and whether urban
animals have different levels of stress hormones or immunity to parasites. This
research will provide critical knowledge about the parasites that birds must
withstand in order to survive in urban areas, which will inform future
conservation efforts in urban habitats. This work will also help protect human
health, since urban birds are potential reservoirs of human diseases; for
example, urban birds are more likely to be infected with West Nile Virus than
non-urban birds. Understanding what parasites urban birds are infected by, and
what physiological states are associated with these infections, can help us
better prevent disease spread from birds to humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to better understand the effects of urbanization on parasitism and host
physiology, the researchers will study a songbird, the Dark-eyed Junco (Junco
hyemalis), from multiple cities and non-urban habitats across California.
Previous research has found considerable variation in phenotype and parasitism
between an urban and neighboring non-urban population of juncos. In a non-urban
population, there was higher prevalence of parasites that require vectors for
transmission. In the neighboring urban population, there was greater prevalence
and intensity of directly and environmentally transmitted parasites, including
an intestinal parasite, coccidia (Isospora sp.). Urban hosts also differed in
endocrine physiology from non-urban birds. This project will combine extensive
field surveys and aviary experiments to test 1) whether urbanization
consistently results in these same patterns for environmentally transmitted
versus vector-borne parasites; and 2) whether the observed difference in
coccidia infection intensity between the urban and non-urban populations is due
to traits of the host (relating to stress response and immune function) or
traits of the parasite. By combining approaches from disease ecology and eco-
immunology, this project will address the critical links among habitat
characteristics, parasitism, and host phenotypes.