* 1406419
* The Geometry, Topology and Number Theory of the Jones Polynomial
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Thang Le, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 377,059.00

Knot theory is the study of 3-dimensional shapes obtained by removing loops from
the 3-dimensional space. Microscopic examples of knotted loops appear abundantly
in solid state physics, biology (notably, the DNA molecule) and various models
of quantum computing. Macroscopic knotted loops occur in the shapes of galaxies,
black holes and plasma physics. The proposed research focuses on the theoretical
aspects of knot theory and more precisely on the relation between classical and
quantum knot invariants. Quantum topology offers a classification of knots by
various measures of complexity, for example by using the Jones polynomial of a
knot (and its parallels). Understanding this filtering leads to deep connections
between knot theory and hyperbolic geometry, number theory, complex analysis,
algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. An important aspect of this
research is the training of graduate students and the collaboration with senior
researchers. The research involves difficult numerical experiments and leads to
unexpected discoveries of conjectures and proofs. Aside from mathematics and
mathematical physics, quantum knot theory is a powerful and effective tool with
the potential to impact topological quantum computation and the study of the
shape of long molecules.

Classical knot invariants include the incompressible and normal surface
invariants by W. Haken, the character varieties of algebraic geometry and
mathematical physics and the hyperbolic geometry approach to 3-dimensional
manifolds initiated by W. Thurston. The birth of quantum topology was the Jones
polynomial in the mid eighties. The discovery of the Jones polynomial attracted
mathematicians and physicists of the highest caliber, including the Fields
Medalists V. Jones, E. Witten, V. Drinfeld and M. Kontsevich. There are precise,
numerically testable conjectures that relate classical and quantum invariants.
Progress on these conjectures (which include the Volume Conjecture of Kashaev,
the Slope Conjecture and the AJ Conjecture) is the focus of the proposed
research. A combination of numerical experimentation with proofs leads to deep
connections between low dimensional topology and hyperbolic geometry, number
theory, complex analysis, algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. This
combination helps to train young researchers, and to make connections with
senior researchers in diverse fields.