* 1406747
* Nonparametric Likelihood Enhancements for Dependent Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Nordman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 119,997.00

The project aims to develop accurate statistical methodology for correlated
data, which applies without stringent assumptions about how data may arise.
Current statistical methodology often relies on specifying an adequate model for
correlated data, which can be a difficult task, and any inference drawn from a
mistaken model can be unreliable. A direct benefit of this research is to
provide alternative, model-free tools for statistical inference that are not
susceptible to model choice and can advance data analysis in scientific areas
such as environmetrics, economics, astronomy, etc., which encounter different
forms of complex dependent data. Additionally, climate predictions are
increasingly relevant for mitigating natural disasters and planning the use of
social/economic resources. Research goals include developing new assessments of
regional climate models to understand how scale differences in such models may
impact climate forecasts.

The research targets development of model-free resampling and nonparametric
likelihood methods for different types of dependent data structures, temporally
and spatially. Three main research problems are: (1) Investigation of optimal
implementations of empirical likelihood for time series (as performance is
linked to tuning parameters in currently unknown ways); (2) Study of spatio-
temporal resampling methods to assess the concept of "scale" in geophysical and
environmental processes, with interest in evaluating regional climate models;
(3) Development of new resampling methods for irregularly located spatial
observations, based on data-transformations, to advance inference with spatial
data. Such nonparametric methods can provide valid inference and assessments of
dependence structures under mild distributional assumptions, and such
methodology can also be helpful for informing model selection.