* 1406090
* High-frequency microwave ablation for targeted, minimally invasive cancer therapy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Susan Hagness, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

The main research goal of this project is to develop a new minimally-invasive
technology for thermal treatment of cancerous tumors using high-frequency
microwave ablation. According to American Cancer Society estimates, over 1.6
million new cancer cases are expected to be diagnosed in 2013. The top ten
cancers with the highest mortality rates are all candidates for microwave
ablation. This technology avoids the high costs, invasiveness, prolonged use of
general anesthesia and other risks, and long recovery times associated with
surgery, which is currently the most common method of treatment of
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate the
fundamental mechanisms of destroying cancerous cells using high-frequency
microwaves as well as to develop miniature antennas suitable for minimally
invasive delivery of microwave energy to the tumor. The use of nanoparticles to
enhance heating efficiency will also be explored. Collectively, these
technologies will enable minimally invasive, targeted treatment of tumors that
are located nearly anywhere in the body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
prime example of integrating research and education, and fostering diversity in
engineering. An 'Expanding Your Horizons' workshop focused on minimally invasive
treatment of cancer will be developed for middle-school girls. Each year, a
summer research opportunity will be offered to a high school student from the
Madison Metropolitan School District Science Research Internship Program.
Institutional programs will be leveraged to involve minorities and
undergraduates in the research activities. The project will be particularly
effective in recruiting and retaining female students in electrical engineering
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels due to its emphasis on a health
care issue of worldwide significance. All students involved in the project will
receive invaluable interdisciplinary training at the interface of
electromagnetics and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microwave ablation employs
an interstitial antenna to deliver microwave energy directly into the tumor and
heat it to cytotoxic temperatures. The vast majority of prior studies have made
use of frequencies below 2.5 GHz, in part due to concerns that smaller
penetration depths of electromagnetic waves at higher frequencies would preclude
the creation of sufficiently large ablation zones. However, experimental
evidence to the contrary has been recently obtained. High-frequency microwave
ablation offers a number of advantages that have not yet been explored. First,
high-frequency microwave antennas, particularly the novel antenna types and
feeding techniques proposed in this project, are radically smaller than their
low-frequency counterparts. Second, the desired ablation zone can be achieved
much faster in vivo using higher frequencies. Third, the use of high-frequency
microwaves enables the development of compact and miniature antenna arrays with
customizable heating patterns that are not available from conventional single-
element low-frequency antennas. Collectively, these attributes are expected to
overcome the shortcomings of existing thermoablative technologies and expand the
realm of capabilities of microwave ablation systems to enable minimally
invasive, targeted treatment of tumors located nearly anywhere in the body.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational test beds involving hybrid
electromagnetic/thermal simulations and physical test beds involving experiments
with ex vivo tissue will be employed to accomplish the following research
objectives: 1) elucidate fundamental mechanisms of HF MWA and investigate novel
interstitial antenna design concepts; 2) investigate nanoparticle-mediated MWA
for improving heating selectivity and reducing power requirements; 3) establish
the feasibility of using flexible HF MWA antennas for gaining access to the
ablation site via a catheter or endoscope; and 4) investigate arrays of HF
microwave interstitial antennas for customizing the size and shape of the
ablation zone.