* 1406814
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How Land Cover and Landscape Connectivity Interact to Determine Species Ranges
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Michelle Boone, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,410.00

Finding ways to reconcile the habitat needs of people with those of wildlife is
of great importance for preservation of species diversity. The objective of this
study is to examine how land-use in a human dominated landscape affects where
wild species occur. These "distributions" of wild species depend on availability
of two types of habitat: habitat where populations can grow and persist, and
habitat that connects populations to allow for dispersal. Changes in land-use
can affect both types of habitat, yet most research has considered just the
first type. This study focuses on how habitat connectivity impacts the growth
and survival of frog populations. In doing so, it will provide research training
for graduate and undergraduate students. Findings from this study will be used
to create educational materials for elementary school students, who will learn
about how habitat connectivity affects animal dispersal. The investigators will
collaborate with the Hefner Museum of Natural History at Miami University to
create a display explaining how patterns of human land-use affect wildlife.
Finally, the methodology developed for this study may provide the basis for
species management plans.

Specifically, the goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that landscape
connectivity explains discrepancies in a species? realized versus potential
distribution, based on availability of suitable habitat. Using cricket frogs
(Acris blanchardi) as a model system, investigators will address the following
aims: (1) assess which land-use and environmental factors are most important for
habitat suitability and are predictive of species presence, (2) determine the
current eastern edge of the range and whether there is a discrepancy between the
actual cricket frog distribution and the distribution of suitable habitat
(potential distribution), and (3) assess whether a gradient in landscape
connectivity from the interior to edge of the range can explain differences in
realized and potential distributions. Aims 1 and 2 will be addressed using
ecological niche modeling and ground-truthing surveys. The niche model will use
presence data from previous surveys and include both climatic and land-use data
layers. Aim 3 will be addressed by incorporating niche model results in
landscape connectivity analyses based on graph theory. Connectivity will be
compared between the interior of the range, the range edge, and outside the
range. Due to recent contraction and expansion of the cricket frog range
boundary, investigators predict areas of suitable habitat outside the current
range. Low levels of landscape connectivity at the range boundary and outside
the range are predicted to explain why cricket frogs are unable to occupy their
entire potential range.