* 1406380
* Homotopy theory of schemes, Grothendieck's anabelian program, rational points
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Kirsten Wickelgren, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2017
* USD 147,030.00

Finding solutions to polynomials in the integers or rational numbers arises
naturally while counting objects subject to various constraints. It is also one
of the oldest problems in mathematics. The solutions to the same polynomials
over the complex numbers form topological spaces. For example, the complex
solutions to the degree n Fermat equation is a torus with (n-1)(n-2)/2 holes.
The fact that the shape of the space of complex solutions influences the
solutions over rational numbers or integers can be viewed as a first instance of
the utility of using methods of homotopy theory to study this problem. Homotopy
theory gives machinery to replace a procedure by a derived version which
frequently gives more control over the problem. For example, consider the
procedure of taking a rotating sphere and returning the points which do not
move. This procedure can be derived to produce a space called the homotopy fixed
points, which records not only the points which do not move, but also compatible
paths between points and where they have traveled. Fixed points and homotopy
fixed points are equivalent under some hypotheses. If fixed points and homotopy
fixed points are equivalent for a certain analogue of the space of complex
solutions of polynomial equations, one can show that the solutions to these
polynomials over the rationals are then determined by the loops on the
corresponding space of complex solutions, under certain restrictions. This
latter prediction is part of Grothendieck's anabelian program, and is unsolved.
It produces strong restrictions on the solutions of the corresponding equations.
The focus of this proposal is to study solutions to polynomial equations and
Grothendieck's anabelian program from this perspective. The project also aims to
stimulate research in homotopy theory, and make the tools of this theory
available to mathematicians in very different areas, and other scientists more
generally.

The projects in this proposal share the approach wherein one views a scheme as a
space in the sense of Morel-Voevodsky's A1-homotopy theory, and then applies
various realization functors, for instance to Z/2-equivariant spaces by taking
C-points of a scheme over R, or to pro-spaces with an action of the absolute
Galois group of the base field for schemes over more general fields. The
Principal Investigator studies the pro-space maps from the étale homotopy type
of a field k to the étale homotopy type of the projective line minus three
points using lower central series approximations to the latter. Additionally
James-Hopf maps in A1-homotopy theory are used to study the same mapping space.
Both have applications to Grothendieck's anabelian program. Running the same
methods backwards, produces results on the algebraic topology of schemes
starting from information about solutions to polynomial equations. For instance,
the Principal Investigator continues a study of the differential graded algebra
associated to group cohomology of absolute Galois groups. Information about the
unstable category of spaces in the sense of Morel-Voevodsky is sought in
conjunction.