* 1406723
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does phenotypic integration reflect local adaptation in Bahamas mosquitofish?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Randall Langerhans, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,695.00

Biologists have long sought to understand the evolution of complexity in
organisms. Individuals are comprised of many diverse traits that can affect
survival and reproduction; these traits are often correlated with one another, a
concept known as phenotypic integration. The extent to which these trait
correlations also affect whole-organism fitness, whether they bias the direction
of evolutionary change, and how they evolve in the wild remain poorly
understood. These questions will be investigated in the Bahamas mosquitofish
(Gambusia hubbsi) inhabiting inland blue holes across Andros Island, The
Bahamas. These populations have been isolated in the presence or absence of
predatory fish for thousands of years. Specifically, this work seeks to
understand whether livebearing fish populations have independently and
repeatedly evolved similar trait correlation networks as a response to similar
natural selection, or whether trait associations are relatively immutable and
constrain evolutionary change.

Understanding how biological complexity, such as correlated trait networks, is
generated and maintained represents a central goal of evolutionary biology; this
work will shed light on the conditions propelling or prohibiting evolution of
organismal diversity. Public outreach associated with this research includes (1)
interactive lessons on evolution for middle and high school students on Andros
Island involving students with research data collection, (2) an art exhibit
showcasing the process of conducting evolutionary research and the ideas
inspiring it, and (3) research experience for diverse undergraduate students.
Further, data collected for this work will be freely available online for
research and educational purposes.