* 1406149
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effect of temperature on the timing and strength of species interactions in a northern hardwood forest
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Nina Lany, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 11/30/2015
* USD 20,937.00

Forests provide a broad range of services to people, including water
purification, timber, food, carbon storage, and climate regulation. They are
increasingly threatened by insect damage and disease. This research will
document the impacts of climate change on herbivore damage to woody plant
species, outbreaks of forest Lepidoptera, and the abundance of migratory
songbirds. The project reaches beyond more traditional pair-wise interactions to
examine multiple interactions affecting caterpillar abundances. It will
contribute new information to a more thorough understanding of the factors
affecting forest herbivores, thus informing both forest and bird conservation
efforts.

Increases in greenhouse gases and atmospheric temperatures in response to human
activities are well documented, as are the direct physiological effects of
increasing temperatures. Warmer temperatures advance the phenology, or timing of
events, of reproduction and development, for example. Individual organisms live
within a web of interacting species, however, and changes in the abundance of a
species with warming depend on how temperature affects its food, competitors,
and predators. This research focuses on interactions among trees, Lepidoptera
larvae, and their predators to examine both negative and positive effects of
warming on forest caterpillars. It combines historical observations,
experiments, and models to test how temperature affects the abundance of
caterpillar consumers both through direct effects on caterpillar physiology and
through indirect effects on predator abundance or food quality. Positive direct
effects of warmer temperatures on the physiology of these consumers may, or may
not, outweigh the expected negative indirect effects due to increased predation
or decreased food quality. The research will significantly improve an ongoing
dissertation project by examining the role of predators on caterpillar success
and expanding the project to include a temperature gradient. The training of a
talented, young, female scientist with thereby be improved.