* 1406031
* Community Workshop: The Next Generation of LiDAR Analyses for Critical Zone Research
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Noah Molotch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2014
* USD 23,357.00

A three-day workshop will be held at the University of Colorado-Boulder in
Spring 2014 involving 25 early-career Earth scientists with a focus on the
potentials for utilizing the next generation of Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) analysis techniques to answer research questions across the
transdisciplinary boundaries of Critical Zone (CZ) science: hydrology, ecology,
geomorphology, and geology. LiDAR technology is capable of resolving vegetation,
terrain, and snowpack data at extremely high resolutions using ground-based
(terrestrial) and aircraft-mounted laser ranging equipment. The growth of LiDAR
data collection has outpaced the potential for CZ scientists to learn about new
analysis techniques needed for research applications, which has left the CZ
community 'data-rich' but 'information-poor' regarding LiDAR data. The workshop
is therefore an important opportunity for early-career scientists to meet and
learn about transformative LiDAR analysis tools and better utilize the LiDAR
datasets already collected by the National Science Foundation's Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO) network and similar CZ field sites from around the world. The
workshop has three clear objectives: 1. Inform early-career CZ scientists on
cutting-edge LiDAR analysis techniques, 2. Identify opportunities to apply LiDAR
analysis techniques across the disciplinary boundaries of CZ science, and 3.
Develop a five-year vision for advancing CZ science with new LiDAR data products
that is articulated in a discussion paper. For one day of the workshop the
instructors will rotate between three topical groups: 1. Watershed hydrology, 2.
Forest ecology and management, and 3. Geomorphic landforms and lithology. The
second half of the workshop will be spent synthesizing these ideas into a vision
for advancing CZ science using transdisciplinary LiDAR analysis techniques to be
published in a top-level peer-reviewed Earth science journal. The workshop
offers a unique opportunity to develop collaborations among multidisciplinary
early-career CZ scientists working with LiDAR data from around the world and
engage the wider CZ community using course materials and journal publications.