* 1406968
* NeTS: JUNO: Energy-Efficient Hyper-Dense Wireless Networks with Trillions of Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Ahmed Ibrahim, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 03/31/2018
* USD 182,000.00

Delivering high-speed, pervasive wireless services to trillions of mobile
devices requires a significant transformation to today's wireless cellular
networks. Hyper-dense heterogeneous networks (HDHNs), enabled via a viral and
large-scale deployment of small cell base stations and mobile devices, are seen
as one of the cornerstones of this transformation. However, most existing
network design and optimization techniques fall short in handling the scale,
density, sustainability, and dynamics of such HDHNs.

This project contributes to the foundations of HDHNs via innovations that
include novel mobility state estimation techniques, optimized cell selection and
handover methods, and a new game-theoretic framework for self-organizing
resource management in energy-efficient HDHNs. The proposed approaches will be
evaluated and enhanced via implementation on an experimental testbed using
software radio and open source platforms.

Boosting the performance of wireless systems will have societal impacts via
enablement of novel mobile services requiring high-performance network
connectivity. The project results will also support the analysis of dense
networks and the development of future wireless standards and products. As a new
Japan-US collaboration the project will build long-term relationships between US
and Japanese researchers designing sustainable, energy-efficient and dense
wireless systems. The project will create new educational and outreach
activities to attract under-represented minorities to the field of sustainable
HDHNs.