* 1406721
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the impact of hybridization on diversification: A case study in the plant genus Heuchera
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* John Freudenstein, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,502.00

Hybridization is broadly relevant because it is the basis for much of the
diversity around us, including agricultural crops and pests. The existence of
successful ancient natural hybrids between species challenges traditional
notions in biology that hybrids are ephemeral dead-ends in the evolution of
biodiversity. However, detecting ancient hybrids using genetic data is
challenging since hybrids have a "mosaic" of genes possessing different
underlying histories and traits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will test hypotheses about ancient hybridizations, specifically
whether Pleistocene glaciations have enabled hybridization by causing range
shifts. The proposed work will be conducted within the genus Heuchera by
comparing species richness between hybrid and parental lineages in several
parallel cases that have been identified. This project analyzes Coral Bells
(Heuchera) from a DNA and morphological perspective to investigate the long-term
contribution of hybridization to evolution. The objectives of this study include
(1) the discovery of hybrids, (2) examination of relative rates of species
formation with parents, and (3) reconstruction of historical geographical
ranges. This study contributes to scientific infrastructure through the
provision of DNA sequences for comparative studies, data for the inference of
evolutionary history, descriptions of new and rare species and varieties, and
the creation of museum specimens and identification keys. The project includes
training of undergraduates in research methods, the creation of pedagogical
exercises for undergraduate classes, and public lectures on hybridization in
general and on specific aspects of the project.