* 1406193
* Geometry and Analysis on Nonholonomic structures on manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Igor Zelenko, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 130,188.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1406193, Principal Investigator: Igor
Zelenko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structures of nonholonomic nature such as bracket
generating distributions and sub-Riemannian structures appear naturally in
Control Theory with applications to Robotics (car-like robots), Mechanics (ball
bearing structures) and the models of visual perception. Distributions are also
basic objects in the geometric theory of differential equations and in geometry
of real submanifolds of complex spaces (Cauchy-Riemann geometry). The knowledge
of invariants of a geometric structure up to diffeomorphisms of the ambient
manifolds or, informally speaking, of the quantities which are independent of
local coordinate representations of such structures often gives the essential
information about various qualitative properties of the geometric structures. In
the last decade we developed the novel variational approach for the unified
construction of the differential invariants for a very wide class of geometric
structures. This approach takes its origin in Optimal Control Theory and
Symplectic Geometry. It extends significantly the set of the nonholonomic
structures for which the canonical frames and differential invariants can be
constructed explicitly and uniformly compared with all previously existing
approaches (including the classical Cartan method of equivalence and the Tanaka
theory from 1970). The aim of the project is to use these invariants in order to
solve a number of natural problems that were not considered in such generality
before. The results of this project will bring new geometric tools for Control
Theory and Mathematical Physics by providing efficient and uniform algorithms
for computing state-feedback and gauge invariants and explicit geometric
optimality conditions for extremals of the corresponding variational problems.
We will develop a special MAPLE based software package for computation of our
invariants and apply the theory to the qualitative study of control and
mechanical systems of practical interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main new
point of the aforementioned variational approach is that the study of geometry
of nonholonomic structures on manifold can be reduced to a simpler (extrinsic)
geometry of curves in flag varieties. In terms of these curves we obtain a new
discrete basic invariant of the original structure, called the flag symbol and
we have an explicit algorithm for construction of the canonical frame for our
original structure that depends only on first fixing this discrete information.
However, the main properties of these frames and of the invariants they produce
are far of being understood. Among the problems that will be addressed in the
project are (1) explicit description of the group of symmetries of the most
symmetric models with given flag symbol; (2) exploring when the obtained
canonical frames are Cartan connections; (3) distinguishing the fundamental set
of invariants among all invariants produced by these frames. To reach these
goals we will use various tools and techniques from Representation Theory,
Algebraic Geometry, and cohomological theory of Lie algebras. Another main theme
of the project is comparison theorems in sub-Riemannian geometry. Several
essential differences here compared with the Riemannian case form serious
obstacles in obtaining sharp analogs of the classical Rauch and Bonnet-Myers
comparison theorems. To overcome these obstacles we propose to work on the
infinitesimal version of comparison theorems, i.e. given a sub-Riemannian metric
to describe directions in the tangent space at this metric to the space of all
sub-Riemannian metrics in which consecutive conjugate points along the
corresponding extremals become closer. We also shall study natural flows on the
space of sub-Riemannian metrics along which the infinitesimal comparison theorem
holds.