* 1406796
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Cohort 11
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Ashton Hamme, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 04/30/2017
* USD 987,000.00

In order to address the national need for the U.S. to remain globally
competitive in Science Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
disciplines, an infusion of an untapped pool of talented, creative, and
intelligent students historically underrepresented in STEM who earn Ph.Ds. is
needed. Jackson State University (JSU), a Historically Black University (HBCU),
has a strong track record for preparing primarily African American graduate
students in chemistry, mathematics, biology, environmental science, computer
science, and engineering for STEM doctoral degrees. JSU's BD program to date has
produced 20 Ph.D. graduates from underrepresented groups and 94 who were
admitted into doctoral programs. Through their program, JSU has and will provide
well-qualified and diverse faculty members for U.S. universities and colleges,
as well as impact the number of scientists, mathematicians, and engineers
holding the doctorate and entering the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson
State University will execute a BD program that is based upon challenging and
rich research and academic experiences, the development and implementation of
professional long term goals and objectives, the utilization of STEM summer
research internships at targeted Ph.D. program institutions, and international
research experiences. The objectives of their BD program fall into four
categories: Research and Academics, Enrichment Activities, National and
International Partnerships, and Evaluation and Student Tracking. These
activities along with sufficient financial support from the LSAMP program,
rigorous curricula, and committed mentoring will allow their BD program to
continue to accelerate and increase the quality and number of students
historically underrepresented in STEM entering the Ph.D. pipeline.