* 1406943
* Astroparticle Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Daniel Akerib, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2018
* USD 909,900.00

The discovery of dark matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology,
astrophysics and elementary particle physics. A broad range of observations from
galactic to cosmological scales indicate that nearly 90% of the matter in the
universe is made up of some new type of particle, different from ordinary
matter. This type of matter has revealed itself only through gravity and is
referred to as "dark matter" because it neither emits nor absorbs light. A
leading hypothesis is that the dark matter is comprised of Weakly Interacting
Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced shortly after the Big Bang from
annihilation of ordinary matter. If WIMPs are the dark matter then they will
make up a spherical halo around the Milky Way and be detectable through
interactions with atomic nuclei in a suitably massive and sensitive detector.
This award will further the search for WIMPs by supporting work on the LUX
(Large Underground Xenon) dark matter experiment that is currently operating in
the Homestake Mine in the Sanford Underground Research Facility in South Dakota.
This award will also support development of the followup LZ (LUX-Zeplin)
experiment, with a proposed mass of seven tons. The search for dark matter has
been driven by the development of radiation detectors with ultra-low radioactive
backgrounds. These detectors are also playing a role in neutrino physics, and
have the potential for security, medical and industrial applications. Work on
LUX and LZ provides excellent and unique opportunities for student training with
technical skills that can be used in careers in basic research or in the private
sector.

Using 250 kg of actively monitored liquid xenon, the LUX experiment is now at
the vanguard in the search for dark matter. The upper limit on the interaction
rate between WIMPs and ordinary matter that is now established by LUX rules out
new regions of parameter space, and provides solid evidence that claims of WIMPs
in the low mass region around 10 GeV are likely due to instrumental effects or
unidentified backgrounds. With the next few years of operations and analysis it
will become clear whether WIMPs will be detected in LUX or new upper limits set.
In either case, LZ will be well positioned to follow up and continue the search
with sensitivities 1000 times better than LUX's current limit.