* 1406776
* Time-Inconsistent Optimal Control Problems for Stochastic Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jiongmin Yong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 187,000.00

Plans are most often made under the time-consistency assumption that optimal
strategies designed at the beginning of a time period will remain optimal
throughout the period under consideration. However, almost everyone has to admit
that this is rarely the case. In fact, more often than not, an optimal policy
made at the beginning of a period will not stay optimal thereafter; this
phenomenon is called time-inconsistency. Studies show that the two main reasons
for time-inconsistency are people's time-preferences and risk-preferences. An
example of the former is that if there is no enforced contract, people may find
it difficult to keep their promises. An example of the latter is that different
groups of people will have different subjective views on the risk inherent in a
certain stock purchase. Mainly due to these two types of preferences, the
'optimal' plan cannot stay optimal as time goes by. The current project is to
quantitatively study such a problem from an optimal control point of view. The
goal is to obtain time-consistent equilibrium strategies, under certain
conditions, for time-inconsistent problems. We expect that the results of the
proposed theory will increase our understanding of the time-inconsistency issue,
and ultimately help in the making of better time-consistent decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, classical optimal control problems are
time-consistent in the sense that an optimal control found at a given initial
pair of time and state will stay optimal thereafter for the corresponding
initial pair. When the discount is general, not exponential, and/or the
conditional expectations of the state and the control nonlinearly appear in the
performance index, the corresponding optimal control problem will be time-
inconsistent. To obtain time-consistent open-loop equilibrium strategies, we
will use variational methods, together with theory of forward-backward
stochastic differential equations. To obtain time-consistent closed-loop
equilibrium strategies, we will modify dynamic programming principles, and
adopt/introduce multi-person differential games. This project will enrich
(stochastic) optimal control theory and related areas.