* 1406578
* CHS: Medium: Design Tools for Physical Computing Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Kevin Seppi, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,123,577.00

As computers decline in cost and interactive computation moves off of the
desktop, computation can assume a variety of physical forms. At present, the
creation of new computer interfaces is limited to already-available formats,
such as smartphones, and even then is constrained to relatively simplistic
computer interfaces. Computing in the future will push beyond desktops, laptops,
tablets and smartphones into objects that fit into every part of our lives. But
for this to happen, design tools are needed that can rapidly adapt computing to
different physical forms and task needs. This project will study toolkits for
the development of interactive physical objects. The project will increase
national competitiveness in the invention and development of new uses of
computation, and make possible rich and diverse usability research with physical
computing objects in the wild rather than in the lab. Creating physical
computing objects will allow a greater proportion of society to use computers in
ways that fit their work requirements in fundamentally new ways. The rapid
design and creation of such devices will open new markets for consumer
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These ends are achieved through three
interrelated efforts: (1) A pluggable toolkit for creating sensor/actuator
systems that form the computational basis for such objects. This toolkit will be
unique in that the components when plugged together not only form an initial
prototype of the device but self-reveal their physical and computational
characteristics to automatically support the other design tools. A prototype
constructed with this toolkit will inherently contain sufficient information to
drive its own fabrication. By plugging together the prototype our tools will
automatically know how to perform a custom fabrication of the electronics at a
size that can be readily deployed. (2) Development of physical form via 3D
printing such that the physical shape, sensors and actuators integrate with the
software and electronics so as to easily prototype a complete
physical/computational object. One goal is to suppress the challenges of
mechanical design so that designers can focus on shape and usability. (3)
Interactive machine learning techniques will be created to easily develop the
mapping between human activities (as detected by sensors) and their recognition
in software. It is known that putting humans in the training loop for machine
learning changes the way training sets are built. Algorithms will be developed
that both adapt to and exploit this behavior. This project will produce new
knowledge of the concepts that are most difficult for designers when creating
physical computational objects.