* 1406787
* Integral models and endoscopy for Shimura varieties with deeper level structure
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Thomas Haines, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 282,000.00

The Langlands program seeks to illuminate currently-mysterious relations between
different kinds of symmetries, thereby connecting the mathematical realms of
arithmetic, algebraic geometry, and harmonic analysis on Lie groups. This
program has been fundamental in answering many longstanding problems in number
theory over the last few decades; to cite one example, it played a key role in
the solution of Fermat's Last Theorem by Andrew Wiles in the 1990s. Variants of
the classical Langlands program, namely the geometric Langlands program
initiated by Drinfeld and Laumon, have been inspirational for developments in
theoretical physics, for instance in the work of Kapustin and Witten on Quantum
Field Theory. This project relates to Shimura varieties, arithmetical objects
which have been indispensable for establishing local and global Langlands
correspondences between representations of Galois groups on the one hand, and
automorphic representations on the other hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI seeks
to build new relations between the study of Shimura varieties and the geometric
Langlands program. The Shimura varieties of interest are moduli spaces of
abelian varieties with additional structure, and that additional structure can
give rise to singularities when the equations are reduced modulo various prime
numbers. The PI will introduce new local models to study those singularities
when the structure is pro-p Iwahori level; the local models will be
generalizations of the Rapoport-Zink local models which have been so effective
for studying parahoric level structure. He will relate these local models to
'pro-p' affine flag varieties and their deformations, bringing in ideas used in
the geometric Langlands program in the setting of tame ramification. This
connection will permit an understanding of nearby cycles and singularities, and
also of endoscopy and Hasse-Weil zeta functions, for interesting new classes of
Shimura varieties. In order to put these constructions into a very general
context, the PI will work out a Tannakian theory of Bruhat-Tits buildings.