* 1406166
* Dynamics in galaxy centers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Scott Tremaine, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2017
* USD 287,980.00

Astronomers now believe that the centers of most galaxies harbor extremely large
black holes, containing millions to billions of times the mass of our Sun. These
black holes can be detected only through their influence on their neighbors,
including stars, dust, and gas. The only way to study this influence, and
especially to interpret the astronomical observations, is through complex
computer simulations. This project will develop several new approaches to
understanding the behavior of stars near black holes, emphasizing the observable
consequences. Much of the detailed work will be carried out by junior scientists
who will thus undergo extensive advanced training in theoretical astrophysics.

Particular effects of importance include flares from stars that wander too close
to the black hole, from active galactic nuclei fed by gaseous accretion disks
orbiting the black hole, and from the influence of the black hole's gravity on
the kinematics of nearby stars. As noted, this research will develop novel
numerical tools to study the dynamics of stellar systems near black holes, and
in addition will study the evolution of warps in accretion disks and look for
relativistic effects in the spectra of quasars. Specifically, this work will:
(i) explore novel orbit integrators for the gravitational N-body problem,
possibly allowing much larger time-steps; (ii) investigate the behavior of
warped accretion disks, where self-gravity, viscous stresses, and the Lense-
Thirring effect, are all important in determining the disk shape; (iii) develop
an "N-wire" code (which averages over orbital phase by representing each star as
an eccentric wire) and use it to study relaxation and stability of stellar
systems near a black hole and the eccentric stellar disk at the center of M31;
(iv) implement an "N-ring" code (which represents each star as an annular disk)
and use it to model stars near the Galactic center; and (v) look for
relativistic effects in the velocity offsets between broad and narrow emission
lines in a large sample of quasars. The project will contribute to the advanced
training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in theoretical
astrophysics, and will help to interpret results from existing and planned
flagship telescope projects.