* 1406035
* Collaborative Research:  Research on Learning and Teaching at the Physics-Mathematics Interface
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2020
* Michael Loverude, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2020
* USD 264,262.00

This award supports a project to investigate the development of undergraduate
students' mathematical understanding in the context of learning physics,
particularly while solving challenging upper-division physics problems. The
project team will conduct an integrated program of research, curriculum
development, and assessment of topics covering a typical sophomore- or junior-
level course in mathematical methods. The broad goals are to conduct research on
student resources, study the process of transfer from mathematics to physics and
the coevolution of knowledge in the two disciplines, and develop a set of Math /
Physics tasks suitable for instruction, research, and assessment materials that
will integrate challenging math content with topics covered in upper-division
physics core courses. This project has the potential to impact a gateway course
to the upper division for physics majors. Curricular materials will be shared
through electronic clearinghouses and via published research and it is
anticipated that the project will inform instruction - both of math methods
courses and subsequent physics courses in which the mathematics is used -
nationally and internationally. The student population at California State
University Fullerton includes many students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in physics, so this project will provide access to research-
based materials for these students and also ensure a diverse research
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project brings together
physics education research (PER) and research in undergraduate math education
(RUME). It blends efforts at identifying and addressing student conceptual
difficulties in physics with efforts toward understanding knowledge transfer in
mathematics. The work targets a key course for physics majors, the mathematical
methods course that is offered in most departments at the sophomore- or junior-
level. This course is typically intended to be a bridge between introductory
physics and calculus courses and the more challenging mathematics and physics
encountered by students in the core courses of electricity and magnetism,
classical mechanics, and modern physics / quantum mechanics. The project will
strengthen the research base in a portion of the curriculum that has, to this
point, largely gone unexamined, and will touch upon, and build upon, work in
several related areas, including PER in other upper-division courses as well as
the extensive research base in undergraduate mathematics education. This
proposed work will provide significant insights into transfer by probing the
extent to which the nature of student understanding depends upon the
disciplinary context. The research team has many years' experience in PER and
RUME and have collaborated on successful research and curriculum development
projects at the upper division in thermal physics and the physics-mathematics
interface.