* 1406865
* Collaborative Research: Improving electric power dispatch to ensure reliable, secure and economic transmission.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Javad Lavaei, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2015
* USD 199,960.00

Choosing the least-operating cost combination of electric power generation to
meet demand is at the heart of utility and Independent System Operator (ISO)
functions in the running of an electric power system. Additionally, utilities
and ISOs must ensure that transmission lines will be operated within limits both
under normal conditions and in the event of an outage, or failure, of a line.
These transmission limitations can limit the choices available for dispatch of
generators. A generation and transmission system operated within these limits is
said to be secure. Maintaining security while seeking to minimize the operating
costs of generation is a central function of utility and ISO operations and
involves pro-active consideration of the many possible outages that might occur.
If an outage does actually occur, then the dispatch must subsequently be changed
so that the system can withstand the next outage. Generally, however, these
actions needed to restore security are not explicitly modeled in the procedures
of utilities and ISOs. The implication is that current systems might be operated
in a manner that under-utilizes transmission capacity there resulting in more
expensive dispatch than necessary or operated in a manner that could threaten
reliability in the event of a single failure. This work seeks systematic methods
to better represent the limitations on transmission and better represent the
post-contingency restoration to security so as to improve electric generator
dispatch. The graduate students will be trained in electric power engineering,
optimization theory, and control systems. Students will be provided
opportunities to interact with the Texas Legislative and Public utility
commission, and the STEM outreach activities will extend to the South Harlem
middle and high schools that serve underrepresented minorities.

This proposal aims at improving representation of post-contingency states in
Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) and Independent System Operator (ISO)
dispatch optimization to better ensure that transmission capability is neither
under-utilized nor operated at levels that jeopardize reliability. Improved
utilization of transmission capacity will contribute to lowering the overall
cost of electricity supply by enabling more of the lower cost resources to be
dispatched, and contribute to enhancing the integration of renewable resources
by reducing transmission-related wind curtailment. Conversely, in cases where
transmission may be operated in an optimistic manner, improved representation of
post-contingency states will improve reliability. These improvements will be
achieved by more comprehensive dispatch methodologies, that explicitly model
post-contingency corrective actions, rather than through costly transmission
upgrades. The capability of the transmission system to support flows of power is
typically limited by both continuous and short-term thermal limits due to the
interaction of resistive heating of lines and line temperature ratings. The
limits vary from line to line and also depend to some extent on ambient
conditions. These limits are incorporated into RTO/ISO dispatch models. Standard
formulations of RTO/ISO dispatch use security-constrained optimal power flow
(SCOPF) that represent contingencies by approximating the post-contingency flows
on lines and other elements given a pre-contingency dispatch. Typically, the
limits allowed for post-contingency flows reflect short-term transmission limits
and are higher than the continuous ratings, with the implicit assumption that
the flows can be reduced to being within continuous ratings through (unmodeled)
post-contingency corrective actions before the temperature rise on the lines
exceeds acceptable limits. The approach is to utilize recent advances in fine-
grain distributed optimal power flow to explicitly represent the trajectory of
post-contingency flows into the optimal power flow formulation, so that the
implied limit on pre-contingency flows will neither be conservative or
optimistic. This will enable better utilization of existing transmission
capacity. Systematic methods to reduce the number of contingency constraints
that must be explicitly represented in the optimization will also be
investigated.