* 1406910
* The Supply Chain for Middle-Skill Jobs: Education, Training, and Certification Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sujai Shivakumar, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

Despite the emphasis in public discourse on the value of a four-year college
education, in 2011 only 30 percent of young adults in the United States had
completed a bachelor's degree, a fraction that is expected to increase slowly
over the next decade. Moreover, some of the fastest growing technical
occupations, such as energy production technology and information technology,
demand skills most often acquired in settings other than four-year college
degree programs. This project is not only clarifying workers' options for
preparing for middle-skill technical jobs but also identifying needed
improvements in the management, coordination, and financing of such pathways,
thus contributing to expanding opportunities for individuals and for employers
in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Research Council (NRC)
and the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) are collaborating to conduct a
consensus study of the multiple education and training pathways to middle-skill
technical jobs that do not require a baccalaureate or higher degree. The NRC and
NAE are convening an expert committee to examine the coverage, effectiveness,
and flexibility of these avenues of technical preparation and skill
certification and the extent of coordination among them. In addition to
reviewing the literature, the expert committee is convening a national symposium
to gather evidence on these topics. The committee is authoring a consensus
report with conclusions and action-oriented recommendations for improving the
various technical education, training, and certification programs, creating a
more coherent and effective system of workforce preparation, and communicating
options to citizens interested in pursuing careers in such occupations. The
report is expected to guide federal and state policymakers and administrators,
educators, employers, labor organizations,and other stakeholders in preparing
Americans for middle-skill jobs supporting middle-class livelihoods and in
meeting employer needs for a skilled, competitive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to recommendations to policymakers,
employers, and other stakeholders, an important product of the project will be a
road map to training, education and certification opportunities, useful to
counselors but couched in terms accessible to individuals seeking to improve
their skills and employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the
NRC's institutional policies, the committee's report is being reviewed
anonymously by experts who did not serve on the study committee but who
represent a range of expertise comparable to that of committee members. In
keeping with standard NRC policy, the sponsor does not have a role in the
process but is informed of the conclusions and recommendations when the
institution certifies successful completion of the review.