* 1406885
* RET Site: Nanotechnology Research Experience for Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* John Hutchinson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 468,186.00

This award provides funding for a three year stardard award to support the
continuation of a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site
program at Rice University, entitled, "RET Site: Nanotechnology Research
Experience for Teachers", under the direction of Dr. Vicki Colvin and Dr.
Carolyn Nichol. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will help further the
educational programs developed by Rice University's NSF funded Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Center (NSEC)entitled the Center for Biological and
Environmental Nanotechnology (CBEN) and will improve upon past success
continuing to pursue the university's commitment to educational outreach and
science innovation. To accomplish these tasks, the project team team will
connect Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) teachers who serve
students in Houston, Texas, with the outstanding nanotechnology research faculty
and facilities at Rice. Providing curricular, content knowledge, and pedagogical
support for these teachers as they translate their research experiences into
novel and exciting activities for their students, the Rice team will use a
"train the trainer" approach and offer a large platform of STEM Professional
Development (PD) programs that allow a total of 36 RET "master" teachers (12 per
year) to disseminate RET program outcomes to more than 300 teachers per year,
thereby creating a robust network of knowledgeable leaders who will then
instruct traditionally underserved students in the Houston area, fostering the
STEM innovators of the future. Since the innovative developments at the
nanoscale are integrated across biology, physics and chemistry, this program
will provide teachers with new insights on basic science that is also well-
aligned with Texas State standards and targets underserved teachers and schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice will work closely with the Houston Independent School
District (HISD) and the Aldine Independent School District (AISD), both urban
and historically underrepresented minority school districts in South Texas. HISD
is the largest school district in Texas and its student population is 88%
Hispanic and African American. AISD's student population is 96% Hispanic and
African American. The Rice PD programs have trained more than 1200 teachers from
over 34 school districts since 2006. This scalable RET will reach 900 teachers
over the next 3 years, impacting about 135,000 students. In addition, the
outcomes of this RET will be broadly disseminated via symposiums at Rice,
national meetings, and online via the TeachEngineering digital library,
Nanoscience Center for Learning and Teaching (NCLT), and the Rice Excellence in
Science Curriculum website.