* 1406357
* Radiation Chemistry: Radiation Driven Processes in Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Jay LaVerne, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2014
* USD 9,660.00

1406357&lt;br/&gt;La Verne&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will provide funds
for 6 young faculty (assistant professors), post docs and graduate and
undergraduate students in the field of radiation chemistry. In the field of
environmental engineering and science, one of the new technologies for the
destruction of chemicals in water, wastewater and site remediation is referred
to as advance oxidation. Advanced oxidation was name for any process that
involves the hydroxyl radical. This radical is very highly reactive and is
capable of destroying chemicals, killing bacteria and parasites and inactivating
viruses. The fundamental science of the process lies in the field of radiation
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of radiation chemistry for
solving environmental problems is accomplished using several techniques
including UV/hydrogen peroxide, TiO2 irradiated with light (both UV and
sunlight), Ozone/hydrogen peroxide and lastly, the electron beam process. As
many of the easy environmental problems have been solved the field will turn to
destructive processes to accomplish the goals. in environmental engineering,
although many employ these advanced oxidation processes, few actually understand
the fundamental science. Therefore, the more scientists and engineers that are
trained to understand this chemistry the more effectively these processes will
be applied.