* 1406354
* Fundamental Quantum Optics in Hollow-Core Photonic Crystal Fibers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 454,258.00

This project studies an aspect of quantum physics, which is the study of the
natural world at its most fundamental level. Experiments with elementary objects
such as photons (constituents of light) or electrons (constituents of atoms) has
led over the decades to many new technologies, including computers and lasers.
The next generation of technology (called quantum technology), might create the
means for ensuring perfect security of information on the internet, as well as
computers that can solve problems unsolvable using today's hardware. Light, as a
carrier of information, plays important roles in such technologies, so the
ability to control light more and more finely is crucial for future success. The
present study addresses the so-called nonlinear interactions of light that
occurs in some substances or materials. For example, when very intense light of
a certain color travels through a long solid-glass fiber, new colors can be
created by nonlinear interactions. Such color-changing interactions have many
uses, both in scientific research and in technological applications. A problem
exists though, called "Raman scattering," which leads to the production of many
unwanted colors in addition to those desired. In this type of scattering, energy
is deposited in the vibrations of molecules making up the medium. These
unwanted, randomly produced colors can degrade the purity of the light, so a
means to avoid their production is an important goal. The present study is
developing such a means by replacing solid-glass fibers with hollow glass fibers
filled with xenon gas at extremely high pressure. Because xenon is a "noble gas"
it does not form molecules, and so the Raman light scattering mechanism is
absent. Optical physics and light-based information science (photonics) offer
excellent opportunities to integrate research with science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a more technical perspective, the project
addresses the need in quantum optics research for attaining ideal interactions
for generating and manipulating quantum-mechanical states of light, including
single photons, entangled photons, squeezed states, and entangled states, as
well as for performing quantum gate operations and implementing quantum
communication methods. Toward these goals, this experimental project studies
optical parametric processes using high-density atomic xenon gas confined in
hollow-core photonic-crystal fibers (HC-PCF). Such a medium will open up the
study of fundamental quantum optical processes without the often-deleterious
presence of Raman scattering. Elimination of Raman scattering removes
spontaneous photon emission background signals in single-photon sources, and
removes Raman-induced frequency shifting in optical soliton propagation, which
limits the degree of quantum noise squeezing that can be achieved. It also
decreases pump-laser degradation. Such a system could lead to well-controlled
nonlinear optical processes for quantum information schemes. Developing the
means to manipulate and control the states of quantum systems is of broad
interest in science and in quantum information technology, metrology, quantum
chemistry, nano-mechanics, etc. The topic brings together quantum opticians with
optical device scientists and material scientists.