* 1406952
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic Basis and Adaptive Significance of Key Developmental Traits Underlying Ecological Differences Between Sympatric Sister Species
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,10/31/2017
* Katherine Toll, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2017
* USD 20,322.00

Most species are formed when geographic barriers physically separate populations
for long periods of time. For species to remain distinct once they are in
contact with one another they must evolve reproductive isolation often through
ecological differentiation. Without reproductive isolation incipient species
will hybridize and fuse back together into a single species. Without ecological
differentiation intense competition will often cause one species to go locally
extinct. Species that presently co-occur may have evolved ecological differences
while physically separated, or they may have evolved differences in the same
area through selection to minimize hybridization or competition. Little is known
about the ecological trait differences that allow species to coexist in the same
area or the genetic loci responsible for ecological differences between species.
This study will identify the traits and genetic loci underlying ecological
differences that enable coexistence between two western North American
wildflower species. The broadly distributed Mimulus guttatus, and its relatively
rare sister species Mimulus nudatus co-occur in some areas but live in distinct
microhabitats that differ in the onset of summer drought. Mimulus nudatus grows
on serpentine slopes that dry out early in the spring, while M. guttatus
inhabits ephemeral streams where drought imposed death is later than in the M.
nudatus habitat. The rare endemic possesses several traits that are likely
adaptations to earlier drought, including a shorter critical photoperiod to
induce flowering resulting in an earlier production of a flowering shoot
(bolting) and an earlier flowering time than the more common M. guttatus.
Understanding how rare endemic species are maintained with more widespread
species has important implications for conservation and the preservation of
biodiversity. Determining the underlying genetic changes to enable species
coexistence will shed light on the interaction among genetic, ecological, and
evolutionary processes that contribute to the maintenance of species
biodiversity. This project will maintain and develop new mentoring opportunities
targeting underrepresented groups at the middle school, high school, and
undergraduate level. The results of the proposed research will be broadly
disseminated though talks and publications to the public and scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explicitly test the ecological
and evolutionary forces maintaining spatial, phenotypic and genetic differences
between two closely related species of Mimulus. Ecological similarity between
sympatric species may lead to competitive exclusion. Consequently, ecological
divergence is a necessary prerequisite for stable coexistence. Differences in
flowering time between the common M. guttatus and the rare endemic M. nudatus
are hypothesized to allow these species to occur in sympatry by inhabiting
distinct microhabitats that differ in the onset of summer drought. Three
quantitative trait loci (QTL) have been identified that profoundly influence
differences in critical photoperiod and bolting and have already been
genetically mapped, yet we do not know how these loci contribute to microhabitat
differentiation and species interactions in nature. This project will utilize
QTL mapping, reciprocal transplant and competition experiments to test: (1)
whether flowering time differences in the field have the same or different
genetic basis from photoperiod and bolting in the lab, (2) whether photoperiod
and bolting loci are adaptive and enable coexistence by contributing to niche
differentiation, and (3) whether ecological or reproductive character
displacement are responsible for flowering time differences in the two closely
related sympatric species.