* 1406386
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biogeochemical controls of Mo and P availability for N2-fixing trees across the Amazon Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Lars Hedin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,741.00

Lowland tropical rainforests are among the most productive ecosystems on the
planet, and are critical sites of carbon sequestration in soils. The long-term
future of these forests as carbon sinks during times of global climate change is
uncertain due to an incomplete understanding of the role other elements (such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, and trace metals) play in driving tropical tree
production, particularly trees that are capable of using atmospheric nitrogen
through a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing microbes. This research
will contribute to our understanding of these processes by answering questions
about the importance of phosphorus (P) and molybdenum (Mo) as limiting nutrients
for nitrogen-fixing trees and how soil fertility affects their diversity. This
project will provide research opportunities for US and Brazilian undergraduate
students, and will be disseminated to a larger audience as part of an Ask an
Ecologist dialogue that engages high school students in Texas and Washington
D.C. Finally, results of this research will inform national and international
policy through data-sharing with modeling groups involved in developing
predictions for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will integrate previous work using greenhouse
and field fertilization experiments with empirical field measurements of P and
Mo across the Amazon Basin to demonstrate the role these elements play in
driving production of nitrogen-fixing trees. Using the Amazon to test
mechanistic hypotheses is ideal due to its great diversity in soil types and its
importance as a terrestrial carbon sink. To test these hypotheses, this study
will examine three contrasting soil types that differ in fertility, and their
physical and geochemical properties. Specifically, this study will contrast (i)
high-fertility and high-weathering rates on young surfaces (i.e., foothills of
western Amazonia); (ii) low-fertility and low-weathering rates on old high clay
shield surfaces (i.e., Guyana Shield soils in central Amazonia); and (iii) low-
fertility and low-weathering rates on white sand soils called Arenosols. For
each soil type, total and available P and Mo in soil (sampled at a variety of
depths through the soil profile) and plant tissue (leaves and roots) will be
measured for the most common fixers and non-fixers. In addition, this study will
measure Mo isotopes of the soil samples and plant tissues at Oregon State
University in the first attempt to understand Mo cycling and isotopic fraction
in a tropical rainforest. As a result, this research will be able to address
critical questions about Mo vs. P limitation on N2-fixers and how soil fertility
affects N2-fixer species diversity. These analyses will also allow the
construction of the first tropical forest Mo budget, and will test critical
hypotheses of nutrient limitation on fixers and non-fixers in tropical forests