* 1406795
* Low-cost label-free whispering gallery mode electrospun optical biosensor for simultaneous detection of multiple biomolecules.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Nosang Myung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 316,000.00

Rapid, on-site detection of biomolecules is critical for the biomedical
industry, environmental monitoring, food safety and quality. As such, there is a
constant demand for novel high performance sensor technologies, capable of
detecting many target biomolecules within small sample volume at a reduced cost.
This research project will aid in addressing societal needs for robust and
sensitive biosensors which are low-cost, readily manufacturable, and are able to
sense many biomolecules at a time. A sensitive, fiber-based optical platform in
which a change in emitted light wavelength signals the presence and amount of
the target biomolecule will be used. Within this platform, multiple sensors will
be integrated into a small area to create high density biosensor array which can
concurrently detect multiple biomolecules from the same small sample volume.
Biorecognition elements, which interact with the target biomolecules allowing
them to be detected, will be directly integrated into each individual sensor
using a simple and scalable, one-step approach. The incorporation of
biorecognition elements into the fiber-based sensors will further facilitate
sensing of multiple biomolecules while maintaining a small footprint and minimal
sample volume. This research project will provide support for a number of
mentoring and outreach activities designed to inspire, recruit, and train a
diverse set of future scientists and engineers. The investigators' endeavors
will benefit the education of graduate, undergraduate, and middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
demonstrate and develop an electrospun whispering gallery mode resonators with
integrated phage-based recognition elements as robust, highly-sensitive
multiplexed optical biosensors. With near circular cross-sections and controlled
microscale diameters, electrospun fibers are excellent candidates for low-cost,
readily manufacturable whispering gallery mode resonators. Moreover, these
simple, compact optical devices will allow several cavities with distinct
optical signatures to be placed within a small area to be used for biomolecule
assays or multiplexed sensing. Electrospinning is well-suited to incorporate
biorecognition elements such as filamentous phage within the optical cavity at
high concentrations. Phage-based bioreceptors provide a high density of well-
organized and highly-oriented analyte binding sites for high sensitivity
detection. Phages are chemically and thermally robust, tolerating a range of
sensing conditions and can be manufactured inexpensively in large quantities
with a bacterial host. The integration of bioreceptors into the whispering
gallery mode optical cavity will eliminate the need for biofunctionalization
steps following cavity fabrication, thus minimizing manufacturing complexity,
reducing biosensor footprint, and enabling straightforward multiple analyte
detection. Furthermore, the unsurpassed density of highly-oriented bioreceptors
associated with the filamentous phage, as well as the long- and short-range
ordering created by the electrospun scaffold is expected to produce biosensors
with unparalleled sensitivity and selectivity.