* 1406712
* Set based tests for genetic association and gene-environment interaction in longitudinal studies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Min Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,998.00

Most human diseases have a multifactorial etiology, characterizing complex
interplay of multiple genes and environmental factors. The effects of these
genetic and environmental factors on disease risk are likely to change
dynamically over different life stages. Longitudinal studies of risk factors for
common and chronic diseases like blood pressure, body mass index, provide a
valuable opportunity to explore how genetic variants affect these traits over
time. The ability to detect disease susceptibility genes can be improved if we
jointly utilize the entire set of longitudinal outcomes. Moreover, since disease
risk factors and phenotypes are likely influenced by the joint effect of
multiple variants in a gene or in a genomic region, a joint analysis of these
variants considering linkage disequilibrium and potential interactions among the
variants may help to explain additional heritability. Integrating repeated
measures of environmental exposure data into these genetic association models
will help to identify specific sub-groups of individuals who may be more
susceptible to environmental exposures. Identification of gene-environment
interactions may have implications for targeted intervention and prevention. In
this project, the investigators will try to utilize the temporally varying
outcome-exposure profile available in a longitudinal genetic association study
to enhance the power of statistical tests for genetic association and
interaction. Using data from a muti-ethnic cohort, the project team will explore
time-dependent genetic associations and gene-environment interactions with genes
and pathways as the unit of analysis instead of a single marker at a given
locus. This approach is biologically more meaningful as genes are the functional
units, not the single nucleotide polymorphisms and by joint analysis of rare and
common genetic variants in a region one may be closer to capturing functional
variation. Several environmental factors measuring an individual's diet,
physical activity, psychosocial behavior and perception of the neighborhood they
live in will be considered in the planned analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are several technical challenges that will be addressed in the project. A
primary goal of the study team will be to develop simple generalized score tests
derived under a random field model involving multiple phenotypes, genes and
environmental factors in a longitudinal study. The approach reduces the
dimensionality of the inference problem by translating the association testing
involving many predictors in terms of a reduced number of parameters and
resultant tests with reduced degrees of freedom. The developed methods will use
and extend classical spatial random field theory and recent results on multi-
marker tests to characterize complex time-dependent associations and
interactions. Several essential methodological improvements necessary for
handling longitudinal data will be carried out to enhance the robustness to
misspecification of within subject correlation structure and to improve
computational efficiency. The methods will then be extended to a gene-
environment set association test using longitudinal data. Several important
dimension reduction techniques to handle correlated environmental exposure data
are proposed. The project team also considers treatment of time varying exposure
and time varying interaction effects under this set-based framework. There are
no multi-marker based tests presently available in the literature that use the
richness of longitudinal outcome and exposure data and the current project is
expected to fill that gap. To summarize, the project introduces a novel genetic
random field framework to formulate this class of multivariable association
problems involving disease outcomes, gene, environment, and time to lead to
powerful statistical inference.