* 1406631
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms driving evolutionary innovation through gene duplication in the amino acid transporters of sap-feeding insects
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Alexandra Wilson de Andrade, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,508.00

Gene duplication is important for evolutionary innovation. When genes duplicate,
the copies are identical at first but can evolve in different directions
resulting in the evolution of new genes, new metabolic pathways and even new
developmental pathways. We know genes duplicate often but we don?t fully
understand the processes and mechanisms that drive independent evolution of
duplicate genes. Co-PI Duncan and PI Wilson will test among different hypotheses
of how duplicated genes evolve by examining the evolutionary trajectory of
several gene copies following duplication. Their research will focus on the
citrus mealybug, a sap-feeding insect that underwent extensive duplication in
genes that transport amino acids, nutrients that are essential for normal
cellular function in all organisms. The PIs will compare expression and amino
acids transported between three types of amino acid transporters: (1) duplicated
mealybug transporters, (2) related single-copy transporters in other insects,
and (3) the extinct mealybug transporter that Duncan and Wilson will
synthetically resurrect. Further, Duncan and Wilson will use computer programs
to test the role of natural selection during the evolution of duplicated amino
acid transporters in the mealybug.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish which evolutionary and molecular mechanisms are most important in the
evolution of duplicated amino acid transporters in the citrus mealybug. The
results will contribute to our general understanding of the importance of
different mechanisms in the evolution of gene copies following gene duplication,
and thus the role these mechanisms play in driving evolutionary innovation
across the tree of life. Further, amino acid transporters are essential for
survival, so this research could identify potential targets for controlling
populations of the citrus mealybug, a pest of citrus and other commercially
important plants. By providing opportunities for University of Miami
undergraduates to conduct research in a lab setting under the mentorship of co-
PI Duncan, this project will advance discovery and learning. Undergraduates at
the University of Miami are culturally and ethnically diverse, providing
research opportunities for undergraduates underrepresented in the biological
sciences. Finally, Duncan and Wilson will share their findings with the general
public in a Department of Biology open house that co-PI Duncan will organize
during the University of Miami Alumni Week.