* 1406156
* Analysis of Practical Microgrid Stability in the Presence of Random Events
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jonathan Kimball, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 307,057.00

Analysis of Practical Microgrid Stability in the Presence of Random
Events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microgrids are power distribution systems that are
small where total generation capacity is similar to the total demand. Examples
may be found in isolated villages, military bases that may or may not be
connected to the surrounding power grid, and vehicles ranging from automobiles
to satellites to ships. DC microgrids have also been proposed for residential
applications, where a single house would be a complete system, and for
telecommunications power systems. Microgrids are an enabling technology for
widespread deployment of renewable energy, such as solar and wind systems. This
project will apply emerging control theory concepts to microgrid stability
analysis. Previous researchers have usually assumed that all loads and sources
have some ability to be controlled, but in practical systems, most loads change
randomly, and renewable resources are subject to weather variations. The random
events could cause the microgrid to become unstable and shut down. Microgrids
are essential to the expansion of renewable energy due to the distributed nature
of renewable energy generation, and the improved stability analysis from this
project is needed to give system operators confidence in their proper
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to analyze ac
and dc microgrids using advanced techniques that apply to generic impulsive
Markov jump linear systems. A Markov jump linear system (MJLS) is a system that
jumps instantaneously among a set of linear dynamical systems according to a
Markov process. More generically, the transitions in the discrete state could be
accompanied by impulses in the continuous-time states, forming an impulsive
MJLS. This is a good description for the small-signal characteristics of a
microgrid. Unfortunately, generic stability results for an impulsive MJLS are
few. In this project, stability results for the subset of impulsive MJLS that
appropriately describes microgrids will be derived. Suitable models for both ac
and dc microgrids will be derived and analyzed. The results will be
parameterized by controller gains and other characteristics that are within the
purview of the system designer, so that stability may be guaranteed by design.
Both the discrete state, which evolves randomly, and the continuous state, which
is deterministic, will be considered simultaneously. The approach will be
validated with simulations and experiments. Two example microgrids, one ac and
one dc, will be studied to demonstrate the ability to compose an appropriate
nonlinear model, to convert it to a set of small-signal models, and to map it
into the impulsive MJLS framework. The proposed impulsive MJLS study will be
applicable to other dynamical systems, such as networked control systems, that
fit a similar framework. Similarly, demonstrating the application of impulsive
MJLS methods to microgrids may stimulate research within the power community on
other applications that fit a similar structure, such as the load on a voltage
regulator module (VRM).