* 1406306
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of concurrent thermal, osmotic and toxicant stress on the copepod Tigriopus californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,319.00

We will explore how organisms respond and adapt to complex, stressful
environments by examining the gene activity of a marine invertebrate, the
copepod Tigriopus californicus. When challenged with copper, temperature and
salinity stress, we observe different levels of survivorship: more individuals
from a southern population are likely to survive than from a northern
population. We will compare the set of active genes (RNA) specific to the
responses of two populations under both single and combined stress. This
research explores the consequences of general and specific stress responses: we
hypothesize that some genes respond to just one stress while other genes are
part of a shared response system. Interaction between these responses could
reduce the effect of an additional stress or compound the problem. In resilient
and vulnerable populations, we will observe differences in gene activity that
may explain how they try to adapt to multiple challenges. Linking the results of
this project with genetic analyses will frame adaptation and stress-tolerance,
comparing both the gene and its activity response. This project will answer
critical questions about how species deal with stressful environments that
present simultaneous challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploring population-wide
variation and the context of stressful natural environments will be key to
understanding organism-habitat interactions, and is increasingly important in
light of climate changes. Integrative approaches that identify these compounded
responses and the biological mechanisms at play will provide a robust context
for understanding the effects of pollution and contamination. This research will
also identify genetic activity that makes one population more resilient than
another in complex environments.