* 1406754
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Developmental breakdown and abnormal growth in hybrid dwarf hamsters
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2014,09/30/2015
* Jeffrey Good, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2015
* USD 18,396.00

A major goal in biology is to understand the origin of biological diversity. The
source and persistence of new species is closely linked to the formation of
barriers to successful reproduction between species. One common barrier that
arises in mammals is abnormal development of hybrid placentas resulting in
unusually large or small hybrid offspring. This recurrent pattern indicates that
the genes and molecular pathways that control development may often be disrupted
in mammalian hybrids. We will use several experiments with hybrid dwarf hamsters
to bridge significant gaps in our understanding of the genetic causes of extreme
embryonic and placental overgrowth. First, high-throughput DNA sequencing
experiments of large- and normal-sized placenta will be used to identify areas
of the genome that cause overgrowth. Second, genomic experiments will be used to
determine if the disruption of gene regulation in the placenta causes hybrid
overgrowth. Together, these experiments will use a powerful laboratory model to
begin to uncover the genetic causes of abnormal mammalian growth during the
early stages of development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will use cutting-
edge methods to address fundamental questions on the nature of species formation
and divergence in mammals. This research will also advance the study of
developmental diseases by providing insights into the genetic causes of abnormal
growth in developing placentas and embryos. Furthermore, the proposed activities
will provide training and support for a graduate student and facilitate the
mentoring of undergraduate students.