* 1406593
* Holomorphic functions and some geometric problems on certain Kahler manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Gang Liu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2016
* USD 118,029.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1406593, Principal Investigator: Gang Liu

Kahler manifolds are a basic building block in the string theory model of the
universe. This project studies the global structure of Kahler manifolds. In
particular, conjectures on the uniformization of Kahler manifolds will be
addressed. These conjectures generalize the classical uniformization theorem in
one complex variable. In the PI's project, there are many interactions among
several branches of mathematics, e.g. algebraic geometry, analysis, topology and
differential geometry. Wider applications of the PI's field include the
structure of molecules, the large scale structure of the universe and the liquid
gas boundary.

The PI proposes to work on three projects which involve function theory and
geometry on Kahler manifolds. The first project is to study problems which are
closely related to the uniformization conjecture of Yau. These problems include
the finite generation of the ring of holomorphic functions of polynomial growth,
sharp dimension estimates for holomorphic functions with polynomial growth on
manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature, and a conjecture of Ni on the
equivalence between average curvature decay, maximal volume growth and the
existence of holomorphic functions of polynomial growth. In the second project,
the PI will seek obstructions to Kahler metrics with nonnegative scalar
curvature. The PI also plans to show that the Kodaira dimension of compact
Kahler manifolds with nonpositive bisectional curvature is a homotopy invariant.
The main tool is the PI's structure theorem for these manifolds.