* 1406971
* NeTS: JUNO: Cost-Effective and Scalable Architectures for Multi-Granular Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 03/31/2018
* USD 282,284.00

Optical networks have expanded their reach from national backbone networks to
metropolitan and customer access networks, and are making their way into
datacenters. This has been made possible due to great strides in two arenas:
optical switching technology including the development of reconfigurable optical
add-drop multiplexers and wavelength-selective switches; and efficient
transmission methods that enable flexible provisioning of elastic bandwidth to
applications. Nevertheless, there are fundamental fiber capacity limitations
that will inevitably necessitate multiple parallel fibers between switching
nodes and larger switches. A solution to the switch-scaling problem is to bundle
some of the wavelengths or frequency slots together and switch them as a band.
Yet, current methods are inadequate because technological advancements have
rendered some of the research obsolete or have introduced new problems that have
not been attempted before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this joint US-
Japan project are to develop novel scalable and cost-effective multi-granular
switching node architectures, and to develop efficient algorithms for
provisioning bandwidth to applications. Scaling an architecture typically
introduces some form of penalty, such as a provisioning constraint, that the
network operator must respect. This project will aim at identifying what
features bring about the most cost reduction and increase in scalability without
overly limiting network operators? flexibility. The architectures and algorithms
will be evaluated using theoretical analyses, simulations, and small-scale
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By targeting an important component of the
cost of optical networks, this project will enable the faster adoption of
optical infrastructure and the availability of high-speed networking for all.