* 1406849
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Five-dimensional Analysis Of Alligator and Bird Encephalization: Integrating Changes in Brain Shape Along Developmental and Evolutionary Timelines
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Mark Norell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,137.00

Taking to the air afforded the ancestors of modern birds access to a previously
unheralded range of environments, a fact that underlies their remarkable
diversity (&gt;10,000 known species). A significant part of this success is
thought to have stemmed from the independent evolution of a mammal-like, hyper-
inflated brain. Such a brain structure has long been considered necessary for
coordinating the many aspects of powered flight, but this hypothesis that has
not yet been tested. This study examines evolutionary changes in avian brain
development using a wide range of techniques, including high-resolution computed
tomography (CT) imaging, 3-D visualization of whole brains, and statistical
shape analyses. By digitally sampling developmental series of brains from birds
and other vertebrates, this project will test for coordinated shape changes in
brain regions that share key functional pathways. This data will be used to
determine whether evolutionary shifts in brain development have driven important
structural evolution in adult avian brains. Correlation with the early evolution
of flight behavior will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
generated for this study will be archived on online repositories and made
available to scientific and public spheres. For educational purposes, brain
models will be 3-D printed and implemented in museum and school programs. The
broader developmental patterns identified here will also be synthesized into the
larger findings of the national "BRAIN" initiative, which seeks to greatly
enhance the understanding of the complex, inner workings of the brain across all
species and through evolutionary history.