* 1406802
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Mechanisms of Mammalian Middle Ear Ossicle Transition from the Reptilian Jaw Joint
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Karen Sears, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 01/31/2016
* USD 19,869.00

The transition from reptile to mammal was one of the most important events in
leading to the eventual evolution of humans. This transition is characterized by
many changes, one of the most important is the evolution of the mammalian middle
ear. The goal of this project is to investigate the developmental basis of the
evolution of the mammalian middle ear, using an opossum species as a model
organism. Because opossum are primitive mammals, they can provide significant
insights into mammalian evolution, and the improved understanding of ear
development that this project will generate has the potential to positively
impact human health. This project will also serve as a foundation for the STEM
training of several undergraduates and for community outreach events geared
toward K-12 students. Results of this project are also being incorporated into a
three-part PBS documentary based upon Neil Shubin's best-selling book, Your
Inner Fish.

The reptilian jaw consists of multiple bones, while there is only a single bone
in the reptile middle ear. Conversely, the mammalian jaw consists of a single
bone, while there are multiple bones in the mammal middle ear. It has been
shown, via paleontology and embryology, that the extra bones in the mammalian
middle ear originated from the extra bones in the reptilian jaw. Separation from
the jaw would allow more flexibility in the evolution of the middle ear
elements, resulting in increased hearing sensitivity and amplified frequency
range. The middle ear changes observed in the transition from reptiles to
mammals in the fossil record also occur during development in opossum. Opossum
are born with a middle ear similar to reptiles, but in adults the middle ear is
mammalian, providing a unique opportunity to study the evolutionary development
of mammalian middle ear bones in an currently living organism rather than with
fossils. The project is based on a detailed characterization of the transition
using micro-computed tomography scans to create three-dimensional images at five
day intervals, beginning at birth, and studying the cellular processes
underlying the transition by cryosectioning at the noted stages, followed by
immunohistochemistry for cell proliferation and apoptosis. The project will
uncover the genes responsible for the transition using in situ hybridization and
RNA sequencing. Alterations in the timing of expression and concentration of
particular genes (e.g., TGTbr2 and Eya1) are expected to be correlated with the
separation of Meckel's cartilage and functional changes in the ossicles. The
research will determine if the active genes in opossum are also expressed in the
middle ear region of placental mammals. The project will compare the transition
that occurs during opossum development to that observed in fossil record leading
to early mammal lineages.