* 1406262
* Dissertation Research: Testing how traits shape individual resource use in response to competition: implications for ecosystem functioning
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Gregory Gilbert, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 16,380.00

Many species of plants depend on insects for pollination, including most of the
fruits and vegetables that humans eat. However, for pollen to fertilize a
flower, it must generally come from the same species of plant. A critical
attribute of insect pollinators is thus their fidelity, how likely they are to
carry pollen from one flower to another flower of the same species. One reason
that bees are especially valued as pollinators is their high fidelity, but
recent research has shown that the fidelity of bees can vary. This project will
test which specific factors enhance or diminish fidelity in bees. Besides
increasing scientific understanding of an important ecosystem service, the
project will add a new component to a doctoral dissertation and provide
intensive field research experience for two undergraduate students. To
communicate results to the general public, researchers will help create an
outreach program on the importance of pollinators at the Desert Museum in
Tucson, Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work on pollination by bumblebees
in meadows in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado shows that competition between
bumblebees for flowers promotes fidelity. However, this depends on the mean
length of the tongue of a species: when other species of bumblebees are removed,
shorter tongued species tend to lose fidelity more and plant reproduction
decreases more. This project will test whether variation between individuals
within a species has the same effect. Researchers will remove all but one
species of bumblebee from areas in meadows and follow the flights and measure
the tongue lengths of individual bees. Results will advance knowledge of the
ecology of fidelity in pollination. More broadly, research will show how
differences between individual animals cause them to respond differently to
competition, with consequences for ecosystem function.