* 1406667
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: THE RESPONSE OF MYXOMYCETE COMMUNITIES TO 14 YEARS OF N, P, AND K ADDITION IN A LOWLAND TROPICAL RAIN FOREST
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Steven Stephenson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2016
* USD 18,980.00

Myxomycetes, or plasmodial slime molds, are among the most abundant protozoans
in many soils, where they feed on bacteria and other microorganisms. The
ecological role of myxomycetes may be considerable but has been studied very
little. In collaboration with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in
Panama, this project takes advantage of a long-term, nutrient fertilization
experiment in lowland, tropical forest to investigate the effects of additions
of nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients on communities of myxomycetes in the
soil using environmental DNA sequencing. Results are expected to provide the
first data on how tropical soil protozoans respond to nutrients and to lead to
increased understanding of how these tiny predators may influence the
functioning of tropical forests.

The broader impacts of the project include enhancement of the genetic database
for studies of myxomycetes, international collaboration, training of graduate
and undergraduate students, and public outreach. DNA sequencing data will be
made available to the public. The project will provide research experience for
Panamanian students attending the University of Arkansas through an
international scholarship program and for the co-PI, a Ph.D. student. The co-PI
has already presented her research through several public media outlets and
plans further presentations to the public.