* 1406355
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Programming Abstractions and Systems Support for GPU-Based Acceleration of Irregular Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Keshav Pingali, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 739,654.00

There is growing interest in using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) to increase
the performance and the energy efficiency of applications outside the graphics
domain. GPUs are particularly suited to run regular programs that perform
operations similar to pixel processing, and they can offer a large advantage
over multicore CPUs in terms of performance, price, and energy efficiency in
this domain. Not surprisingly, GPUs are increasingly appearing in devices
ranging from handhelds to supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although regular
algorithms are very important, new problem domains such as computational
biology, data mining, and social networks necessitate very different algorithmic
foundations: they require building, computing with, and updating large graphs.
Unfortunately, relatively little is understood about how to implement irregular
applications efficiently on current GPU architectures. Features such as lockstep
operation and the need to minimize thread divergence and maximize memory
coalescing pose particular challenges to efficient implementation of irregular
algorithms. Nevertheless, some recent successes in hand-porting irregular codes
suggest that the difficulties lie not in the GPU hardware but in the immaturity
of the state of the art of writing and tuning GPU code due to the lack of
general, well-understood optimization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will develop programming notations, compiler optimizations, and runtime system
support that will enable programmers to express their algorithms at a high level
of abstraction but still yield good performance. Projected tasks include
producing highly optimized handwritten GPU implementations of important
irregular algorithms and adding them to the LonestarGPU benchmark suite,
identifying common patterns of optimizations and runtime systems support needed
for efficient GPU implementations, developing a programming notation to permit
the software developer to specify irregular algorithms at a high level of
abstraction, implementing a synthesis system that automatically generates high-
performance GPU code from these high-level specifications, and developing course
material for teaching GPU programming of irregular
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The higher performance and better energy efficiency
of GPUs relative to multicore CPUs has sincere societal benifits. This work
builds on the realization of these benefits by facilitating simpler and more
widespread utilization of GPUs and incorporating more effective practices into
future compilers and GPU hardware.&lt;br/&gt;