* 1406048
* CI-P: Planning for a Multilingual FrameNet Lexical Resource
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Collin Baker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2016
* USD 99,825.00

The FrameNet Project (http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu) at the International
Computer Science Institute in Berkeley, California, has been building a unique
dictionary of everyday English words, which connects words with semantic frames,
each representing a type of event or relation and the roles of people or objects
that participate in it. For example, the Kinship frame includes the words
'nephew', 'mother-in-law', 'sibling', etc. and the Leadership frame includes
both nouns like 'corporal', 'bishop', 'CEO', and 'headmaster' and verbs like
'lead', 'preside', and 'rule'. Since 1997, the FrameNet project has developed
more than 1,100 such frames covering more than 12,700 word senses, and manually
annotated almost 200,000 examples showing how these semantic roles fit into the
grammar of the sentences. The database is freely available and is being
downloaded daily for use around the world, in NLP applications like question
answering and reasoning about the causes and effects of events.
&lt;br/&gt;Projects elsewhere are building FrameNet-style databases for many
other languages, including Spanish, German, Japanese, Chinese, French, Brazilian
Portuguese, Arabic, etc. These other projects have largely followed the English
FrameNet example, using the same semantic frames and roles. Their conclusion has
been that roughly 80% of the lexical units in the target languages fit nicely
into semantic frames that were originally defined for English. But there has
been no broad, systematic effort to align all these databases to produce a
freely available unified multilingual frame semantic resource. This award is
used to plan such an effort, to lay the groundwork for connecting all these
FrameNets into one multilingual database, which will permit many new NLP
applications, such as frame-based machine translation and recognizing when news
accounts in two different languages are discussing the same
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this planning project, the investigators are
planning how to go about aligning the separate FrameNets, based in part on the
frame names (other FrameNets either use the English frame names or translations
of them) and in part on quantitative measures of the similarity of frames,
lexical units, and semantic roles. The quantitative measures will exploit the
networks created by frame-to-frame relations in each language, comparing not
only individual frames, but also their neighbors in the network, their
corresponding semantic roles, and the similarity of the fillers of corresponding
roles across languages. In this way, correspondences will be established between
the quite different syntactic constructions (valence patterns) in which these
roles are realized across languages, similar to the methodology used in creating
FrameNets in other languages by projection. &lt;br/&gt;The plan includes both
face-to-face and virtual meetings to define community requirements and
priorities and to gather researchers and developers' suggestions on alignment
methods, application interfaces, etc. As a result of this project, the
investigators plan to prepare a comprehensive proposal to the CISE Research
Infrastructure Program to actually create the multilingual database, guided by
continuing consultation both with the teams developing the various FrameNets and
with those who are already using FrameNet in research and practical
applications.