* 1406773
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Stay Cool: Connecting the Proximate Physiological Mechanisms to the Performance and Variation of Thermoregulatory Behavior in Apis mellifera l.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Michael Breed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,896.00

A defining characteristic of societies is the ability of their members to
perform tasks efficiently. Many proposed mechanisms by which these tasks are
performed focus on jobs that can be accomplished by many individuals working
independently; however, most research neglects those jobs that require
coordination among individuals to effectively execute the task. Thermoregulatory
fanning behavior in worker honeybees requires that coordination. In this study,
researchers are exploring how honeybees coordinate with each other to most
effectively cool their hive. The researchers believe that understanding more
about fanning behavior allows the science community and public to prepare for
how global climate change could affect honeybee populations in the future.
Results from this project will contribute to the understanding of how societies
function by providing insight into the immediate physiological mechanisms of
behavior. Exploring these mechanisms will not only clarify how social behaviors
are performed, but will also allow for future evolutionary comparisons of social
behavior across taxa. As a model organism, honeybees are an incredible research
tool, as they are the most well characterized example of eusociality, and they
provide a powerful method by which to engage in science outreach. The proposed
collaboration between the USDA and the University of Colorado will allow for
interaction between academia and government. In addition, outreach will continue
through an established beekeeping course for elementary-aged students with
Science Discovery. Finally, this project has initiated an outreach interaction
with the Denver Rescue Mission that expands this work outside of academia to a
high-risk group of recovering addicts.

This research has uncovered several interesting components to fanning behavior
that have not been explored in the context of division of labor in honeybees.
Observable behavioral responses are caused by coordinated chemical reactions
within the organism that involve neurons and their associated chemical signals,
which are often biogenic amines. Four biogenic amines been identified as playing
a significant role in the honeybee division of labor. The researchers
hypothesize that fanning behavior is regulated by biogenic amines, and that
fanning behavior is induced by a change in one of these four biogenic amines.
Researchers will analyze behavioral data on the honey bee fanning response
during development, including associated interactions with multiple individuals,
as well as after injection with biogenic amines. For the biogenic amines
analysis, the researchers will either be collecting honeybees from the hive or
after they have been subjected to a heating regime behavioral assay. The
honeybees will be snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and dissected. Biogenic amine
concentrations will be characterized using HPLC analyses between those
individuals that are performing fanning at the hive and those that are not
fanning to isolate the effects of task group on biogenic amine concentrations.
By quantifying concentrations of all four biogenic amines, the researchers will
be able to identify which one(s) is playing the most significant role in the
initiation and performance of fanning. Following publication of results,
processed HPLC data will be shared using online chemical databases, such as
ChemSpider (http://www.chemspider.com/).