* 1406926
* Integral p-adic Hodge theory and its application to automorphic Galois representations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Tong Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,200.00

This research is in the area of number theory, one of the oldest branches of
mathematics, which is concerned with questions about the integers. The research
described in this proposal aims to understand the properties of the integer
solutions to systems of polynomials, via some analytic, algebraic, and geometric
tools. Recent advances in cryptography and coding theory have depended on
solutions to these problems. For instance, most cell phone calls are protected
by a code based on elliptic curves over a prime, one of the primary objects of
study in the PI's field.

The PI will continue his work on integral p-adic Hodge theory. The first aim is
to improve the understanding of integral structures (lattices) in semi-stable
p-adic Galois representations, and then use this improvement to study the
reduction of these representations. As the expected consequences, certain parts
of automorphic lifting theorems and Serre's conjecture will be extended to more
general settings. The second aim is to study Galois representations associated
to automorphic representations and certain algebraic varieties. In particular,
the PI and his collaborators will focus on the Galois representations arising
from modular forms of noncongruence subgroups and certain torsion
representations constructed (by Scholze) from Shimura varieties.