* 1406989
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hybridization and its downstream consequences for biodiversity.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Robert Moyle, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,733.00

Despite the importance of the microbial communities within higher organisms,
little is known of the processes shaping the formation and persistence of these
communities in natural systems. These microbial communities living in and on an
organism can strongly influence host health by effects on nutrition, immunity,
and other physiological systems. This project provides opportunities for
undergraduate students at the University of Kansas to participate in cutting-
edge biodiversity science research on birds and their associated microbial
communities, as well as the opportunity to present results and network at local
and national conferences. Research results will be disseminated to lay audiences
locally and in the U. S, Southwest where the research takes place by
collaborating with regional outdoor groups such as the Sierra Club and Audubon
Societies to host and promote talks that will be open to the public.

The hologenome concept links evolution of the host genome and its associated
microbiome and was originally conceived for coral reefs, although recent studies
have expanded the idea taxonomically. Just as evolution in a host may affect the
microbial community, evolution of microbial communities may also affect
evolution of the host. Although previous work suggests a role of the geography
related to host environment as well as host genetics in shaping the community of
microbes living in and on an organism, currently there are no strong studies
addressing the evolution of these associations in wild organisms. Hybrid zones
provide an intriguing context to study the coevolution between microbial
communities and their hosts. These zones provide insight into population genetic
mechanisms affecting continued lineage divergence or lineage reticulation; gene
flow, genetic drift, and natural selection may all be studied in the context of
closely related, geographically-overlapping species. The proposed work will use
next-generation sequence data of intestinal microbial communities across two
bird hybrid zones in the U.S. Southwest. The study will assess whether
population genetic processes and observed population structure in birds are
associated with the structure, diversity, and patterns of selection in microbial
communities in their intestine. Additionally, the project will investigate
selection among ubiquitous bacterial groups between bird species, a currently
unstudied topic, although it has been studied among individuals in humans. The
research will further two components of key research priorities in molecular
ecology, including understanding genomics of speciation and, specifically to
this project, understanding the evolution of microbial communities, the
understudied "influential passengers" of all higher taxonomic organisms, from
plants to vertebrates.