* 1406254
* DISSERTATION IMPROVEMENT GRANT:  Identifying Reproductive Isolation Loci from Clines in Hybrid Zones
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* John Hvala, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,565.00

The emergence of new species from others is a captivating topic for evolutionary
biologists and non-scientists alike. Speciation occurs when genetic differences
called incompatibilities accumulate between populations reducing the fitness of
progeny of parents from different populations. This research will develop new
approaches to analyze genomic signatures of incompatibilities during the process
of speciation. Progress in understanding the genetic basis of speciation will
improve efforts in wildlife conservation, crop improvement, and given recent
evidence that humans and Neanderthals interbred, human evolution and medical
genetics. The software and approaches developed will be freely available and
provide guidance for similar studies conducted on other taxa. This grant also
facilitates an international collaboration with a German researcher, and
doctoral dissertation research training for a first generation college graduate.
Finally, speciation is a topic that is fundamental to understanding the process
of evolution. The researchers regularly participate in outreach events including
public lectures and events for K-12 teachers and students.

Early in the process of speciation incompatibilities are uncommon and
populations may cross in a region called a hybrid zone. Such hybrid zones
provide rare opportunities to search for incompatibilities and to understand the
speciation process. Unfortunately, analysis of incompatibilities in hybrid zones
is limited by the methods currently available for analyzing recently available
genomic data. The task is complicated by historical factors of populations that
mimic or mask the effects of selection against hybrids in genome sequences. The
mouse subspecies complex, Mus musculus spp., offers a unique opportunity to
study laboratory mapped hybrid incompatibility loci in a natural hybrid zone.
Numerous hybrid incompatibility loci have been mapped in laboratory crosses
between M. m. musculus and M. m. domesticus. These two species also form a
stable hybrid zone in central Europe. This project will use cline methods to
test whether hybrid incompatibility loci discovered in laboratory crosses
exhibit reduced gene flow in the mouse hybrid zone. Because current analytical
methods are not well designed to detect interactions between alleles of the kind
found in the laboratory studies and do not consider the complex demographic
factors of hybrid zones, the research includes computer simulations of hybrid
incompatibilities segregating in hybrid zones and measures their effects on
clines using currently available methods, as well as methods developed as part
of this project. The new methods will be tested by the field studies.