* 1406568
* Spin, Charge, and Energy Transport in Semiconductor Nanostructures and Graphene-Like Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Giovanni Vignale, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in experimental
techniques have opened the way to unprecedentedly accurate studies of charge and
spin dynamics in two-dimensional electronic systems, which are formed at the
interface between semiconductors, metals, and metal oxides, and in various
layered materials. The ability of these materials to transport spin, charge and
energy in an efficient and controllable manner makes them promising candidates
for the development of new technologies, both in the field of information
processing and in that of energy conversion. This project combines theoretical
research and accompanying educational and outreach activities that address key
issues relating to charge, spin, and energy transport in single- and multi-
layered electronic systems. Particular systems which will be investigated
include materials such a single-atom-thick form of carbon, known as graphene,
and other graphene-like two-dimensional materials composed of transition metal
atoms and sulfur. Through careful analytical and computational studies, the PI
will examine the interplay between the spin and charge degrees of freedom in
these systems, and predict how external fields (e.g. electric, thermal) can be
manipulated to bring out novel phenomena that could lead to technological
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is strategically positioned at
the interface between fundamental condensed matter theory, applied physics, and
computational materials science, and has potential technological implications in
electronics and thermal energy transport. While carrying out this research with
the assistance of postdoctoral researchers and external collaborators, the PI
will maintain a weekly seminar on "Selected topics in condensed matter theory",
in which the graduate students of the Physics Department at the University of
Missouri will be introduced to the basic concepts and methods which underlie the
execution of the project. The broader significance of the research will be
explained to a wider audience through public lectures delivered by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in experimental techniques such as transient grating spectroscopy,
magnetopolarimetry, spin noise spectroscopy, and nonlinear optical generation of
spin currents open the way to unprecedentedly accurate studies of charge and
spin dynamics in two-dimensional electron liquids, which exist at the interfaces
between semiconductors, metals, and metal oxides, and in layered materials such
as graphene, MoS2, and the surface of topological insulators. The ability of
these systems to transport spin, charge and energy in an efficient and
controllable manner makes them promising candidates for the development of new
technologies, both in the field of information processing and that of energy
conversion. This project combines theoretical research and accompanying
educational and outreach activities addressing key issues relating to charge,
spin, and energy transport in single- and multi-layered electronic systems. At
the core of the projected activity lies a set of basic physics problems which
will be addressed in parallel or sequentially during a period of three years.
These are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Evaluating the microscopic spin-charge
response functions for two-dimensional electron liquids in graphene and
graphene-like materials, including electron-electron interactions, disorder,
spin-orbit couplings, and magnetic fields in suitable
approximations;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Developing the theory of spin diffusion,
thermal conductivity, and viscosity in graphene and graphene-like materials, to
the point where the calculations exhibit the crossover between the collisionless
(high-frequency) and collision-dominated (hydrodynamic)
regimes;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Identifying and quantifying novel
thermoelectric phenomena for interacting electrons in multi-layer
structures;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Developing the theory of spin Hall effect
and spin-galvanic effects at metallic and oxide interfaces with strong spin-
orbit interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is strategically
positioned at the interface between fundamental condensed matter theory, applied
physics, and computational materials science, and has potential technological
implications in electronics and thermal energy transport. While carrying out
this research with the assistance of postdoctoral researchers and external
collaborators, the PI will maintain a weekly seminar on "Selected topics in
condensed matter theory", in which the graduate students of the Physics
Department at the University of Missouri will be introduced to the basic
concepts and methods which underlie the execution of the project. The broader
significance of the research will be explained to a wider audience through
public lectures delivered by the PI.