* 1406739
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Advanced Architectures for Hand-held 3D Ultrasound
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Thomas Wenisch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 599,182.00

Much as every medical professional listens beneath the skin with a stethoscope
today, we foresee a time when hand-held medical imaging will become as
ubiquitous; ?peering under the skin? using a hand-held imaging device. Hand-held
imaging is not only a matter of convenience; moving the imaging device to the
patient (rather than a critical patient to an imaging suite) has been shown to
improve clinical outcomes. Moreover, the portability of hand-held systems can
make advanced imaging available to traditionally underserved populations in the
rural and developing world. Today, hand-held imaging is possible with compact,
battery-operated ultrasound devices. However, existing hand-held ultrasound
systems produce a low-resolution two-dimensional view within the patient, and
fall far short of the image quality possible in state-of-the-art non-portable
ultrasound systems. These larger systems can produce real-time 3D ultrasound
images, drastically improving system ease of use, and have already been
demonstrated to improve diagnostic efficiency. Moreover, direct 3D image
acquisition enables new diagnostic capabilities that are difficult or impossible
to accomplish with 2D, such as measuring volumetric blood flow. However, forming
3D ultrasound images requires over 5000 times more computing horsepower than
comparable 2D imaging. Because it is in close contact with human skin, an
ultrasound scan head must operate within a tight power budget (similar to that
of a cell phone) to maintain safe temperatures. Developing a 3D ultrasound
imaging system within this tight power budget requires innovation both in signal
processing and computer architecture techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new hardware architecture for 3D hand-held ultrasound
that leverages co-design of hardware and beamforming algorithms, three-
dimensional die stacking, massive parallelism, and streaming data flow, to
enable high-resolution 3D ultrasound imaging in a hand-held device. The project
focuses on three medical ultrasound applications areas: (i) image quality
enhancements for general imaging applications, such as abdominal imaging; (ii)
advanced 3D motion tracking; and (iii) high-frame-rate 3D flow tracking for
cardiac applications. The proposed research program focuses on hardware
acceleration for specific, novel applications of diagnostic ultrasound targeting
heart disease and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, respectively the 1st
and 3rd leading causes of death in the United States. Project innovations will
be demonstrated and evaluated using an FPGA prototype to reconstruct images of
physical phantoms captured with existing ultrasound probes.