* 1406501
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Quantifying Changes in Lignin Chemistry During Photodegradation Versus Biotic Decomposition Using 2D NMR Spectroscopy
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Jennifer King, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 19,505.00

Lignin is the second most abundant compound synthesized by plants, comprising
approximately 15-40% of terrestrial biomass. Decomposition of lignin, therefore,
is an important process influencing carbon storage and sequestration in
terrestrial ecosystems. Microbial decomposition of lignin is slow, most likely
because only a small group of microorganisms have the capacity to comsume these
complex biological materials. Recent studies, however, suggest that lignin can
be degraded by exposure to solar radiation (or photodegradation), which is
purely a physical process. The role of photodegradation in lignin decomposition,
and how this process interacts with microbial decomposition, are not well
understood. The primary goal of this project is to examine how photodegradation
and microbial decomposition processes combine to determine lignin chemical
composition and decomposition. In this project, a novel approach using two
dimensional nuclear magnetic (2D NMR) resonance spectroscopy will be used to
examine the chemical composition of lignin at a molecular level, providing a
clearer picture of the structure of lignin, deepening our understanding of how
it is processed in the soil.

The proposed study is important to society because of its relevance to our
understanding of the carbon cycle, since the dynamics of lignin decomposition
have a strong influence on carbon storage in soils in most ecosystems. Results
of this research will contribute to a better understanding of lignin
degradation, which is critical to unlocking decomposition processes more
broadly. This study will also impact a broad audience by providing training and
education opportunities for a graduate student researcher and an undergraduate
student directly supported by this funding. It will also provide opportunities
for undergraduates or senior high school students to develop related independent
projects through ongoing K-12 outreach activities and links to the McNair
Scholars Program at the University of California, Santa Barbara.