* 1406049
* II-EN: Software Tools for Monte-Carlo Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 456,286.00

The Computing Research Infrastructure project supports the development of an
open-source software library for Monte Carlo methods in artificial intelligence
on a cloud-based platform. Monte Carlo methods are randomized numerical
algorithms used in AI, machine learning, data mining, and the physical sciences.
As data size and model complexity continue to grow, advanced large-scale Monte-
Carlo techniques (including parallel implementation) has become ubiquitous.
However software tools to easily implement advanced techniques for large-scale
Monte Carlo are not established or broadly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software library developed in this project will help bridge this gap, and lower
the barrier to adoption of advanced Monte Carlo techniques by a broad research
community. The library will include a variety of existing state-of-the-art
algorithms, as well as novel software components. The algorithms and tools have
many important applications, including: &lt;br/&gt;(a) optimization of
ecological management problems, including endangered species conservation,
forest fire management, and invasive species management (b) automated software
testing, (c) optimization for experimental design in science and engineering,
(d) tracking of multiple objects from noisy visual evidence, and (e) activity
and object recognition in computer vision. These problems have significant
societal and economic importance and the research has the potential to
significantly extend current capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms
and tools will be implemented using a common interface supporting a cloud-based
platform, which will allow other researchers to extend and apply the library to
important applications. The software library will be integrated into
the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate curriculum at Oregon State University.
In addition, an online course centered around the theory and application of the
library components will be developed, facilitating use by a wide
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed library will include components
based on the investigators' research that realize a number of
technical&lt;br/&gt;innovations for Monte-Carlo Optimization (MCO), including:
a) Exploiting multi-fidelity simulators in MCO for offline and online planning,
(b) Developing MCO techniques for item discovery problems, (c) Developing MCO
techniques for online policy improvement in sequential decision making, (d)
Learning to reduce branching factors for more efficient online MCO, and (e)
Integrating symbolic reasoning and MCO for scalable sequential decision making.
These new capabilities will advance the state-of-the-art in artificial
intelligence and enable new applications to be addressed that are beyond the
scope of prior MCO methods.