* 1406368
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Morphological and developmental disparity dynamics associated with the emergence of commensalism and the loss of swimming in "swimming" crabs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Gustav Paulay, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,487.00

The proposed project will investigate how morphological and developmental
diversity accumulated in a unique and charismatic lineage of crabs belonging to
the economically important "swimming crab" family Portunidae. Diversification of
these crabs included significant ecological divergence that involved abandoning
a swimming lifestyle for sedentary, symbiotic relationships with reef-associated
organisms. Research will include comparative analyses of size, shape and growth
data. The primary goal of this work will be to infer whether significant
developmental differences between these crabs were generated before, during or
after significant changes in adult forms and whether these divergences correlate
to the emergence of symbiotic associations in the group. Results of this work
will contribute to an active area of research concerned with how external (e.g.
ecological) and internal (e.g. developmental) factors influence morphological
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the co-PI with
opportunities to foster collaborations both nationally and internationally. It
will also facilitate the training of undergraduate students on research methods
in molecular systematics. Fieldwork activities will be shared with the public
through the science blog "Adventures in Spineless Science!". Specimens, tissue
samples and photographs collected for this work will be curated and archived at
the Florida Museum of Natural History; making them available for other
researchers. Results will be professionally communicated at scientific meetings
and through publication in open-access journals.