* 1406179
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Impacts of human activities on aquatic insect emergence and effects on terrestrial food webs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Brad Taylor, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 11/30/2015
* USD 20,898.00

Leaves falling into streams provide food for many aquatic organisms. Likewise,
streams contribute materials to the terrestrial environment. Aquatic insects
spend most of their life in the water as larvae, but emerge as adults and fly
into forests, providing important food for terrestrial predators such as
spiders, lizards, birds, and bats. Streams and their adjacent forests are thus
intimately connected. Human activities may affect this reciprocal movement of
energy and materials between these ecosystems. We have long recognized the
effect of human activities on the movement of materials from the landscape to
streams. For instance, intense agricultural activities are known to change the
community composition of aquatic insects in streams by decreasing sensitive
aquatic insects and favoring insects tolerant to pollution, increased nutrients,
and the low oxygen conditions resulting from intense agriculture. These land-
use-associated changes to aquatic insect communities could be reflected in the
kinds and amount of insects emerging and their movement to land, with
consequences for terrestrial predators and their prey. Little is known, however,
about how land use change could affect the transport of materials from streams
to land. What?s more, most of our knowledge on the movement of aquatic insects
to land comes from research in temperate, forested areas, leaving a gap in our
understanding of how the movement of materials from streams to land affects
terrestrial food webs in human-altered systems, particularly in the tropics. The
proposed research integrates extensive undergraduate training and mentoring,
teacher training through the NSF GK-12 program, community outreach, and support
for a Latin American graduate student.

Initial research in Costa Rica suggests that aquatic insect density and
biomass, and streamside terrestrial spider density increase with the intensity
of agricultural land-use, and the community composition of aquatic insects
changes across a land use gradient. Using a field experiment, this project aims
to understand the mechanisms behind these changes, and the consequences for
terrestrial insect density and community composition. The planned experiment
will manipulate the movement of aquatic insects to land at four forested streams
and four streams with intensive agricultural land use, and quantify the response
of spiders and their terrestrial prey. The approach will test whether land use
effects on aquatic insects is the mechanism for the observed increase in
riparian spiders with increasing agricultural land use, and will test whether
land-use effects on aquatic insects propagate through the terrestrial food web
to affect terrestrial insect prey of spiders.