* 1406240
* Self-similar Solutions of Geometric Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Lu Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2018
* USD 132,604.00

A geometric flow is the gradient flow associated to a functional on a manifold
with a geometric interpretation. Not only is the theory of geometric flows a
fundamental subject in mathematics, but it also has potential applications to
other scientific fields including computer sciences, material sciences and
physics. One of the most important problems in the study of geometric flows is
to understand all possible singularities of the flows, which are in turn modeled
by self-similar solutions of the flows. The proposed research on the moduli
space of such self-similar solutions is expected to broaden and advance the
knowledge and techniques both within and outside of mathematics, such as the
topology of manifolds, image processing, crystal growths and the large-scale
structure of the universe. In the meanwhile, new ideas and tools will be
developed in various mathematical disciplines ranging from differential geometry
to analysis. In addition, the PI will continue mentoring and organizing seminars
and workshops for undergraduates, graduate students and young researchers. The
PI will also actively participate in the promotion of women in mathematics to
enhance diversity and gender equity in the society.

The main objective of this proposed project is to establish various geometric
and analytic properties of the space of self-similar solutions of geometric
flows. First, the PI, in the continuing collaboration with Brett Kotschwar at
the Arizona State University, will apply the Carleman type technique to attack
the rigidity problem for noncompact gradient Ricci solitons. Second, appealing
to the tools inspired in part by the theory of minimal surfaces, the PI aims to
describe a much detailed picture of two-dimensional smooth noncompact self-
shrinkers of finite genus of mean curvature flow. To achieve this, the PI will
begin with investigating the asymptotic structures at infinity of such self-
shrinkers which are conjectured to be regular cones or cylinders. Then the PI
intends to address the Cylinder Rigidity Conjecture of Ilmanen concerning the
uniqueness of self-shrinking cylinders. At the end, the PI, with Joel Spruck at
the Johns Hopkins University, plans to seek the sufficient and necessary
conditions of the existence of the asymptotic Dirichlet problem for the self-
shrinker equation. Third, in higher dimensions, the PI, joint with Neshan
Wickramasekera at the University of Cambridge, will extend the regularity theory
of stable minimal submanifolds to derive estimates on the size of singular sets
of entropy stable weak self-shrinkers.