* 1406932
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic systematics, lineage diversification, and niche evolution in spinetails (Furnariidae, Aves)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,240.00

Determining the how species are created is key to understanding the origins and
maintenance of biodiversity across the planet. This project tackles this issue
by focusing on a small set of very similar tropical birds called "spinetails",
which are unusual because they appear to have developed new species at an
incredibly fast rate. If this rapid speciation is indeed the case, study of
spinetails will likely reveal novel insights about how new species come about.
Investigators will use genetic techniques and cutting-edge statistical analyses
to determine the evolutionary history of spinetails. The study will foster
international partnerships through sharing of genetic samples and collaborating
on complicated analyses of huge genetic datasets. The study will also provide
research opportunities for undergraduates interested in learning how to apply
bioinformatics and statistical programming to answer fundamental questions in
ecology and evolutionary biology. Results of this study will help resolve long-
standing taxonomic confusion about spinetails and provide a clearer picture of
South American biodiversity -- a goal of both science and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators will test two
alternative hypotheses of speciation. Both hypotheses rely on geographic
isolation as a key requirement and explore the ecological context in which
populations become isolated. On the one hand, if two populations of the same
species occur in different environments it may cause to them to diverge
ecologically due to local adaptation. Alternatively, small environmental
differences may exist within a species' distribution due to conserved ecological
preferences. If this distribution is divided by a region outside the species'
ecological preference, such as mountains for a lowland species, dispersal will
be greatly restricted. These hypotheses will be tested at multiple evolutionary
scales. Across Furnariidae, there is a positive relationship between the rate of
ecological divergence and speciation. Importantly, the arboreal spinetails
(genus Cranioleuca) exhibit rates of ecological divergence and speciation far
exceeding those found in other groups in the family. Both observations support
the hypothesis that ecological divergence is associated with speciation, but to
test these hypotheses a densely sampled phylogeny is needed. This study will
reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of the arboreal spinetails using
genomic scale genetic datasets. Investigators will then employ detailed
comparative analyses to determine if speciation in this group is associated with
ecological divergence or conservatism.