* 1406876
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeographic analysis of introgressive gene flow among nuclear loci functionally linked to the mitochondrion
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* David Weisrock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,485.00

Genetic studies across species frequently uncover conflicting patterns between
the nuclear and organellar (including mitochondria) genomes. Contrasting
patterns of genomic divergence can potentially be explained by differences
related to inheritance, gene flow, and mutation rate, but it is unknown how co-
evolutionary interactions between these genomes influence genetic divergence.
Using Dusky Salamanders and revolutionary DNA sequencing technologies,
evolutionary patterns of divergence will be compared between the nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes, with a focus on nuclear genes that function within the
mitochondrion. Dusky salamanders are an excellent system for this project
because they are regionally diverse in eastern North America and have
demonstrated gene flow across species boundaries. These criteria, and the
growing genetic resources available for salamanders, make them an excellent
system to test for conflicting evolutionary patterns between nuclear and
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute toward graduate student training in the use of rapidly changing and
advancing genetic technologies and help preparations for an academic career
through peer-reviewed research and undergraduate mentorship. Results from this
study will provide new insights into how researchers should use genomic data to
reconstruct the Tree of Life, and will contribute to an understanding of the
processes that influence genetic divergence and speciation.