* 1406984
* EXTREEMS-QED: GW Mathematics and Statistics Training, Education, &amp;  Research (MASTER)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Murli Gupta, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The George Washington University Mathematics and Statistics Training, Education,
and Research (MASTER) program is designed to excite students about the
mathematical questions and techniques underlying the computational challenges of
analyzing large-scale data. The program will be run by the Departments of
Mathematics and Statistics, with support from faculty in Computer Science.
Computational and Data-enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) has now
emerged as a distinct intellectual and technological discipline lying at the
intersection of applied mathematics, statistics, computer science, core science
and engineering disciplines. The program will help educate mathematics and
statistics undergraduate students who are prepared to confront new challenges in
CDS&amp;E. Training students to think mathematically while working with big data
will prove useful for students' successful careers in many application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will feature curricular enhancements,
research mentoring, and faculty development. The curricular enhancements will
add new courses centered about the theme of CDS&amp;E; the undergraduate
research mentoring program will provide research experience for talented
undergraduates majors in mathematics or statistics. The research projects will
themselves involve CDS&amp;E research questions arising from network dynamics,
biological data analysis, clustering, topology of large data sets, and
compressive sensing. Among the new courses to be offered are mathematics of
networks, the statistics of data exploration, and CDS&amp;E mathematical
modeling; the courses will be focused on the variety of topics, including
network data analysis, biological network data, graphical techniques for data
exploration, statistical computing, dimension analysis, and modeling of large
data sets. Summer workshops for faculty will enhance the skills of college
faculty in CDS&amp;E.