* 1406515
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Melatonin Regulation of Vocal Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Andrew Bass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,201.00

Circadian rhythms that approximate the 24 hr day-night cycle, synchronize animal
behavior and physiology to cyclical changes in environmental cues, such as
light, temperature, and the availability of mates. How biological rhythms are
generated by hormonal, genetic, and neural mechanisms is of great scientific
interest. The nocturnal hormone melatonin plays a central role in entraining
daily activity to the day-night cycle. In many mammals, activity and mating
occur at night so there is potential for melatonin to regulate important
reproductive behaviors such as vocalizations used in courtship. This project
will investigate circadian and melatonin regulation of daily rhythms in the
vocal behavior of a nocturnally active and highly vocal fish, the plainfin
midshipman (Porichthys notatus) by answering three questions: (1) Is the daily
vocal rhythm under internal, circadian control? (2) Does melatonin stimulate
nocturnal vocal behavior? (3) Does melatonin regulate gene expression underlying
neural excitability in vocal brain regions? These studies will contribute to a
comparative framework for predicting melatonin regulation of vocal behavior in
other species, including birds and mammals that exhibit divergent daily activity
patterns. More broadly, melatonin has been implicated in sleep, jetlag, autism
and epilepsy, making basic research on how it affects social communication and
neural excitability important and widely applicable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the overall hypothesis that the midshipman's nocturnal
courtship vocalization is under circadian control and stimulated by melatonin.
Proposed studies will (1) record vocalizations from naturally behaving fish
under constant external light conditions to test for an internally generated
circadian vocal rhythm, (2) implant fish with melatonin to test for melatonin
regulation of vocal behavior, and (3) seek a deeper understanding of how
melatonin influences daily rhythms in vocal behavior by examining its regulation
of neural excitability-related gene expression in a well-characterized vocal
network. If the midshipman daily vocal rhythm is under endogenous circadian
control, it is predicted that rhythms recorded under a normal light regime will
persist under constant darkness with a period of ~24 hr. Additionally, if
midshipman vocal behavior is dependent on melatonin action, it is predicted that
vocalizations will be reduced or abolished under constant light, shown to
abolish melatonin production, while exogenous melatonin replacement under light
will rescue the occurrence of vocalizations. Finally, the researchers predict
that melatonin increases the expression of previously identified candidate genes
known to affect neural excitability. These genes encode three types of ion
channels and exhibit increased expression in a hindbrain vocal nucleus collected
during the summer night, a time of maximal natural vocal behavior. Given
conserved functions of the candidate genes explored in this proposal, such
mechanisms could provide the molecular basis for translating the nocturnal
melatonin signal to increase or decrease neural excitability in nocturnal versus
diurnal animals, respectively. This project will train current and new
undergraduates of both genders from diverse backgrounds, including
underrepresented minorities. The results will be disseminated in open-access
peer-reviewed journals, popular articles via online platforms, at national and
international conferences, and at local science outreach events.