* 1406757
* People with Disabilities Achieving Career Employment (PACE)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 899,836.00

The Human Engineering Research Laboratories at the University of Pittsburgh and
the Hiram G. Andrews Vocational Training Center are partnering to conduct an NSF
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) project entitled People with Disabilities
Achieving Career Employment (PACE). PACE will extend advanced manufacturing
certificate training and employment opportunities to veterans and people with
disabilities. The project focuses on individuals with orthopedic and cognitive
impairments. This project has the potential to provide significant societal
benefits by creating opportunities for veterans and people with disabilities to
become full participants in the advanced manufacturing educational and workplace
arenas. Advanced manufacturing is an area of critical importance to the national
economy. Currently, advanced manufacturing industries are reporting difficulties
in finding entry-level employees with appropriate skills. Veterans and people
with disabilities have the potential to obtain meaningful employment in advanced
manufacturing, but the lack of training programs and workplace facilities that
are accommodating to veterans and people with disabilities keep this from being
a reality. The contribution of veterans and people with disabilities to the
advanced manufacturing workforce benefits not only those individuals, but also
society as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PACE program will work with a
broad range of industry, academic and advocacy experts to design, develop, and
deliver didactic and experiential training curricula tailored to veterans and
people with disabilities in the advanced manufacturing field. The project will
provide guidance to academic institutions and industry on making their advanced
manufacturing programs accommodating to veterans and people with disabilities.
Project goals include delivering an advanced manufacturing curriculum that is
integrated into for-credit certificate programs. The certificates are: National
Institute for Metalworking Skill (NIMS) Certified Machining Level 1, Machining
Level 2, and the Society of Manufacturing Engineers (SME) Additive Manufacturing
Certificate. PACE will also design and disseminate professional development
materials and guidelines for education and industry for inclusion of and
accommodations of veterans and people with disabilities in advanced
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from PACE will contribute
significantly to the advancement of knowledge in the areas of educational
curricula, engineering education, engineering public policy, and inclusiveness.
The project evaluation work includes design of a criteria-based evaluation
instrument to review the program characteristics developed through this work. In
addition, stakeholder perceptions will be compiled including analysis of the
qualitative data gathered from partners and participants. Evaluation design
includes the development of survey instruments of potential broad use by similar
programs. Findings regarding formative data will serve to document the need for
program modifications and provide insights to help disseminate the project
innovations to other interested groups.