* 1406235
* Magnetic-Free, Non-Reciprocal Integrated Nanophotonic Components Based on Angular-Momentum Bias
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrea Alu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,473.00

Magnetic-Free, Non-Reciprocal Nanophotonic Components Based on Angular-Momentum
Bias&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical isolator i.e., devices that allow photons to
travel in one direction, but prohibit reverse propagation play a crucial role to
route optical signals in optical fiber networks and to provide stability in
laser operation. Commercially available isolators today are exclusively based on
magnetically-biased garnets or ferromagnetic materials. However, because of the
weak character of magneto-optical effects, they are typically based on bulky
optical components, they are based on expensive materials, and they are
impossible to integrate in a nanophotonic platform due to lattice mismatch with
conventional substrates. The objective of this effort consists in introducing
new theoretical concepts and design principles, as well as experimentally
realizing integrated nanophotonic devices that can isolate without requiring
magnetic effects. Our approach is centered on the nanophotonic analog to the
Zeeman effect, the physical mechanism based on which conventional isolation is
realized with magnetic materials: we will be able to induce a strong isolation
on-chip by biasing with angular-momentum suitably designed "meta-atoms" in the
form of spatio-temporally modulated nanoring resonators. The findings of this
project are expected to attract significant interest from the nanophotonics
industry, since monolithic integration of non-reciprocal nanodevices can
dramatically minimize the cost and footprint of these essential devices. More
broadly, the proposed research combines a plethora of exciting topics in
electrical engineering, that can directly involve undergraduate and graduate
students in some of the most important fields of electrical engineering such as
nanophotonics, metamaterials, integrated electronics, nanofabrication, and
modeling, opening unique opportunities to inspire the next generation of
scientists and researchers, with special attention to under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research introduces disruptive concepts for
nanophotonics, allowing the realization of magnetic-free optical components that
can break Lorentz reciprocity without requiring magnetic bias or special
ferromagnetic response. Being fully based on components and materials that are
already available in conventional nanophotonic boards, such as dielectric
waveguides and semiconductor junctions, the newly proposed non-reciprocal
components can be directly integrated into conventional nanophotonic systems. In
addition, the proposed structures will optimally benefit from recent advances in
the quickly growing fields of silicon photonics, nano-optics and electronics. At
completion of this effort, we will have demonstrated non-reciprocal optical
components based on angular-momentum biasing, achieved with suitable spatio-
temporal modulation of resonant nanorings based on electric radio-frequency
signals. The careful combination of a strong resonance and of a precise form of
spatiotemporal modulation in the azimuthal direction will be able to drastically
enhance the otherwise weak electro-optical effects responsible for spatio-
temporal modulation, thus leading to giant non-reciprocity within a footprint
comparable or smaller than the wavelength. Our additional investigations of
angular spatio-temporal modulation in plasmonics and graphene-based platforms
will set the basis for a new technology platform able to process and control
light in novel ways at a deeply subwavelength scale.