* 1406537
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Diapause in Aplocheiloid Killifishes (Cyprinodontiformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Guillermo Orti, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,811.00

Diapause, defined as a reversible delay in embryonic development, is often
brought on by unfavorable conditions. While common among insects and other
invertebrate animals that overwinter in harsh climates, it is rare in
vertebrates. One of the most exceptional forms of diapause among vertebrate
animals occurs in annual killifishes that complete their life cycle in ephemeral
bodies of water subject to seasonal desiccation. Killifish are popular pet
fishes around the world that have inspired aquarium organizations such as the
American Killifish Association in many countries. Aquarists have long known that
killifish can stop cellular growth, delay development, and lower their metabolic
rate. This makes them excellent model organisms for studying cancer, storage of
embryos, and development in animals, yet the molecular genetic basis and
evolution of diapause has not yet been examined. The researchers will
participate in Aquarists conventions, sharing information about the importance
of these fish for scientific research, highlighting the questions, methods and
results of this project. Many annual killifishes are endangered or extinct in
the wild and because they occur in isolated pools, which will likely change in
geographic range and frequency as a result of climate change, making it
important to study these fishes before their biodiversity is lost.
&lt;br/&gt;The unique diapause of killifish occurs when their ephemeral pool
habitat dries up. All the adults die, leaving their eggs behind, buried in the
soil. Developing embryos survive until the following wet season by entering
unique diapause stages, and the eggs may remain in this dormant state in the
soil for over a year if unfavorable conditions persist. Phylogenetic studies
suggest that this adaptation to extreme environments;may have evolved at least
six times among killifishes. The ultimate goal of this project is to understand
the genetic basis of diapause among killifishes focusing on its evolutionary
origin. Genes associated with diapause will be identified and the DNA sequence
of these diapause genes will be determined and analyzed using mathematical
models that estimate the strength of natural selection acting at the molecular
level. These data will indicate the evolutionary ancestry of diapause in these
fish, how the trait evolved and possibly re-evolved multiple times in these
fishes. The project will use comparative transcriptomics to identify, sequence,
and characterize candidate genes associated with embryonic diapause. Molecular
evolution of diapause-associated genes will be modeled on a phylogeny of annual
and non-annual fishes to test hypotheses of the evolutionary origin of diapause
and to connect the phylogenetic pattern with signatures of adaptive genetic
changes in structural and regulatory genes underpinning the evolution of this
complex life history trait.