* 1406124
* Canonical Metrics, Geometric Flows and Formation of Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jian Song, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 155,823.00

Recent progress and influx of new ideas have unraveled a deep, rich and unifying
structure among analysis, Riemannian geometry, pluripotential theory, classical
several complex variables and the minimal model program in algebraic geometry.
The proposed research work focuses on a number of open problems and developing
programs on canonical metrics, geometric flows and complex Monge-Ampere
equations arising from geometry and physics. The proposed project also aims to
bring in research and teaching innovation in mathematics from various
disciplines and have an immediate beneficial effect on graduate and
undergraduate students at Rutgers as well as in the regional community of
mathematics. The PI will also organize and participate in the integrated
research/education programs and activities that will promote the education level
of the nation. Furthermore, the PI plans to disseminate the exciting frontier
research at the interface of geometry, analysis and algebra to a broad audience
through lectures and survey papers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
investigate and continue to make progress in the analytic minimal model program
with Ricci flow. In particular, the PI will study both the finite time and long
time formation of singularities of the Kahler-Ricci flow on algebraic varieties.
Such singularity formation is reflected by canonical geometric/analytic
surgeries equivalent to birational transformations and should be understood
through global and local metric uniformization. The PI will also investigate the
canonical metrics of Einstein type on singular varieties, in particular, the
Riemannian geometric properties of such singular metrics and related moduli
problems with applications in string theory such as geometric transitions and
mirror symmetry. The PI willy employ new theories and techniques from
L^2-theory, nonlinear PDEs, Perelman's works and Cheeger-Colding theory. The
outcome of the proposed research will develop new tools and give profound
insights of the structure of the universe as well as many other applied
sciences.