* 1406028
* Quantum and Nonlinear Photonics in Silicon Carbide
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

The project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Programs, both in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR), and by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD)
Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This project develops a
new platform for strong interaction between light and matter - using an optical
cavity (resonator) nanofabricated in silicon carbide that simultaneously
contains optical emitters (color centers) and localizes light in an overlapping,
sub-wavelength volume. Such a platform enables switching one optical beam with
another and changing its color - even with very weak beams, at the level of only
a few photons. The potential applications of these effects include building
blocks for secure quantum communication systems over long distances, optical
equivalents of electronic switches operating at much lower powers and higher
speeds, and magnetic field sensors. This work therefore combines photonic
engineering, with materials/nanoscience, and fundamental physics. The project
contains educational and outreach activities integrated with research, including
active recruitment of minorities and women for science and engineering careers,
development of new classes and textbooks, undergraduate research and advising,
and participation in outreach programs for K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The focus of this research
is the development of a quantum and nonlinear photonics platform based on
silicon carbide nanophotonic cavities with embedded ensembles of optically-
active crystalline impurities (color centers). Ensembles of suitable quantum
emitters are generated (e.g., via electron beam irradiation) inside
nanofabricated photonic crystal cavities with high quality factors and small
mode volumes. Such a platform is probed in a variety of custom-built optical
setups to study nonlinear and quantum optics, and multi-emitter cavity quantum
electrodynamics effects at room temperature and at low optical power levels. The
observed effects are employed to build optical switches at the level of a few
photons (for optical communications and computing), to interface long-lived
states of quantum emitters in silicon carbide to photons propagating in fiber
optic networks (with applications to quantum networks), to build on-chip light
sources for wavelengths from visible through mid-infrared, and to sense weak
magnetic fields.