* 1406195
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of soil organic carbon interactions with black carbon
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Johannes Lehmann, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,150.00

Increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth's atmosphere are driving global
climate change. Because soils currently hold more organic carbon than is present
as carbon in the atmosphere, soil management can affect rates of global climate
change. Pyrogenic carbon is a form of soil carbon that is produced naturally
during fires that can be difficult for microbes to decompose. Under some
circumstance, this pyrogenic carbon ("biochar") may increase carbon storage and
thus reduce the amount of carbon that is emitted to the atmosphere from soils.
In order to predict the effects of pyrogenic carbon on soil carbon balance,
proposed research will expand existing work to look at the importance of
microbes and soil type in determining whether addition of pyrogenic carbon
increases soil carbon storage. Methods will include a soil incubation
experiment, where diverse soil types from across the United States will be mixed
with pyrogenic carbon to predict the effects of pyrogenic carbon on soil organic
carbon storage under a variety of conditions. This will help improve national
and global efforts to model and predict the natural organic carbon cycle and
will provide information that can be useful for land management decisions,
especially those where prescribed burning is an option. In addition to these
impacts, the research will support a PhD student's research, train undergraduate
students in research, and engage the public with organic carbon cycle science,
through lectures, general interest articles, a research website, and
professional meetings.

Pyrogenic C (PyC) can comprise a large fraction of the soil organic carbon (SOC)
in soils around the world, with levels up to 50-80% of SOC in some ecosystems.
The effects of PyC additions on already existing SOC are still poorly
understood. PyC additions to soil have been found to both increase and decrease
SOC decomposition, with the magnitude and even direction of these interactions
changing over time. These varied responses indicate that multiple mechanisms are
occurring, with different mechanisms potentially acting over different
timescales. The researchers will use experimental manipulations to determine
whether varying the amount of labile OC in PyC and in SOC can predict the
magnitude and direction of any priming effects, using 13C-labelled BC. This
doctoral dissertation improvement grant will expand current experiments to a
nationally representative set of soil types and will test the hypothesis that
microbial community composition (analysed using high-throughput sequencing) can
be used to predict PyC-SOC interactions. Understanding these mechanisms is
essential to predict the impact of natural PyC inputs to soils on the global C
cycle, and to quantifying the net climate impact of intentional PyC production
and management.