* 1406763
* 2014 National Academy of Engineering Frontiers of Engineering Symposia:  United States, Japan-America, and European Union-United States
* ENG,EFMA
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2015
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The symposia serve as a catalyst to spur engineering innovation
and foster collaborative networks of researchers within the United States and
between engineers from the United States and partnering countries. This award
provides partial support for three FOE symposia, to be held in 2014: Japan-
American FOE (to be held June 9-11, 2014, in Tokyo, Japan), United States (U.S.)
FOE (to be held September 11-13, 2014, in Irvine, California), and the European
Union (EU)-U.S. FOE (to be held during November 2014 in Seattle, Washington).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each FOE symposium will focus on four topical areas. The
four topics planned for the Japan-American FOE symposium are energy harvesting
and power transmission, field robotics for disaster response, bioimaging, and
noise control engineering in health care environments. The four topics planned
for the 2014 U.S. FOE symposium are next-generation robotics, frontiers in
materials for batteries, impacts of shale gas and oil on the economy,
environment and energy sustainability, and technologies for the heart. Finally,
the four topics planned for the EU-U.S. symposium are energy storage across
scales, smart homes, protein design for therapeutic applications, and
design/engineered aerospace materials. About 100 outstanding young engineers for
the U.S. symposium and 30 from each country for the bilateral symposia will
participate. Each two and one-half day symposium will include four formal
sessions, technical tours, break-out sessions, and opportunities for developing
collaborative research partnerships. Sessions will consist of presentations on
cutting-edge research, innovations, and emerging research opportunities in
engineering fields relevant to the symposium. Papers from the U.S. FOE symposium
will be published in a volume available on the National Academies Press website
at http://www.nap.edu.