* 1406770
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The ax and wedge of competition shapes symbiont diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* James Skelton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,668.00

The term symbiosis has many technical and non-technical definitions, but here
symbiosis simply means that the lives of two species are intimately linked by
exchanges of resources and services or provisioning of habitat, such as when one
organism lives on or inside another. Most plants and animals are engaged in
symbioses. In many cases, organisms cannot live without their symbionts.
Moreover, the life of an organism may depend on many kinds of symbiotic
interactions with many kinds of symbionts. For instance, human nutrition,
development, and immune function depend on interactions with thousands of
internal and external bacterial species. However, current symbiosis theories
cannot account for the evolution and maintenance of diversity in symbiont
communities. The proposed project will explore patterns of ecological and
evolutionary similarities among species of worms which live in symbiosis with
crayfish to show how competition among symbionts can limit symbiont diversity by
excluding less competitive species, but also create diversity by favoring the
evolution of new symbiont species. Because symbiont diversity is often necessary
for an organism?s survival, an understanding of symbiont diversity is needed to
predict the fate of many species in a rapidly changing world. Therefore this
work will have far-reaching implications for disparate fields such as
conservation, epidemiology, and agriculture. The proposed work includes a
collaboration with Dr. Mike Rosenzweig, director of the Seek Education, Explore,
and DiScover (SEEDS) program as part of the Virginia Tech Biological Science
Outreach. The investigators will disseminate their findings through public
lectures and demonstrations at the Price House Nature Center in Blacksburg,
Virginia. These activities will raise public awareness of the intriguing
symbioses that occur just beyond their back door and provide a first-hand
experience with charismatic native species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competition
may play a dual role in shaping local biodiversity; it can limit local diversity
through competitive exclusion, or it can create diversity through disruptive
selection. Observation of contemporary patterns alone cannot distinguish these
processes because both yield similar patterns. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;work will
extend beyond contemporary patterns of symbiont assemblages to search
phylogenetic&lt;br/&gt;history for evidence of the evolutionary processes that
create and shape symbiont diversity. The researchers will do this by combining
ecological data of functional traits and broad scale assessment of patterns in
biodiversity with a phylogenetic reconstruction of evolutionary history using
genetic sequence data, in order to elucidate the evolutionary processes that
create symbiont diversity.&lt;br/&gt;