* 1406535
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community-Based Organizations and Immigrant Civic Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Marion Coddou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 11,999.00

SES-1406535&lt;br/&gt;Susan Olzak&lt;br/&gt;Marion Coddou&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates how community-based
organizations shape migrant social and civic engagement in their settlement
societies. Research on civic engagement argues that community organizations
boost the participation of socially marginal groups through the development of
social networks and civic skills. However, this research posits that
organizational social networks are domain specific. This means they are directed
toward the organization's goals, which may not be civic oriented. The research
asks how organizational roles or "domains" are defined by staff, members, and
broader institutional arrangements, and how these definitions impact migrant
community engagement and social support. The research advances theory by
contributing to a better understanding of how social networks are marked by the
organizations that form and sustain them and, as a result, are constrained in
the projects under which they can be mobilized. The co-PI examines these
processes among civic organizations serving Latino immigrants in an immigrant
gateway city and its suburbs. Rich insights gained from over a year of
ethnographic fieldwork are triangulated with national surveys of organizations
and members to provide evidence of differential political mobilization by
organizational networks and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to their limited access to resources through the
state, many migrants must rely on informal social ties and local organizations
to establish themselves and gain a voice in their new communities. However,
membership carries distinct social consequences across organizations. There is a
need to study and thus increase our understanding of how resources
differentially diffuse through community organizations, providing variable
opportunities for member engagement. This research contributes to this body of
knowledge by showing how social definitions of organizational roles shape the
opportunities available through them. The findings of this research will be
shared directly with the organizations participating in the study and will be
available to scholars, policy makers and nonprofit leaders through scholarly
papers, conference presentations, and published reports.