* 1406084
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Colony-level Selection and the Role of Reproductive Conflict on Collective Decision-making in a Slave-making Ant
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* H. Kern Reeve, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 9,869.00

Animal behavior research is increasingly concentrated on the collective
behaviors that emerge from social living. Significant work is underway to
understand how such apparent organization is achieved without any conscious
oversight or direction from a leader; however, researchers understanding of
these behaviors are incomplete without an understanding of how natural selection
operates on both the group and its individual constituents. The goal of this
project is to investigate the influence of within-group conflict on collective
decision-making in the North American slave-making ant Protomognathus
americanus. Through coupled analysis of cooperation and conflict, this project
contributes to our understanding of how social insects achieve superorganism
status, which can more generally be applied to the other major transitions in
biological organization (e.g. genes to chromosomes, unicellular to multicellular
organisms). This project will also establish slave-making ants as models of
collective decision-making and contribute a novel mechanism distinct from the
relatively well studied collective decision-making behaviors by rock ants and
honeybees searching for new nests. Over the course of this project, 4-5
undergraduates will be mentored and the investigators will continue their
outreach and science education activities using portable, acorn-nesting ant
colonies. Ultimately understanding what principles make collective behavior
effective may also help guide the structure of human groups in our increasingly
networked world.

This project will investigate the relationship between within-group conflict and
the efficiency of group-level behaviors by studying P. americanus' collective
decision over where to launch slave-raids. The researchers will combine
observational experiments in the lab and naturalistic field experiments to
achieve three main goals: (1) test how resilient collective decision-making is
to within-group conflict; (2) describe how individual behaviors differ between
high and low conflict groups; and (3) test if the emergent benefits from
collective behaviors influence the evolution of cooperation. In this experiment,
the researchers will manipulate the degree of selfishness in slave-maker
colonies by inducing ovarian development in half of the lowest ranking slave-
maker workers. A slavemaker colony will then be introduced to a glass arena
containing three host colonies of low, medium and high quality. The maximum
number of scouts actively searching, total time spent searching before first
nest discovery and before raid initiation, number of nests located and recruited
to, duration of recruitment, quality of the nest raided, size of the raiding
party and number of brood items stolen will be analyzed using video tracking
software. Lastly, P. americanus colonies will be moved into artificial nests and
placed in a study plot. After a year, the number of slaves and the number of
male and sexual female pupae will be counted and ovarian development will be
measured in the workers. Both eCommons (http://ecommons.library.cornell.edu/),
and the Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity (http://knb.ecoinformatics.org) will
be used to make data accessible to a wide audience.