* 1406383
* Invariants of bordered 3-manifolds and contact structures in Floer homology, connections with Khovanov homology, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* John Baldwin, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 159,844.00

The proposed project involves studying geometric structures on 3- and
4-dimensional manifolds. Understanding these spaces and structures is central to
understanding the shape of our macroscopic universe, and many of the theories
the PI intends to study have applications and origins in physics. A major goal
of the PI's proposal is to develop methods which might be used to unify several
existing and important tools for studying 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds. Such a
unification would likely reveal interesting connections between quite disparate
fields of mathematics. The PI also plans to use some of these tools to study
contact structures and knots in new ways. Both serve as probes by which to study
3- and 4-dimensional manifolds. Contact structures are also important in
classical mechanics, thermodynamics, dynamical systems, and in the study of
liquid crystals, while knot theory has found many recent applications in the
study of DNA knotting. This proposal also contains several explicit directions
for student research, at both undergraduate and graduate levels, and will
support the PI's teaching and mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the last couple decades, Floer theory has revolutionized the study of the
topology and geometry of smooth manifolds in dimensions 3 and 4. There are
multiple distinct Floer theories for 3-manifolds defined using techniques from
quite different branches of mathematics. Amazingly several of these theories
appear to give the same information, indicating deep connections between fields
like symplectic geometry and gauge theory. These connections have lead to
beautiful results like Taubes' proof of the Weinstein conjecture. Despite
remarkable progress in understanding these connections, one wonders whether
there is a simpler, unifying explanation. Indeed, a fundamental open problem and
a distant lodestar for the PI's proposal is to axiomatize Floer theory. One
approach to this and to the related problem of computing Floer theories is to
develop invariants of bordered 3-manifolds and a means of computing the
invariant of a closed manifold from those of its pieces. The first such
invariant was defined by Lipshitz, Ozsvath, and Szabo in Heegaard Floer
homology. The PI's proposed bordered monopole Floer theory is novel in that it
may provide methods for computing invariants of 4-manifolds as well (it is
defined in the HM-from, "master" version, of monopole Floer homology), and can
likely be ported to other Floer theories (an important ingredient for an
approach to axiomatization). This proposal will support the further development
of this theory. A closely related aspect of the proposal involves fleshing out
connections between Floer theory and Khovanov homology, an invariant of links
motivated by representation theory. Such connections were instrumental, for
example, in Kronheimer and Mrowka's celebrated proof that Khovanov homology
detects the unknot. Often these connections arise in the form of a spectral
sequence from Khovanov homology and Floer thoery. A goal of this project is to
better understand these spectral sequences. The PI proposes a means for
combinatorially computing their terms and for proving that the sequences are
functorial with respect to link cobordisms. The hope is to use these
combinatorial methods and functoriality to better understand Floer invariants in
dimensions 3 and 4. A final, complementary aspect of this proposal involves
defining new invariants of contact structures. The PI has done so in recent
work, using instanton and monopole Floer homology. An exciting future project is
to use the instanton Floer invariant to uncover hitherto unexplored links
between the Stein and symplectic fillings of a contact 3-manifold and its
fundamental group.