* 1406601
* Studies of Dynamics for El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diversity and Complexity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2014,12/31/2018
* Fei-Fei Jin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2018
* USD 599,778.00

El Nino refers to an abnormal warming of the ocean surface in the equatorial
Pacific, while the Southern Oscillation is a seesaw pattern in sea level
pressure in which abnormally low pressure on the eastern side of the Pacific is
matched by high pressure on the western side of the basin and vice versa. As El
Nino events occur in association with fluctuations of the Southern Oscillation,
the combined phenomenon is referred to by the acronym ENSO. While ENSO is an
equatorial Pacific phenomenon, its impacts are felt worldwide and include
disruptions of the tropical monsoons, heavy rain and mudslides in California,
and increases in the frequency of winter storms over the southeastern US. Given
its worldwide impacts, ENSO has been a topic of intense scientific research over
the past three decades, and skillful ENSO forecasts can now be made up to a few
months in advance. However, the full range of ENSO behaviors has not yet been
satisfactorily explained, and there is still much room for improvement in ENSO
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand the diversity
found in ENSO events, where the term "diversity" denotes the rich variability
seen in the amplitude and frequency of events, as well as differences in the
pattern of sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies that appear in different
events. A key form of diversity is the existence of two distinct types of ENSO
events. One is the conventional ENSO event in which sea surface temperature SST
anomalies are concentrated in eastern equatorial Pacific. The other, which is
referred to as "El Nino Modoki", "Dateline El Nino", "Central Pacific El Nino",
and Warm Pool El Nino", has its largest SST imprint in the central equatorial
Pacific, rather than the eastern side of the basin, and its impacts over the
globe are quite different from those of the conventional El Nino. Research in
this project would attempt to determine if the two types can be ascribed to two
distinct dynamical modes, driven by different physical mechanisms, or whether
the two are produced by a single dynamical mode with a single set of mechanisms
which can produce either type depending on stochastic forcing which varies from
event to event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another factor contributing to diversity in
ENSO behavior is the nonlinear interaction between the ENSO cycle and the annual
cycle. Work performed here examines this interaction and its impact on ENSO
diversity. Preliminary work suggests that the interaction creates ENSO-related
variability at frequencies which correspond to the sum and difference of the
ENSO frequency and the annual cycle. A third factor to be investigated is the
extent to which diversity in ENSO behavior is generated by multiplicative noise
forcing, in which the forcing of ENSO by stochastic noise (for instance, the
effect of winds from westerly wind bursts) is dependent on the state of ENSO SST
anomalies. Such dependence is expected to result in events of extreme
amplitudes, and may explain why El Nino events are generally stronger than La
Nina events (ENSO events of opposite sign).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As noted above,
the work has broader impacts due to the global effects of ENSO events and their
consequences for human activity. ENSO diversity is an important issue for
understanding and predicting ENSO events and their effects on weather and
climate around the world, and the results of this work could contribute to
improved ENSO prediction. In addition, the work will support and train two
graduate students, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.