* 1406689
* Precision Standard Model Tests With Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Thomas
* 08/31/2019
* USD 405,000.00

This grant supports research that seeks to answer a fundamental question about
matter. What is the nature of any new physics not described by the Standard
Model - our current understanding of how particles and forces interact? This
question will be addressed by precision measurements of the weak charges of the
proton and electron. The proton and electron's weak charges are the weak force
analogs of the ordinary electric charges of these particles. The weak charges
are precisely predicted in the Standard Model. Any deviation of measurements
from these predictions could be evidence of as yet undiscovered massive
particles that represent new physics beyond our existing understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will support graduate and undergraduate students
who will form an essential part of this project. The anticipated activities
cover a range of hardware and software projects that will provide excellent
training for these students. This training in fundamental research provides a
strong basis for careers both in basic research and in more applied research and
industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The funds provided by this grant will support
activities on two parity-violating electron scattering experiments at Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF). The Qweak experiment will
measure the proton's neutral weak charge via parity-violating electron
scattering at very low momentum transfer. The proton's weak charge has a well-
defined prediction in the Standard Model; a precise measurement of it is
sensitive to many popular scenarios for extending the Standard Model. During the
period of this grant, we will perform data analysis leading to the final
determination of the proton's weak charge from the Qweak experiment. We will
also perform analysis to extract physics results from the Qweak data for two
other topics - a probe of hadronic parity violation in the N to Delta transition
and a measurement of the transverse asymmetry in Moller scattering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The MOLLER experiment is an approved TJNAF experiment intended for
the upgraded 12 GeV TJNAF. It will measure the electron's neutral weak charge by
making a precision measurement of the parity-violating asymmetry in the elastic
scattering of polarized electrons on unpolarized electrons at a very low
momentum transfer. This will result in a determination of the weak mixing angle
at low energy with a precision comparable to the best determinations from high
energy colliders. It would have excellent sensitivity to many beyond the
Standard Model scenarios. During the period of this grant, our group will
contribute to the development of this experiment by working on beam charge and
position monitor upgrades, luminosity monitor and background detector
development and construction, and simulation design studies.