* 1406862
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding how shifts from migratory to sedentary behavior influence host-pathogen dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Sonia Altizer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2016
* USD 19,237.00

Each year, billions of animals migrate long distances to track seasonal
resources. In some cases, these migrations promote healthy populations by
reducing levels of infectious disease. This occurs if infected animals are
weeded out of the population during strenuous journeys or if migration allows
animals to escape contaminated habitats for part of the year. In recent decades,
some animals have stopped migrating, instead forming sedentary populations that
breed year-round and leading to greater opportunities for harmful pathogens to
take hold of populations. For example, all monarch butterflies in eastern North
America once migrated to Mexico every fall, but some monarchs now remain year-
round in the southern U.S., where they breed on exotic species of milkweed.
These sedentary (non-migratory) monarchs face greater infection risk from a tiny
parasite. This project examines whether these sedentary monarchs pose risks for
migratory monarchs by acting as sources of infection or by causing more of them
to abandon migration.

This research is important because changes in animal migration can alter
infectious disease levels in wildlife and may influence the transmission of
pathogens between wildlife and humans. As diverse species around the globe
undergo dramatic changes in migrations, understanding the ecological
consequences of these changes will be valuable for wildlife and human health.
This project will engage the public to help investigate this problem. Since
2006, hundreds of volunteers across North America have sampled monarchs for
parasite infection through the citizen science program Monarch Health. With the
support of this grant, Monarch Health will recruit new volunteers to conduct
capture-mark-recapture surveys and will produce an online video to highlight how
citizen scientists enhance ecological knowledge. Finally, this project has the
potential to contribute to monarch conservation by elucidating how the planting
of exotic milkweeds affects monarchs.

Specifically, this research has two goals: (1) To determine whether sedentary
populations of monarchs somehow cause migrating individuals -- particularly
infected ones -- to stop migrating, and (2) to determine whether sedentary
populations act as sources of infection for migratory populations. Earlier work
showed that sedentary monarch populations in the southern U.S. suffer extremely
high prevalence of protozoan infection. To accomplish the first goal, wild
monarchs will be collected in the southern U.S. during fall migration and
chemically analyzed to distinguish migratory from sedentary individuals. These
data will be used to test whether infected migrants are more likely than healthy
migrants to stop migrating. To accomplish the second goal, field sampling of
monarchs will be done in the spring to distinguish sedentary monarchs from
migratory monarchs re-colonizing the U.S. from their Mexican wintering grounds,
and to quantify the extent of spatial overlap between these groups. Infections
in larval monarchs at these same sites will be monitored to evaluate the
potential for sedentary individuals to transmit pathogens to migratory
individuals.