* 1406853
* Collaborative Project: Puzzle-Based Cybersecurity Learning to Enhance Defensive Skills of Front-Line Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Dipankar Dasgupta, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 364,864.00

This is a collaborative project involving Jackson State Community College (Award
DUE-1406992) and the University of Memphis (Award DUE-1406853).

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. The objective of this project is to develop innovative "puzzles,"
using specialized software, to assist students in learning concepts of and
approaches to cybersecurity. Every day, new cyber-attack patterns and
vulnerabilities are emerging. Passive methods of cybersecurity education do not
adequately prepare students to defend against rapidly evolving, real-world
threats. The central idea behind puzzle-based learning is to provide interesting
challenges that engage students in thinking about multiple approaches to solving
a problem. Puzzles formulate a problem in a specific format that encourages
students to use their knowledge and skills and to think "outside the box."

The project team will design and develop interactive, multi-level puzzles both
for students who have limited knowledge of computers, networks, and
cybersecurity and for students who have a moderate to high level of expertise.
The complexity of the developed puzzles will be varied based on the target
audience. Puzzle-based learning addresses two issues: (1) It places emphasis on
developing critical thinking skills instead of simply covering content. (2) It
promotes and builds mathematical and logical reasoning skills. Many institutions
have already used puzzles in their STEM curricula successfully. Puzzles have
been introduced in introductory computer science courses. However, no
significant work has been done on introducing puzzles into cybersecurity
curricula. The project team will design scenario-based security puzzles that
explore a range of topics (such as identifying and neutralizing malicious
software, deploying a secure wireless network, and detecting e-mail spam) using
logical decision trees, truth tables, and directed graphs. At the end of each
exercise, participants will be able trace back their decisions and analyze how
an incorrect decision stem can lead to the exploitation of a vulnerability and
how correct actions can prevent it. The investigators will phase in the use of
these puzzles so as to: i) examine how to effectively integrate such puzzle-
based learning technology with instructional content of community college
courses to improve the skill sets of front line cyber defenders, and ii) better
identify and understand the circumstances under which success occurs. The
project team will also conduct a small-scale efficacy study by having students
participate in cyber "capture-the-flag" competitions to determine if the new
enhanced courseware enables increased learning compared to the existing
instructional methodology.