* 1406494
* Funding for a conference on Groups, Computation, and Geometry, June 9-13, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Alexander Hulpke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2015
* USD 18,000.00

The award funds a conference "Groups, Computation, and Geometry" at Pingree
Park, a campus of Colorado State University, June 9-13, 2014. Building on the
successes of an earlier conference, held at the same location in 2004, the broad
goal of the meeting is to bring together researchers in the closely related
fields of computational group theory and finite geometries. The scientific
content of the conference is designed to explore known and emerging connections
between a broad range of topics, including scientific computing, combinatorics,
group theory, and theoretical computer science, with a view both to providing
answers to open theoretical questions and to investigating practical
applications. Historically, the interplay between practical and theoretical
concerns has led to advances on both fronts, and cross-paradigm collaboration of
this type will feature prominently at the conference. Further programming
details may be found at the conference website: http://www.math.colostate.edu/~h
ulpke/pingree/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group theory is often described
as the algebraic study of symmetry in the abstract. Group theory arises and is
used in a wide variety of other fields, including solid state physics, chemistry
(crystallography), coding theory, and cryptography. Geometry has always played a
crucial role in understanding the structure of groups, and over the last forty
years machine computations have been increasingly important to developments in
both fields. The subject of the conference is the interaction between
theoretical questions concerning groups and geometries and algorithmic questions
arising from extensive machine computation with these fundamental objects.