* 1406447
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Exploring Sparsity and Spectral-Temporal Decomposition in Real-Time Network Modulation for Intractable Epilepsy
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 348,000.00

Understanding the relationship between brain activity and human behavior is not
only one of the most important scientific challenges of our generation but also
one of the most important challenges in medicine and public health. This project
develops new technology that can address the minute size of the neurons, and the
vast amount of data generated by neural activity. This project leverages the
collaborative environment between Rice and Texas Medical Center to develop novel
electrical stimulation approaches to modulate the seizure network, adaptively
and selectively. If successful, the end result would be a reparative therapy
that leverages inherent brain plasticity mechanisms and may one day be
independent of chronically implanted electronics.

This project develops algorithms that capture the dynamic, frequency dependent
connectivity of the brain from real-time monitoring of the brain using ECoG
(Electrocorticography) and then identifying the "optimal" parameters of the LFS
(low-frequency electrical stimulation) to modulate the connectivity of the
epilepsy network with temporal and spatial precision. The complexity of modeling
such connectivity in real-time is managed by first segmenting neural activity
into different epochs and spectral bands and then deriving the sparse
connectivity in each of the segments. Effective connectivity in each spectral-
temporal segment is estimated using Granger causality. LFS is applied after
detecting interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) at spatial locations
identified from the model. These critical steps lead to the development of a
prototype system of real-time stimulation with a natural trade-off of complexity
versus accuracy prompting a compromise between battery life and efficacy. The
efficacy of spatially-optimized, activity-triggered LFS is evaluated by
measuring the irritability of the seizure network and comparing the rate of IEDs
detected during pre- and post-treatment periods. These experiments would point
the way to treatment of pharmacologically refractory epilepsy without surgical
resection of brain tissue and lead to reparative therapies leveraging inherent
brain plasticity. The proposed methodology presents the first of its kind
reparative, real-time, and selective network modulation to treat a debilitating
disease.