* 1406809
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Synthesizing the Mass-ratio and Novel-trait Hypotheses to Explain Variability in the Impact of Plant Invasions on Coupled C and N Cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2018
* USD 19,983.00

Invasive plant species can have significant detrimental effects on ecosystem
services that sustain ecosystem and human health. These impacts, however, are
highly variable and hard to predict, raising difficulties for policy makers
deciding how to allocate finite resources to address plant invasions. This
project aims to understand factors that drive variability in the impact of one
of the most widespread invasive plant species in the eastern US, Microstegium
vimineum (Japanese stiltgrass) on carbon and nitrogen cycling. Specifically, the
project will investigate the relative importance of two hypotheses that describe
variation in invader impacts: first, that species have greater impacts where
they are most abundant; and second, that species have greater impacts where they
function most differently from the resident vegetation with respect to the
ecosystem process of interest. Investigators will use a combination of
observational studies and field manipulations to test these hypotheses, and a
modeling approach to link drivers of variability in invader impacts to
biogeochemical processes that control nutrient fluxes from plant litter across
varying soil environments. The modeling approach will explore invader
characteristics and abundances that limit or promote its impact on carbon and
nitrogen cycling. By combining observational, experimental and modeling
approaches, this research will provide a unique and powerful synthesis that will
both inform the management of this species and address key questions of basic
ecological interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the role that individual
species play in controlling ecosystem processes is one of ecology?s grand
challenges as global distribution of organisms shift due to human activity. This
project addresses how individual invasive plant species can impact critical
ecosystem processes that have a strong influence on global climate, soil
fertility, ecosystem productivity, and ecosystem resilience. This research will
produce novel information on how the impacts of non-native species invasions on
ecosystem functions are mediated by the individual and interactive effects of
coexisting species. Such information will improve general theory on consequences
and mechanisms of non-native species invasions under different conditions, and
will advance our ability to predict when and where biological invasions will
have the greatest effects. This research will result in broader impacts in three
key areas. First, the project will provide excellent experience and broad
training for an undergraduate student each academic year of the project and will
substantially improve a PhD student?s research. Second, the PIs will disseminate
their research findings to land managers, other ecologists, and the general
public through a web site, web blog, public presentations, and publications.
Third, the project will provide important information for predicting where and
under what conditions invasive species will have the greatest impacts.
Specifically, the focal species, Microstegium, is one of the most common
invasive plants in eastern deciduous forests where it has significant community
and ecosystem impacts. Improving the ability of land managers to efficiently
target invasive removal and restoration efforts will greatly enhance
conservation and management efforts in the eastern U.S.