* 1406956
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Living on the Edge: Biodiversity and Metabolic Potential of Microbial Communities in Salt Crusts of the Hyperarid Atacama Desert
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,321.00

For decades, the hyperarid region of the Atacama Desert was considered to be the
dry limit to life, too hostile to sustain any growth. However, microorganisms
have recently been discovered colonizing salt crusts on the surface of soils. It
is hypothesized that salt is the key to their survival because it is able to
absorb moisture from the atmosphere and create a liquid solution in an otherwise
totally dry environment. This project is the first in-depth examination of the
microbial communities in this unique ecosystem, and is designed to achieve two
objectives: 1) to analyze how microbial biodiversity is affected by water
availability, and 2) to determine how small changes in the availability of water
influence the metabolic potential of the microbial communities. This will be
accomplished through the use of 16S rRNA gene sequencing, metagenomic analysis,
and confocal laser scanning microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
examines how microbial biodiversity and metabolic potential vary with climate
and moisture. The results will inform ecological theories that describe
geographical patterns of life on earth. These theories are essential for proper
management of ecosystems and for predicting biological response to global
changes. Completion of the proposed research will also lay critical groundwork
for future exploration of the desiccation and UV tolerance of the
microorganisms, which is of great interest to a variety of fields including,
biotechnology and renewable energy.