* 1406541
* Research Initiation Award Grant: Optimization of Heavy Metal Ions Remediation from Kaolinite Soil Using Molecular Micelles Chelators
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Sayo Fakayode, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2014
* USD 91,368.00

Winston-Salem State University's (WSSU) Research Initiation Award entitled -
Optimization of Heavy Metal Ions Remediation from Kaolinite Soil Using Molecular
Micelles Chelator - is a student-faculty collaborative research project to
develop a new analytical strategy for environmental heavy metal ion (HMI)
remediation of contaminated soil. Specifically, the study will investigate the
potential utility of molecular micelles (MMs) as chelators for HMI remediation
of kaolinite soil. In addition, the HMI remediation efficiency capability of MMs
will be compared with the remediation abilities of sodium dodecyl sulfate, a
monomeric surfactant, and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, a conventional
chelating agent. Furthermore, D-optimum experimental design will be employed to
simultaneously investigate the influence of experimental conditions to evaluate
the best conditions for HMI remediation. Compared with the current available HMI
remediation methods, the proposed study is more environmentally friendly,
capable of HMI remediation of diverse environmental sample matrixes and requires
few experiments, potentially reducing both the time and cost of
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is the
development of a better analytical strategy for environmental HMI remediation
and production of well prepared scientists through active student-faculty
collaborative research. Emphasis on research engagement of students is not only
the basis for gaining admission into graduate and professional schools, but it
will also significantly strengthen WSSU's newly American Chemical Society
accredited chemistry programs. The project aims to increase the number of
minority students trained in research at a Historically Black College and
University, ultimately improving students' learning and problem solving skills.