* 1406244
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Commitment and Disengagement in Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Javier Auyero, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2015
* USD 11,945.00

SES-1406244&lt;br/&gt;Javier Auyero&lt;br/&gt;Marcos Perez&lt;br/&gt;University
of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is much research on the factors
that contribute to a person's involvement in social movements, but most studies
focus on the recruitment phase and ignore what happens once a person is already
participating. This project studies the experiences of participants in a social
activist movement, with the purpose of addressing this central limitation in the
current understanding of activism. Specifically, the research will focus on a
social movement that emerged in the late 1990s in Argentina, when groups of
activists began to organize unemployed workers in order to demand access to jobs
and relief programs. For the last fifteen years, these groups have played a
crucial role in countless poor neighborhoods, managing workfare plans, providing
social services, and creating opportunities for petitioning the government. Our
project focuses on an intriguing puzzle. The profile of most new members and the
way in which they join the movement hardly seems conducive to sustained
activism. However, after recruitment some of them become increasingly committed,
making substantial sacrifices to stay involved, while others leave as soon as
the relative costs and benefits of participation change. The investigators will
use life-history interviews with current and former activists, as well as
participant observation of events carried out by their organizations to explain
this divergence to address a more general question: why do people follow
different trajectories after joining a social movement? The PIs hypothesize that
particular trajectories are followed based on the intrinsic rewards of
participation. Through the interplay between a person?s background and his or
her experiences in a movement, some activists gradually begin to see
participation as an end in itself and consequently make efforts to stay
involved. In contrast, other people fail to develop this perspective, and hence
when participation becomes too demanding or costly they are more likely to
leave. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will generate a greater understanding of grassroots organizations in both
developed and developing nations. Findings could potentially help government
agencies better address the demands of underprivileged populations. Activist
movements provide a space for petitioning the authorities and serve as effective
communication channels between disadvantaged groups and state officials. Study
results could also inform strategies to reinforce community institutions in poor
neighborhoods, offering solutions to the deterioration of public life and
reducing the levels of marginality and interpersonal violence.