* 1406371
* Knots and contact topology through holomorphic curves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lenhard Ng, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 436,686.00

The subjects of mathematics and physics have always been closely intertwined,
with each one motivating and informing progress in the other. This project
focuses on one current area of interplay, between topology (the study of shapes)
on the mathematical side and string theory on the physics side. The jumping-off
point for the project is an intriguing and unexpected connection, recently
discovered by the Principal Investigator and collaborators on both sides,
between two separate algebraic structures associated to knots in space: one in
topology developed by the Principal Investigator, and one in string theory that
has been the focus of much research in the past few years. In the course of this
project, the Principal Investigator will establish this connection, which is
currently only supported circumstantially; it is hoped that this work will
create and strengthen new lines of communication between mathematics and
physics, introducing techniques from each discipline into the other. The
Principal Investigator will also use this project to train future mathematicians
at all levels, from contributing to the annual USA Mathematical Olympiad for
high school students, to supervising the research of undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows, to organizing conferences and seminars for
established researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade, the Principal
Investigator has introduced and studied a package of knot invariants called knot
contact homology, which arises by counting holomorphic curves in certain
symplectic manifolds, using a method in symplectic geometry pioneered by Gromov
and Floer and more recently culminating in the Symplectic Field Theory of
Eliashberg, Givental, and Hofer. Previous work has shown that knot contact
homology is a robust invariant that is effective at distinguishing knots and
contains classical topological information about the knot. In 2012, it was
discovered by Aganagic, Ekholm, Vafa, and the Principal Investigator that knot
contact homology has an unexpected and potentially powerful relation to string
theory and mirror symmetry: the augmentation polynomial, a knot invariant
derived from knot contact homology, is conjectured to be equal to Aganagic and
Vafa's Q-deformed A-polynomial, which arises in the context of topological
strings. The Principal Investigator will approach this conjecture using
Lagrangian fillings and Gromov-Witten potentials. This could have significant
ramifications in different directions: in knot theory, it would establish a
variant of the AJ conjecture; in mirror symmetry, it would produce a new
approach via Symplectic Field Theory to constructing mirror Calabi-Yau 3-folds;
and in topological string theory, it would provide a mathematical foundation for
recent results. In related work, the Principal Investigator will develop and
strengthen the algebraic framework underneath certain aspects of Symplectic
Field Theory, including knot contact homology and symplectic homology. New
algebraic tools in this context, such as representation theory for differential
graded algebras, would enable one to more effectively attack problems in
symplectic geometry, in particular by analyzing Weinstein structures on
symplectic manifolds and Legendrian and transverse knots in contact manifolds.