* 1406650
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The developmental genetics of floral size variation in Saltugilia (Polemoniaceae):  Linking cellular phenotypes, genetics, floral size, and pollinator shifts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Pamela Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,291.00

The interactions between plants and their pollinators has been gaining increased
attention recently due to the recognition of extensive pollinator loss due to
anthropogenic activities. One trait that is important for pollinator success is
flower size. This project will investigate the cellular and genetic bases of
flower size as it relates to selection by pollinators in the phlox family of
flowering plants (Polemoniaceae). The goals of this study are: 1) determine the
phylogenetic relationships among members of genus Saltugilia, 2) measure cell
area of petal epidermal cells in developing flowers using microscopy techniques,
3) identify and isolate the possible genes responsible for the control of flower
size based on data from other species, 4) determine the expression profiles of
these genes in developing flowers and in species with different pollinators, and
5) demonstrate the function of these genes in regulating floral
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide the co-PI with training in
current genetic and cellular techniques, in addition to training two
undergraduates in laboratory techniques. Hands-on modules for high school
students will be developed to teach common laboratory techniques such as DNA
extractions and polymerase chain reaction. High school teachers will be trained
in these protocols to increase the implementation of the modules.