* 1406450
* Collaborative Research: High-Density, Cost-Effective Electrochemical Power Management with Real-Time Diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Daniel Steingart, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Electrochemical energy storage in the form of large arrays of small to medium
sized battery cells has the potential to improve U.S. energy independence,
efficiency, and security by enhancing the capabilities of the electrical grid
and increasing the viability and acceptance of widespread electric
transportation. With the ongoing decentralization of the electrical grid and the
growing penetration of low-carbon, but intermittent, renewable energy sources,
electrochemical storage may play a critical role in maintaining grid stability
while helping to manage energy flow between generation and end-load. However,
modern battery systems are complex with a wide range electrochemical processes
that underlie the simple metrics of cell voltage and current. Limitations of
current battery management systems (BMS) result in system overdesign and
operation well below maximum energy and power capabilities to minimize risk of
catastrophic failure and meet operational targets. There is a clear need for
transformational innovation in energy storage management technology, especially
at the intersection of distributed power electronics architectures, control
systems, and diagnostics. This project will support a collaborative effort that
spans these areas of critical importance, while also supporting a range of
broader impact activities through engagement in undergraduate teaching, K-12
students, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the collaborative
project, researchers at Dartmouth will develop a new class of highly-integrated
power electronics, used to manage individual cells in a large array, which will
benefit from low-cost semiconductor batch fabrication, Moore's law scaling, and
unprecedented performance in terms of efficiency versus power density. The
Dartmouth team will also develop a multi-objective control system, implemented
on top of the power electronics platform, to provide real-time diagnostics based
on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Researchers at Princeton will
support construction of the platform at the embedded systems and software level
and will develop the diagnostic toolset used to measure the state-of-charge
(SOC), state-of-health (SOH), and pending failure modes of individual cells in
real-time. To characterize the system and study EIS failure mode signatures, the
Princeton team will design a series of batteries with known characteristics and
flaws. This will open new dimensions in state-of-health diagnosis and provide
the ability to fingerprint important physical phenomena across multiple time-
constant regimes. By providing a realistic roadmap to cost-effective, highly-
granular management and diagnostics, the collaboration has the potential to
improve safety, performance, and cycle life while supporting reductions in pack
overbuild and overall cost.