* 1406296
* RET Site in Engineering and Computer Science: Energy and Sustainability - To Develop the Green Collar Workforce for the 21st Century
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Adah Leshem, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2018
* USD 499,992.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Iowa State University (ISU) entitled, "RET Site in Engineering and
Computer Science: Energy and Sustainability-To Develop the Green Collar
Workforce for the 21st Century", under the direction of Dr. Eric W. Cochran.

The technical focus of this Site is sustainable energy and materials. Faculty
mentors represent a diverse array of backgrounds supporting this theme and are
affiliated with a number of ISU centers and institutes including the NSF Center
for BioRenewable Chemicals (CBiRC) Engineering Research Center. Research
opportunities will include a broad spectrum of specialities within the theme of
energy and sustainability: from the production of fuels, chemicals, and polymers
from renewable feedstocks; to advances in photovoltaics and fuel cells; and to
novel water purification systems. These projects highlight the efforts at ISU to
develop technologies that will allow a continuation of current living standards
without jeopardizing the environment. Such topics are especially relevant for an
RET Site since they address needs that directly connect with students served by
participating teachers. Project Lead the Way (PLTW)-trained and Career and
Technology Education (CTE) high school instructors will receive authentic
research experiences in engineering disciplines for 7 weeks during the summer
plus additional activities during the academic school year. These experiences
will enable participants to prepare and inspire their students to become part of
the 21st century "green-collar" workforce. A total of 39 participants (13 per
year) will be selected from Iowa's pool of PLTW-trained high school teachers as
well as CTE instructors who are not yet part of the PLTW program. The objectives
of this Site are to: provide technology and pre-engineering instructors
immersion in engineering research and applications; help teachers learn to
translate this experience into increased student engagement in the STEM fields;
leverage the research experience into enhanced curriculum delivery designed to
recruit and prepare students for future careers in engineering and technology
fields; and form personal connections between ISU Engineeirng Faculty and Iowa
PLTW and CTE teachers, ultimately helping to raise the level of student
preparedness for the transition to college.

Broader impacts of the project include increased professional development for
high school PLTW and CTE teachers; increased opportunity for teachers to
catalyze their efforts in curriculum development to be able to share with their
students the rewarding and exciting opportunities associated with a career in
engineering; benefits to the U.S. economy resulting from a well-trained,
globally competitive workforce; and the introduction of RET participants to the
ISU Program for Women in Engineering (PWSE), Student Role Models.