* 1406063
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Neuroendocrine Mechanisms of Seasonal Aggression in Female Siberian Hamsters (Phodopus sungorus)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,007.00

Aggression is a widespread naturally-occurring behavior serving a range of
adaptive functions including access to mates and resources. Testosterone
produced by the gonads is frequently associated with high levels of aggression.
However, in seasonal breeding animals aggression can be both intense and
widespread during the non-breeding season when testosterone levels are
undetectable. This means that aggression is regulated by more than one mechanism
and there is little understanding of how non-breeding aggression is regulated.
This research seeks to understand the physiological mechanisms that underlie
seasonal variation of aggression using female Siberian hamsters as a model. This
work is highly integrative and unlike most other studies that examine single
factors it will consider many relevant endocrine parameters and their
interactions to understand how the brain and hormones function to control
seasonal aggression in females. These studies will provide important insights
into the physiological mechanisms mediating aggression, and social behavior more
broadly. Additionally, this proposal will allow for the continued mentorship of
undergraduates and high school students in research directly related to this
work. Communication of these research findings will include public lectures and
scientific conferences, and journal articles, as well as specialized regional
symposia and organizations focused on the advancement of underrepresented
minorities in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers' data so far
show that melatonin, the hormonal signal encoding photoperiod, drives seasonal
changes in aggression, and further that adrenal hormones, such as DHEA, rather
than gonadal hormones, may indirectly regulate aggression via conversion to
active androgens or estrogens during periods when animals are non-reproductive.
To examine seasonal switching from a gonadal to adrenal source of hormone, the
proposed research tests the hypotheses that DHEA mediates non-breeding season
aggression and that melatonin regulates DHEA release and its conversion to
active hormones, which can then act on neural receptors. Specific Aim 1 will
link seasonal changes in aggression and seasonal melatonin cues to neural
receptor profiles (androgen and estrogen receptors) as well as a converting
enzyme (aromatase, the enzyme that converts T to estradiol), via
immunocytochemistry. Specific Aim 2 will determine whether changes in DHEA
levels predict aggression among individuals across seasons by challenging
animals in different photoperiods with ACTH, and assessing DHEA release. Lastly,
Specific Aim 3 will test the hypothesis that short-day increases in melatonin
mediate seasonal changes in DHEA by isolating the adrenal gland from other
organs responsible for DHEA release and by using an in vitro bioassay to address
localized action of melatonin on this organ and its subsequent production of
DHEA. Collectively, the proposed work takes a whole organism approach and
examines direct hormonal action on multiple tissues to determine the mechanisms
underlying seasonal aggression in female hamsters using multiple levels of
analysis. To facilitate proper storage and access of data, manuscripts will be
published in open-access format, when possible, and on the lab website.
Presentations will be made at international and national conferences, as well as
in local venues to lay audiences, including high schools. Following processing
of samples for the primary project, samples will be archived, and made
accessible for collaborations from interested parties. Lastly, the PI will work
with Indiana University Information Technology Services to archive data on the
Research Data Complex (RDC), a dedicated server for hosting databases.