* 1406755
* Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort X (2014-2016) Program
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2017
* USD 986,949.00

The primary aim of the proposed Cohort X of the Texas A&amp;M University System
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the
Doctorate (BTD) program is to increase the pool of PhDs from groups historically
underrepresented (URGs) in science, technology, engineering or mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. One of the major objectives of this BTD program is to train
fellows in STEM fields with the academic and leadership skills necessary for the
highest chance of success at the next level. In higher education, the number of
Hispanic and African-American faculty and administrators at U.S. colleges and
universities is not representative of the nation's population. Unfortunately,
there are few graduate programs in the sciences and engineering that incorporate
the development of leadership skills that doctoral graduates will need to ascend
to and succeed in positions of leadership in the professions that they choose.
The broad significance of TAMUS LSAMP BTD is to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM by providing opportunities and activities at the
graduate level that lead to educational and career enhancements of these
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University's (TAMU's)
goal is to foster academic success in a cohort of twelve first-time graduate
students from URGs, BTD Fellows, by developing their readiness and encouraging
eagerness to complete STEM doctoral degrees and by preparing them to take their
place as leaders in interdisciplinary research and in academia. Objectives to
carry out the program's goals include (1) retention of Fellows into doctoral
programs with funding after completion of the BTD program, (2) preparation to
meet the challenges of completing doctoral programs of study and for possible
academic careers in higher education, and (3) leadership skill development
necessary to succeed as young STEM professionals upon completion of doctoral
programs of study. This will be achieved through collaborations among the
College of Science (COS), College of Engineering (COE), the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences (COALS), and the College of Geosciences (COG) at
TAMU. TAMU's BTD program will create a cohesive community of graduate students
across different disciplines within the university. The BTD Fellows, with
differing STEM disciplines and a common purpose, will share coordinated
resources and intellectually enriching group activities with each other, and
also with the larger population of STEM graduate students at TAMU, to the
benefit of all.