* 1406271
* CAREER: Molecular Diversity in Drug Delivery Design: An Integrated Approach to Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Debra Auguste, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/29/2016
* USD 301,911.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Harvard University is to synthesize and study patchy liposomal vehicles that
complement the heterogeneous cell adhesion molecules on the surface of cytokine-
activated endothelial cells. Endothelial cell surfaces are dynamic; they
segregate cell adhesion molecules within saturated lipid microdomains on the
cell surface to regulate binding and signaling events during inflammation.
Liposomes prepared from self-assembled lipid bilayer spheres encapsulating
aqueous volumes, lack the structural information embedded within cell membranes.
However, the proposed studies by partitioning unsaturated and saturated lipids
into liquid crystalline and gel phase domains, respectively, would affect local
molecular diffusion and elasticity. In addition to altering the mechanical
properties, the project will incorporate liposome microdomains to pattern
molecules, such as antibodies on the liposome surface to create concentrated,
segregated and specific binding regions. Drug delivery vehicles prepared from
liposomes with antibody and other ligand molecules are expected to significantly
enhance drug delivery binding with high specificity. As part of broader impact
outreach activities, the project will focus on embedding classroom research
experiences within the local high schools by creating an online resource for
instructional strategies with hands-on experiments that complement existing
curricula at these high schools. Graduate and undergraduate training will focus
on the use of cutting-edge techniques that assess features at the molecular
level.

This proposal is to develop drug delivery vehicles that target inflammation
sites, and could be useful in treating a number of conditions such as
cardiovascular diseases, cancers, etc. In addition, these drug delivery systems
will be able to target specific diseased areas of the body, and thus would have
the potential to improve therapeutic outcomes with reduced side effects that are
usually associated with the drug toxicity. The liposomal vehicles that will be
prepared by this project are expected to mimic immune cells (white blood cells)
that are interacting with the inflamed endothelial cells by responding to
inflammatory signals and concentrating on molecules of the cell membrane. This
dynamic restructuring of cell membrane molecules are expected to regulate the
immune response and in designing new drug delivery vehicles. This targeting of
liposomes with modified surfaces is expected to improve the delivery of drug
that binds with molecules on cell membranes with enhanced binding and
specificity. The outreach efforts part of this will focus on incorporating
research activities within curricula of the local high schools. The project will
create an online resource for instructional strategies and hands-on experiments
that complement existing curricula. This course website will highlight: 1)
research that utilize molecular and cellular diversity as design principles; and
2) as a resource for educators, parents, and students. Additionally, this
project plans to develop a course in "Diversity in Design" to expose high school
students to science and engineering topics, and research activities related to
this project. This "Diversity in Design" course will be taught as six modules at
the local high schools. Graduate and undergraduate training will focus on the
use of cutting-edge techniques that assess features at the molecular level.