* 1406732
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Species of a new generation -- Integration of massively parallel sequencing, morphological, and niche modeling data for species discovery and delimitation.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* John Freudenstein, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 18,788.00

Species represent the fundamental units of evolutionary and ecological studies,
yet their nature and how best to circumscribe them remain controversial. The
southeastern US Wild Gingers (Asarum subgenus Heterotropa) are a highly variable
group of plants that have long been problematic in their species boundaries, as
well as being poorly known with respect to reproductive biology. This project
develops a novel quantitative approach to delimiting species and characterizing
reproductive biology by integrating data from sophisticated morphological
analysis, climatic variables, geography, cutting-edge DNA analysis, and
pollinator identity that can serve as a model for future
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The appreciation, management, and conservation of
biodiversity are greatly hindered by ill-defined species boundaries, and this
project develops a powerful new tool for investigators of any biological system.
Collections made for the study will be publicly available to other
investigators. An online database will serve as an identification resource for
ecologists, land managers, and amateur botanists who encounter SE US Wild
Gingers. This project will support the research and training of a doctoral
student, and the public at large will benefit through exhibits at the annual
Ohio State University Museum of Biological Diversity Open House, public
lectures, and a laboratory module to be designed for use in introductory biology
courses.