* 1406418
* Symplectic Floer cohomology, mirror symmetry and gauge theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Timothy Perutz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2017
* USD 192,773.00

This project centers on a field called "symplectic topology", a part of geometry
with roots in the development of celestial mechanics, whose distinctive
mathematical features emerged in the 1980s. This field is today the subject of
vigorous research activity. The PI, along with his graduate students and
collaborators, will study connections between symplectic topology and two other
parts of geometry, each superficially quite different. The first connection is
to algebraic geometry, and is through the phenomenon known by the metaphorical
name of "mirror symmetry". In mirror symmetry, objects from symplectic topology
reappear in transformed form into algebraic form in a looking-glass world. The
inter-relations between the symplectic objects and those between the algebraic
objects match precisely, in an astounding way. Mirror symmetry was proposed
around 1990 by physicists working in string theory, and for years,
mathematicians could verify it in examples but not explain it. The PI contends
that a quarter-century after its inception, the time has come to prove basic
theorems conceptualizing how mirror symmetry works. The second connection is to
geometry in dimensions 3 and 4. Though the two parts of the project touch on
different parts of mathematics, they share common technical tools, the theories
of "pseudo-holomorphic curves" and "Floer cohomology". A significant part of the
proposal is to support the training of graduate students working on the two
aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two strands of the research
proposed in this project are both based on symplectic Floer cohomology, a tool
in symplectic topology that is proving as incisive and adaptable as singular
cohomology is in algebraic topology. One strand explores structural aspects of
the connection between symplectic topology and algebraic geometry known as
mirror symmetry, in the setting of Calabi-Yau (CY) manifolds. Homological mirror
symmetry, and the Fukaya category of a CY manifold, take center-stage. Key to
the proposal is the investigation of logical relationships between different
formulations of mirror symmetry: constructions of mirror pairs; homological
mirror symmetry; Hodge-theoretic mirror symmetry; and enumeration of holomorphic
curves. The other strand arises from the relationship between the symplectic and
gauge-theoretic versions of Floer cohomology. The proposal is to develop a new
Floer cohomology theory for 3-manifolds using the same mechanism as the hugely
productive Heegaard Floer homology of Ozsvath-Szabo, but working not in a
symmetric product of the Heegaard surface (made a complex curve), as one does in
Heegaard Floer homology, but rather in a space of "stable pairs" on the Heegaard
surface, consisting of a rank 2 holomorphic vector bundle together with a
holomorphic section thereof. This theory is likely to have close relations both
to Heegaard Floer homology itself, and to instanton Floer theory, and may
illuminate the relations between those theories.