* 1406224
* Collaborative Research:  A Distributed Approximate Dynamic Programming Approach for Robust Adaptive Control of Multiscale Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 167,000.00

This project will develop a new type of general multiagent system for management
and control of complex systems, in which the agents work together in a fully
cooperative way to maximize global performance over time, in the face of
nonlinearity and complexity. As a testbed to prove the value of the new
approach, they will simulate the challenges of: (1) earthquake response,
representing a class of disasters with very rapid occurrence, short lead times
and restricted geographic extent; and (2) drought-induced famine relief,
representing the class of disasters with longer forecast and lead times, and
larger geographic extent. The results will be widely disseminated and will feed
into programs for education and outreach, including a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Duke and the NSF-funded IGERT on Wireless
Intelligent Sensor Networks, feeding into summer schools and international
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge here is to develop a new
version of adaptive, approximate dynamic programming (ADP) which is fully
distributed,&lt;br/&gt;to address the case of multiscale dynamical systems. The
work builds on recent work of the lead PI on Distributed Optimal Control
(DOC),&lt;br/&gt;and includes development of optimal restriction operators for
dimensionality reduction in parts of the system, and exploitation of methods
from the field of partial differential equations (PDE) and stochastic
differential equations (SDE).