* 1406741
* Collaborative Research: TRANSFORM: TRANSFORMing liberal arts careers to meet demand for advanced manufacturing workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Chitra Javdekar, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,996.00

Unlike technical majors such as engineering, unemployment among non-technical
majors is high; 8.9% for Social Sciences and 9.4% for Liberal Arts graduates.
Unemployment or underemployment of a high percentage of these recent college
graduates is problematic for the economic vitality of our nation. These students
do not contribute to the nation's economic growth through either their
intellectual skills or their spending power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Northeastern University and MassBay Community College are
collaboratively implementing an innovative TRANSFORM model to retool the skill
set of liberal arts college graduates to prepare them for careers in
manufacturing. The project is enabling the targeted population to step into the
advanced manufacturing jobs that otherwise go unfilled due to shortage of
qualified job seekers nationwide. The TRANSFORM program is also increasing the
awareness of manufacturing careers among members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The TRANSFORM model is using the share-the-burden approach
among the concerned constituents (government, industry and technical education
providers). The modular, 12-month fast-track curriculum of the TRANSFORM program
includes courses and internships. The industry-based internships are providing
students with project-based learning experience to facilitate students' career
transition. TRANSFORM is offering a scalable pedagogically proven manufacturing
curriculum for liberal arts graduates that can be replicated at the local,
regional, and national levels, and in other sectors such as energy. Social media
is being used to reach out to liberal arts graduates on a broad
scale.&lt;br/&gt;The three guiding evaluation questions for this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;1) What is an appropriate model of self-efficacy associated with
preparing the target population to confidently and capably enter the
manufacturing workforce?&lt;br/&gt;2) Do the various components of the program
successfully prepare the target population to enter the manufacturing
workforce?&lt;br/&gt;3) What institutional capacities are needed to sustain the
program over time?