* 1406812
* Activatable Fluorescent Protein/Metal Hybrid Raman Nano-Probes for Biosensing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Fabien Pinaud, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to the University of Southern California is
to develop probes that are activatable fluorescent protein/metal hybrids that
will be useful in Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) for biosensing.
Detecting individual pathogenic cells and eliminating them is crucial for early
cancer detection and treatments. Raman nanoprobes are among a handful of probes
that could provide such high detection sensitivity. Yet, current formulations
are molecularly bulky and lacking in specificity and sensitivity, which
ultimately limits their efficacy in research and medical settings. This project
offers a novel design and implementation of Raman nanoprobes for biosensing,
with the goal of achieving highly sensitive but specific detection of cancer
cells. Educational and outreach components are an integral part of the project.
The proposed activities engage participating researchers and students in highly
interdisciplinary research to prepare the next generation of scientists to face
the growing demands for interdisciplinary skills at the interface between
physics, chemistry and biology. The program also integrates modern technology
and interdisciplinary science for young students. Mentoring and cross-
disciplinary training of traditionally underrepresented undergraduate and high-
school students on emerging nanotechnology methods and on the use of advanced
photonic instrumentations will be realized through established programs at the
University of Southern California, through partnership with non-profit
organizations and through outreach to high-schools in the Greater Los Angeles
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic
Raman nanoprobes are highly promising agents for the next generation of
biomedical imaging and treatment but current limitations in their design,
including large sizes (&gt;100 nm) and poor Raman signals, significantly impede
their potential for major breakthroughs in molecular imaging and theranostics.
This project will investigate the use of split-fluorescent proteins as both
molecular glue and Raman reporters for cell-directed assembly of small and
activatable surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) metal nanoprobes, with the
aim of achieving highly sensitive and specific Raman detection of cancer cells.
The project offers a novel approach to SERS biosensing and detection and may
allow significant advances in the basic understanding of (i) photonic properties
emerging at natural chromophore/metal nanoparticle interfaces, (ii) Raman
enhancement processes in well-defined nanostructures and (iii) molecular factors
affecting the assembly of nanomaterials into controlled nanoclusters in live
cells. The studies are expected to contribute knowledge and techniques that will
be broadly useful for the directed assembly of nanoparticles into metamaterials
and into catalytic/electronic nanostructures to be used in biomedical,
prosthetics, therapeutics and fundamental research applications. An integral
part of this project is the training and mentoring of underrepresented students
in interdisciplinary research in nanotechnology, biomaterials and photonics,
through the integration of research findings and instrumentation into classroom
teaching, outreach programs to local high-schools, and general public
presentations. Significant enhancement of the infrastructure for research and
education at the University of Southern California is also provided by the
implementation of an optical set-up for single molecule SERS measurements.