* 1406995
* Research Experiences for Teacher Advancement In Nanotechnology (RETAIN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Justin Hess, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 494,220.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis entitled, "Research
Experiences for Teacher Advancement In Nanotechnology) for Green Energy and
Technology (RETAIN)", under the direction of Dr. Maher E.
Rizkalla.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing an RET site at IUPUI will provide
pedagogical training and assistance to STEM teachers within the school districts
that comprise metro Indianapolis. Participation will enhance teacher development
through graduate course credits and infuse STEM curricula with inquiry-based
methodology in order to generate STEM interest among students. More importantly,
due to the multidisciplinary nature of nanotechnology, trained teachers will be
equipped to integrate multiple STEM subjects into their curriculum providing
students with subject-to-subject connectivity comparable to real-world
collaborative expectations. This program complements IUPUI's undergraduate
nanotechnology-track, funded through an NSF Nanotechnology Undergraduate
Education (NUE) award, by investing in Indiana's K-12 community to ultimately
produce graduates with interest and college-ready skills for success in
nanotechnology-related degree programs. The proposed framework provides a
portable model that can be implemented at other institutions and teaching
modules that can be implemented on a national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute (INDI) at IUPUI proposes to
establish RETAIN an immersive research and training program in the
multidisciplinary field of nanotechnology for a total of 30 (10 per year)
Indiana high school teachers from high needs, metropolitan school districts, for
six weeks during the summer. RETAIN will offer participants: 1) knowledge of
topics and careers in nanotechnology; 2) hands-on laboratory experiences in
inquiry-based science; 3) participant-designed teaching modules developed to
meet existing state and national science standards; 4) connection to a
professional network of teachers and scientists as well as on-site RETAIN
support during module implementation; and 5) professional development and
college credit programming. Annually, five refined teaching modules will be
disseminated on the Hoosier Association of Science Teachers, I-STEM Network, and
TeachEngineering websites. The two major goals of RETAIN are: 1) Train 30 high
school teachers (from high-needs metropolitan school districts) in inquiry and
discovery-based science from hypothesis development and experimental design to
data collection and dissemination of results, while introducing STEM concepts,
applications, and careers options. 2) Integrate RETAIN content into high school
classrooms by translating research experiences into 15 (five per year) inquiry-
based, nanotechnology teaching modules designed to boost excitement and student
interest in the STEM disciplines and careers.