* 1406774
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The consequences of natural and anthropogenic geographic range expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* David Jablonski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 12,816.00

A major scientific challenge today is understanding the consequences of
biological invasions in response to environmental change. The proposed research
uses fossil and modern data on marine clams and snails to compare evolutionary
changes in species that have expanded geographic ranges along their native
coasts with changes in invasive species that have crossed ocean basins with
(accidental or intentional) human assistance. This research will evaluate
biological characteristics that may confer an expansion advantage (for example,
body size), analyze changes in shell shape between the source and colonized
regions in both native and invasive expansions, and experimentally assess the
contribution of genetic evolution to such shell shape
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this research seeks to understand
biological invasions in marine systems through comparisons with ?native? species
expansions, where the natives are coming into contact with novel climates and
new ecological communities. Despite the negative consequences of invasive
species, they may offer a window into the rapid evolutionary adaptation that
occurs in a recently colonized region over contemporary timescales. The proposed
research has the potential to give insight into the evolutionary responses of
species to past climate change and may help us predict how species adapt in
response to expansions under current climate change.