* 1406823
* Dissertation Research: Sound Communication and Reproduction in Fishes: The Cost of Underwater Noise to Fish Reproduction, Larval Sensory Development, and Acoustic Sensitivity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Joseph Luczkovich, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 16,093.00

Vessel noise is a worldwide concern because it is known to alter behavior in
marine animals. While fishes show avoidance behavior to vessel noise, research
is needed to determine how vessel noise impacts fish reproduction and larval
development. In this study, the oyster toadfish (Opsanus tau) will be used as a
model organism because males call to females using "boatwhistle" sounds and care
for benthic, substrate-attached embryos at dens. Vessel noises can mask mating
calls, which may lower female den visitation rates and alter larval development.
If this study demonstrates that vessel noise alters reproduction and larval
survival, then it is likely to encourage the development of noise-quieting
technology for vessels, provide additional evidence to justify ocean soundscape
monitoring and could impact policies that limit acoustic disturbance in
protected habitats, e.g., marine protected areas, seagrass beds, and coral and
oyster reefs. The investigators will continue to participate in community
outreach through exhibitions and demonstrations that address the area of
bioacoustics, and the findings will be used in undergraduate and graduate
courses.

This study will determine if vessel noise alters adult and larval behavior and
survival. Larval toadfish exposed to vessel noise experimentally will be
examined for changes in sensory anatomy, sensitivity to sounds and noise, and
preferred sound frequency of juvenile toadfish during settlement. Adult and
larval toadfish will be exposed to two types of vessel noise (outboard motor and
large vessel) and snapping shrimp sounds (natural sounds, control). Reproductive
output will be monitored weekly and larvae will be collected for microscopic
examination of neurological development of sound-producing (swimbladder
musculature) and morphometric examination of sound-receiving (lateral line and
inner ears) structures. Larvae in each treatment will be tested for sensitivity
to particle motion and sound frequency preferences to determine if acoustic
imprinting occurs during development in fishes. The researchers hypothesize that
vessel noise will reduce male calling rates, lower reproductive output, and
cause larvae to change their acoustic behavior during and/or after settlement,
potentially altering survival.