* 1406524
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking microbial community assembly and elemental cycles in a natural micro-ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,384.00

Communities of microorganisms are found in every environment on the planet and
perform myriad ecological functions critical to the health of the biosphere. The
decomposition of dead organic matter and the subsequent recycling of nutrients
back into the food web are roles played primarily by microbes, in habitats
ranging from the human digestive tract to the ocean floor. Like plants and
animals, these microbial communities experience turnover with time (succession)
resulting from both environmental change and interactions such as competition
and predation. Furthermore, since microbes such as bacteria and archaea can have
very rapid generation times and exchange genetic material with unrelated
individuals, they can rapidly adapt to, and thrive in, a novel environment. The
proposed research has two main goals: first, to investigate the time-scale of
microbial adaptation and community succession within a micro-ecosystem, and
second, to evaluate the consequences of these changes for the breakdown and
recycling of nutrients in the food web. An understanding of how microbial
succession affects processes operating at a variety of biological scales has
direct relevance to agricultural production and land management, and the
proposed research will test some long-standing assumptions regarding the role of
competition in driving nutrient cycling within an ecosystem. In addition to
supporting the work of a graduate student, undergraduates will be mentored.

Pitcher plants will be used as model ecosystems to examine the effects of
microbial succession on nutrient cycling. The California pitcher plant,
Darlingtonia californica, is a carnivorous plant that receives nutrients from
insect prey captured by specialized water-filled leaves. Digestion is enabled by
an aquatic microbial community that rapidly develops and changes over a
pitcher's lifespan. Because microbial ecological interactions and evolution
often occur on similar time-scales, it is possible to study the causes and
consequences of microbial succession at a variety of biological scales within a
developing pitcher plant ecosystem. The proposed research includes three main
approaches. First, replicated environmental genomic and metabolic studies will
be used to assess how the decomposing abilities of a pitcher's microbial
community change with time. Next, a laboratory competition assay will test
whether microbial communities become better at competing for growth-limiting
nutrients as succession proceeds. Finally, a field study utilizing stable
isotopes of nitrogen and carbon will link temporal changes in a microbial
community to their rates of nutrient cycling within the pitcher micro-ecosystem.