* 1406225
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Active Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Smith, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Computer and network security is currently challenged by the need to secure
diverse network environments including clouds and data-centers, PCs and
enterprise infrastructures. This diversity of environments is coupled to
increased attack sophistication. Today's tools for securing network and
computing infrastructures can be painstakingly composed and configured using
available components, but fail to automatically learn from their environment and
actively protect it. This research introduces Active Security, which is an
architectural approach with fundamental advantages for network defenders; Active
Security continuously senses threats and adapts defenses to those threats,
including those previously unseen.

Active Security prototyping and applications incorporate a novel high-rate
decision procedure that avoids manual intervention. The project addresses: (1)
the characteristics of network 'sensors' most useful to an observe-orient-
decide-act (OODA) loop; (2) decision and control algorithms for determining
appropriate actions based on sensed events; (3) the infrastructure required for
robust and trustworthy systems requiring minimal human-in-the-loop interaction;
(4) automated defense approaches viable in diverse network settings that do no
harm and are recoverable; and (5) metrics for performance assessment of an
Active Security system such as responsiveness and accuracy.

Active Security's central themes of network security, network sensing, and
automated defenses integrate naturally into both graduate and undergraduate
education at participating institutions, including both midshipmen at the United
States Naval Academy and cadets at the United States Military Academy. Network
security is an increasing concern for society at large, and an Active Security
implementation is straightforward to deploy on networks equipped with
programmable software defined networking (SDN) controllers, a technology
increasingly present in data center, carrier and enterprise networks.