* 1406190
* Fast algorithms, computational complexity, and subconvexity bounds in analytic number theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ghaith Hiary, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 144,528.00

The topics in this proposal fall within the area of number theory. This is a
fundamental area in mathematics interested in understanding the integers. There
is deep information about the integers encoded in certain analytic objects
called L-functions. And there have been many fruitful interactions between
L-functions and computational methods. Such interactions started with the
Riemann zeta function which, famously, Riemann computed numerically. The role of
computation in analytic number theory has continued to grow since then. The
proposer will investigate certain L-functions from a computational viewpoint.
This includes investigating their computational complexity, the derivation of
new fast algorithms, with an application to learning about integer
factorization, and the use of computation as an experimental tool in the study
of L-functions.

The proposer will study several independent topics in analytic and computational
number theory. The main topic is to investigate connections between subconvexity
estimates of the Riemann zeta function, on the one hand, and its computational
complexity on the other. Part of the novelty here is that these two aspects are
weakly related in general. However, they connect strongly for the Riemann zeta
function in the critical strip, and also for Dirichlet character sums to a
power-full modulus, perhaps even for more number-theoretic objects. One goal of
the project is to translate recent progress between the analytic and
computational viewpoints. Another topic concerns the full moment conjectures of
``families'' of L-functions with symplectic or orthogonal symmetry. The proposer
aims to derive uniform asymptotics for the full moment conjectures for such
families, extending previous joint work with Michael Rubinstein in the unitary
case. A third topic is to develop the recent algorithm for detecting squarefree
numbers that was derived in joint work with Andrew Booker and Jon Keating,
especially in relation to lower bounds for the growth rate of character sums
over the primes.