* 1406078
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The intragenomic conflict between the meiotic driver Abnormal Chromosome 10 and its suppressor in Zea mays.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,218.00

Abnormal chromosome 10 (Ab10) is a chromosome found in maize that breaks the
rules of Mendelian genetics. The general assumption of genetics is that every
trait, gene, and chromosome has a 50% chance of being passed on to the next
generation. In most varieties of maize, Ab10 cheats these odds and shows up in
70-80% of offspring. However, other varieties suppress this selfish activity.
This research will investigate how the individual maize plant fights back and
stops the selfish chromosome from spreading quickly through the population. The
use of high-throughput sequencing across a geographically diverse group of maize
varieties with the ability to suppress Ab10 will identify the genes that evolved
to police selfish elements and restore balance to the
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Selfish elements are likely common in nature. An
understanding of the race between a cheating chromosome and the genes that
evolved to stop it tells the story of natural selection acting at the DNA level.
Ab10 cheats during meiosis, a crucial process by which an organism parcels its
DNA into gametes (seeds and pollen) and then passes it on to its offspring.
Understanding how the selfish chromosome is halted illuminates the steps of the
careful dance of chromosomes through meiosis and into the next generation.