* 1406533
* Event Triggered Unknown Networked Control System Design by using Adaptive Dynamic Programming
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Jagannathan Sarangapani, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

This project will develop new universal control designs for Network Control
Systems (NCS) such as the new distributed control systems needed for the smart
grid and modern automotive systems. Unlike many traditional NCS systems, these
will be designed from the start so as to maximize performance over time, fully
accounting for communication delays in networks and unexpected events, as well
as nonlinearities, continuous random disturbances and other issues which this PI
has addressed in the past. He intends to develop rigorous mathematical proofs
that these new designs will always lead to stable operation. He will also
maintain a pipeline to immediate practical applications, through his existing
Industry-University Center on Intelligent Maintenance. The designs are intended
to be general, learning-based and massively parallel, in a way which may also
help us understand how mammal brains can perform tasks beyond the scope of more
traditional types of design.

These designs will be an extension of work previously funded by NSF, described
in the Handbook of RLADP, edited by Lewis and Liu. ADP, like linear programming,
is a class of challenges, not just one specific method, though there are
relations between the successful methods. ADP includes all the methods aimed at
the general problem of multistage optimization in the face of nonlinearity and
stochastic disturbance. In order to cope with general nonlinear tasks, this
project will include neural networks which have been proved to be more effective
as approximators of general nonlinear functions than more traditional systems.
The chief novelty here is the ability to combine these capabilities with the
presence of communication delays and random discrete events, which are an
important practical issue in most NCS.