* 1406399
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Divergent selection and behavioral isolation due to anthropogenic ecosystem fragmentation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Craig Layman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,322.00

Recent research conducted in natural ecosystems has demonstrated that shorter,
decadal, timescales are relevant for the study of evolutionary processes in wild
populations. Such rapid evolutionary changes have been discovered in a wide
range of species, many of which are of economic and ecological importance (e.g.,
commercially valuable fish and agricultural pests). Consequently, human-driven
ecological changes such as climate change, pollution, extinction, and
overexploitation are increasingly implicated as agents of evolutionary change.
One emerging result of this burgeoning research direction is that animal
communication systems, such as those used in mate choice, predator detection,
and species identification, are particularly sensitive to anthropogenic
ecosystem alterations. This study addresses how communication systems are
evolving due to altered ecological conditions. Data such as those generated by
this study are critical for the advancement of a more integrated understanding
of wild populations on an increasingly human-dominated planet. Integrating
scientific research and education is also an important component. Education
programs, and the development of field-based environmental courses, will build
from long-term collaborative relationships with stakeholders such as local
Bahamian NGOs (e.g., Friends of the Environment) and directly supports
continuation and expansion of programs dedicated to the dissemination of
conservation information and science relevant for contemporary and emerging
environmental management scenarios in the United States and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address the role of terrestrial
anthropogenic ecosystem changes in altering the evolution of aquatic fish
communication systems in which the evolutionary interests of the signaler
(typically male) and the receiver (typically female) diverge. In these types of
systems conflicting interests select for males to exploit existing female
preferences by exaggerating their signals and for females to discriminate
against such males. Importantly, exploitation by signalers, and the stability of
the communication system, is theorized to be kept in check by high ecological
costs, such as predation risk, paid by low quality males that exaggerate their
signals (costs of lying). This research will evaluate this prediction using a
series of coastal wetlands in which predators have been extirpated due to
habitat fragmentation. Specifically, two hypotheses are tested: 1) anthropogenic
predator extirpation (and thus lower costs of dishonesty) will cause increased
rates of dishonest signaling in males, and 2) the strength of female preference
will be positively correlated with the degree of male dishonesty. In essence, we
predict that anthropogenic predator extirpation will result in higher rates of
male dishonesty and a decrease in female preference for those signals
representing the erosion of a functional communication system.