* 1406236
* Collaborative Research:  Reconstruction of Carbon Monoxide in the Pre-Industrial Arctic Atmosphere from Ice Cores at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Vasilii Petrenko, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 231,385.00

The main goal of the proposed work is to provide the first reliable record of
pre-industrial carbon monoxide (CO) concentration and stable isotope composition
in the Arctic atmosphere, which would also be representative of a large part of
the Northern Hemisphere. Carbon monoxide concentrations are a crucial component
of any complete modern or past atmospheric data set because CO plays a key role
in global atmospheric chemistry by being the largest single sink of hydroxyl
radicals in the lower atmosphere. Carbon monoxide concentration in combination
with stable isotopes is also a powerful tracer for large-scale biomass burning
variations. Pre-industrial carbon monoxide concentration in the northern
hemisphere (where anthropogenic impacts have been by far the strongest) is
poorly characterized, with prior measurements made using an older technique in
the 1990s on only a few samples from one ice core. No published carbon monoxide
isotope measurements from northern hemisphere ice cores are currently available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to collect a new large diameter
ice core near Summit, Greenland using the Blue Ice Drill (BID), providing ice
from 80 to 170 meters depth (air age from about 1960 to about 1600 AD).
Continuous measurements of carbon monoxide concentration would provide a high-
resolution record over the entire ice core and identify ice layers where carbon
monoxide is well preserved. High-precision discrete analyses of carbon monoxide
concentration and isotopic composition would then target ice from these layers.
Continuous analyses of trace chemistry and discrete analyses of trace organics
would also be conducted to establish the ice core chronology and improve
understanding of mechanisms of in situ carbon monoxide production in ice.
Atmospheric histories for carbon monoxide concentration and isotopic composition
would be derived using a combination of firn-ice gas transport and inverse
models, and the implications for pre-industrial carbon monoxide budget would be
investigated with the use of a climate-chemistry model. The proposed approach
maximizes the chance of obtaining a reliable history of carbon monoxide
concentration and isotopic composition through careful site selection and the
application of novel ice drilling and analytical techniques. Results from the
study will be made available to the scientific community and the general public
through the NSIDC and NOAA Paleoclimatology data centers. The work will
contribute to the training of two graduate and 2 undergraduate students, support
an early career investigator, and establish several new collaborations among the
investigators. The investigators have a strong history of and commitment to
scientific outreach in the forms of media interviews, participation in
educational films, as well as speaking to schools and the public about their
research, and will continue these activities as part of the proposed work.