* 1406960
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  An integrative genomic study of multiple domestication events in squash and pumpkin (Cucurbita, Cucurbitaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,461.00

Domestication has radically altered wild species to meet human needs, producing
traits dramatically different from those seen in the wild. This study will use
genetic and genomic approaches to obtain new insights into squash and pumpkin
(Cucurbita) domestication and identify genes that may have been involved in the
domestication process. Cucurbita is unique in that there have been multiple
domestication events from diverse wild ancestors in just this single genus.
These multiple domestication events make Cucurbita an especially valuable system
in which to study crop evolution. Cutting-edge DNA sequencing technologies will
be used to resolve species relationships within Curcubita that have eluded
researchers for decades. This framework will provide the context for
investigating the genetic basis of domestication in squashes. The genes
underlying domestication will be inferred from analyses of DNA diversity in all
expressed genes across diverse wild and cultivated populations of two squash
species.&lt;br/&gt; There is an urgent need for basic plant research that
addresses the connection between the study of plants and the practice of
agriculture, as breeding programs alone are not increasing crop yield
sufficiently to meet the demands of projected population increase. Research,
such as that described here, to identify specific genes underlying domestication
traits will enable the development of efficient crop improvement techniques
needed to meet this rising demand. This research will also provide co-PI Kates
with significant training opportunities in diverse molecular and analytical
techniques. In addition, the innovative combinations of techniques employed in
this project will model new, inexpensive ways to study the genetics of plant
adaptation in the context of plant relationships. Thus, the study will
contribute to a broader understanding of domestication and adaptation.