* 1406366
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Possible evolution of a novel ZW chromosome system in a hybrid laboratory population of the copepod Tigriopus californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,972.00

Among sexually reproducing organisms, the allocation of maleness and femaleness
to offspring occurs in many ways, most familiarly, via sex chromosomes (XX
females and XY males in humans, flies; ZW females and ZZ males in birds,
butterflies). Although closely-related species often differ in their sex
determination mechanisms, why those evolve is poorly understood. The marine
crustacean Tigriopus californicus has many genetically isolated populations and
polygenic (genetic, but non-chromosomal) sex determination. Previous work with a
laboratory-created hybrid population revealed that females, but not males, are
often heterozygous across an entire chromosome (bearing one copy from each
original population), suggesting that it could be acting as a Z/W sex
chromosome. This project will use next-generation DNA sequencing on individuals
from this hybrid population and its wild progenitors to identify identify the
sex determination mechanism in each population and to ascertain whether the
hybrid population has evolved a novel sex chromosome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the genetic basis of sex determination in copepods, one of
the most abundant animal groups on the planet. Sex chromosomes are a predictable
outcome of evolution. The emergence of a sex chromosome in a hybrid population
would suggest that sex determination mechanism switches could be a consequence
of hybridization-induced genomic disruption. This is especially important in
light of the increasing hybridization occurring in natural populations due to
human-driven processes, such as species introductions and climate change-induced
range shifts. In addition, the project will include extensive mentoring of
undergraduates, and an evolution and science communication workshop at the
Aquarium of the Pacific, Long Beach, CA