* 1406962
* Assessing the Impacts of Arctic Amplification on the Midlatitude Circulation with a Hierarchy of Atmospheric General Circulation Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Yutian Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2018
* USD 349,959.00

Arctic amplification refers to the tendency of the high latitudes of the
Northern Hemisphere to warm faster than the rest of the globe. This effect has
been documented both in the warming trends of recent decades and in climate
model simulations of greenhouse gas-induced climate change, and is closely
related to the decline of Arctic sea ice and reductions in Fall snow cover over
northern Eurasia.

This project addresses the potential for Arctic amplification to influence the
weather and atmospheric circulation of the middle latitudes of the Northern
Hemisphere. Motivation for the work comes from recent simulations which suggest
that reductions in Arctic sea ice in late Summer and early Fall promotes the
negative phase of the Northern Annular Mode, in which sea level pressure is high
over the Arctic and the Northern Hemisphere jet streams and storm tracks are
shifted southward. Further motivation comes from recent claims that Arctic
amplification has resulted in an increase in the frequency of atmospheric
blocking events, which are associated with extreme weather events including the
cold air outbreaks over the US during the winter of 2013/2014 as well as recent
summer heat waves over Europe.

The research examines the effect of Arctic amplification on atmospheric
circulation, including jet streams, storm tracks, and blocking events, using a
hierarchy of models of varying levels of complexity. In this modeling approach,
the simplest models are used to isolate and study the fundamental dynamical
mechanisms responsible for the behaviors found in more complex and realistic
simulations. A key concern of the research is that Arctic amplification will act
in concert with other consequences of global warming, including the warming of
tropical upper troposphere, and previous work suggests that the warming of the
tropical upper troposphere leads to a poleward shift of jets and storm tracks
which will somewhat offset the impact of Arctic amplification. A second concern
is the possible role of the stratosphere in mediating connections between the
Arctic and the midlatitude circulation. Previous work shows that circulation
changes at stratospheric levels over the polar cap can influence midlatitude
weather, and that these influences can propagate slowly downward, resulting in
time lags up to a few months between high-latitude forcing and midlatitude
response.

As noted above, the topic of this research has societal broader impacts due to
the potential for Arctic amplification to produce changes in the weather
patterns of the Northern Hemisphere midlatitudes, in particular over the
populous regions of the US and Europe. Even subtle shifts of jet streams and
storm tracks can yield significant changes in rainfall and available water
resources, and blocking events are an important source of extreme winter cold
and summer heat waves. The research conducted here may be of value for both
long-term climate projections and near-term weather forecasting.