* 1406750
* CAREER: Understanding and Analyzing User-Prosthesis Interaction for Designing a Volitional Controller for Powered Lower Limb Prostheses
* CSE,IIS
* 06/30/2013,01/31/2018
* He Huang, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 490,439.00

Although volitional control of prosthetic arms has been studied intensively in
recent years, similar technology has not yet been developed for lower limb
prostheses, due in part to the lack of control capability in current passive
prosthetic legs. Two emerging technologies, powered lower limb prostheses and
neural-machine interfaces (NMI), have opened up new possibilities for allowing
leg amputees to operate prostheses intuitively and to perform various activities
in a natural way. It remains, however, to demonstrate the feasibility of
volitional control for powered prosthetic legs. This is the PI's goal in the
current project: to develop and implement a novel volitional controller that
allows users with transfemoral amputations to operate a multifunctional, powered
prosthetic leg intuitively and safely. To this end, she will systematically
investigate and quantify the interaction effects between lower limb amputees and
powered artificial legs. Intrinsic control (i.e., control based on intrinsic
mechanical feedback) for a prototype powered transfemoral (TF) prosthesis will
be developed with finite-state machine and impedance control mechanisms so that
it can assist amputees in performing various activities in weight bearing and
non-weight bearing situations. The design of the volitional control will be
based on a multi-model engineering framework that integrates intent decoders
with intrinsic prosthesis control so as to create feed-forward control in a
powered TF prosthesis while ensuring amputee safety. Finally, a proof-of-concept
prototype of a volitionally-controlled, powered TF prosthesis will be
implemented and evaluated in real time on patients with TF amputations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project outcomes will significantly
advance lower limb prostheses technology, which will in turn lead to quality of
life improvements for the large and growing population of lower limb amputees.
Similar technology should be applicable to control of powered orthotics, which
would benefit patient populations with neuromotor deficits. The experimental
data collected in the project will shed light on human motor control mechanisms,
which should benefit diverse fields such as kinesiology and neuroscience. The
new technologies developed in this research (including sensors, communication,
algorithms, control, etc.) should help advance research across human-centered
computing (including, for example, exoskeleton control and wearable sensors for
health monitoring). Through integration of her research into comprehensive
education and outreach programs, the PI will help educate the next generation of
engineers and scientists, who will impact the future of science and technology.