* 1406320
* Expanding Lifelong STEM Career Pathways in Sustainable Building Science Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alison Pugh, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 862,080.00

South Seattle Community College, Washington State University, and Edmonds
Community College are working with industry partners to prepare technicians for
the sustainable building science technology workforce. Due to the effects of the
Baby Boom bubble, retirements in the energy efficiency industry are estimated to
reach 23 percent of building energy managers in the next five years. As these
skilled and experienced employees prepare for retirement, the market for an even
more advanced workforce is expected to grow. More complex building codes and
ever emerging technologies create increased demand for increasingly skilled
labor. The institutions are addressing industry needs by implementing career and
education pathways at all levels of the skill continuum. The potential societal
benefits include producing a stable supply of highly skilled and diverse
graduates to serve as managers of sustainable buildings into the future.
Further, outreach activities for area high school students are laying the
groundwork for creating an ample supply of high school graduates into
sustainable building management on a continual basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of the project are to (1) design a Baccalaureate of Applied
Science (BAS) curriculum that meets the needs of both employers and targeted
populations (i.e. students from groups that are typically underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines); (2)
incorporate curricular innovations such as industry-recognized certifications
and building benchmarking skills into the curriculum; (3) enhance recruiting and
retention of students from targeted populations; and (4) create summer workshop
programs for high school teachers resulting in curricular materials that they
can use with their students. This program is advancing knowledge in two ways.
First, it is enabling the development of a curriculum that is one of the first
of its kind in the country. Specifically, it is incorporating emerging
scientific, policy, technical, and managerial skills required of operators of
sustainable buildings in the coming years. This program also includes innovative
components, for example a course that teaches students how to benchmark building
energy use and use that skill to inform building maintenance schedules and
upgrades. Second, the program brings together several cutting-edge pedagogical
and student services strategies to ensure that the diverse populations targeted
for this program graduate. These strategies include the use of competency-based
instruction as well as an early warning system to identify students at risk of
attrition, coupled with intrusive advising to ensure they get the services they
need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Context, Input, Process and Product (CIPP) model
is being used to evaluate the project. Outcomes from program assessment and
evaluation are informing the broader STEM education community of the impact of
various program elements on the enrollment and retention of students from
underrepresented groups in STEM programs focused on sustainable buildings and
the quality and significance of that impact, effectiveness of incorporating
industry certifications into curricula, and gains in overall student
participation, enrollment and employment in the sustainable building industry
resulting from secondary to post-secondary pathways.