* 1406978
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution of Strain and Microstructures in the Presence of Solute Hydrogen - a Mulitscale Experimental Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Matthew Miller, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2018
* USD 335,521.00

Hydrogen embrittlement, a sudden and catastrophic failure, of metallic
structures, accounts for losses equal to 3 percent of the gross domestic
product. This enhanced failure mechanism presents a significant challenge to
transitioning from a fossil fuel powered transportation system to one powered by
hydrogen. For this to occur, the mechanisms by which hydrogen enhances the
failure must be discovered. This advance will enable design of alloys for use in
hydrogen environments as well as development of models to predict component
lifetime. This experimental collaborative effort between UW-Madison and Cornell
University seeks to identify the fundamental mechanisms driving the hydrogen-
enhanced failure. Students educated in this effort will gain international
experience through collaboration with faculty at Kyushu University in Japan and
their International Institute for Carbon Neutral Energy Research. In addition,
the PIs will develop and distribute engineering based in-class activities that
emphasize mechanical properties of metallic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
deleterious impact of a hydrogen environment on the mechanical properties of
metallic structures is well-documented and yet the fundamental mechanisms
driving the enhanced sudden failure remain elusive. This collaborative effort
will employ a multi-scale experimental approach designed to test the premise
that solute hydrogen can accelerate the evolution of the microstructure (strain)
and it, along with attendant high hydrogen concentration, establishes the local
conditions that determine the fracture path and mechanism. The influence of
hydrogen on the evolution of microscale lattice strains and orientations will be
probed dynamically using high energy x-ray diffraction and in-situ mechanical
loading at Cornell High-energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This effort will be
coupled with post-loading microstructure characterization in the TEM of
materials loaded to varying degrees of strain under different conditions,
including those used in the in-situ testing. Confirmation of the premise will
provide a basis for design of hydrogen tolerant microstructures as well as for
physically-based predictive models.