* 1406349
* Iterative Methods for Nonlinear Equations and Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Computation simulation is pervasive in society. Automobiles, aircraft, and
mobile phones, for example, need high-quality simulators not only for their
design, but also for their operation. In this project the PI will investigate
nonlinear solvers, which are core components of many simulators. He will
consider classes of problems and solvers for which theory is incomplete or
missing. A theoretical understanding of these problems and solvers will lead to
improved performance and reliability of the solvers and the simulators which use
those solvers. The PI will apply his findings to problems in physics and
chemistry basic to the design of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses some unresolved algorithmic questions in numerical analysis theory.
These problems have important applications. The work on optimization and
nonlinear solvers with embedded Monte Carlo methods in the objective function or
residual is a very new line of research. The work is particularly timely in view
of Monte Carlo methods robustness and resiliency in a massively parallel
environment. Progress in this topic will lead to better understanding of how to
couple existing solvers to Monte Carlo models. The research on Anderson
acceleration will explore a class of Jacobian-free solvers which are very
important when Jacobians or Jacobian vector products are unavailable. Anderson
is already widely used in electronic structure computations which, in turn, are
core components in computational chemistry software and the design of materials.
While there is wide literature on the use and operation of Anderson
acceleration, including cases where it fails to converge, there is very little
theory. The object of this part of the project is to develop that theory.