* 1406302
* What Next?  The Mathematical Legacy of Bill Thurston,  June 23 - 27, 2014
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Karen Vogtmann, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard
* 04/30/2015
* USD 97,200.00

The conference "What Next? The Mathematical Legacy of Bill Thurston" will be
held at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York on June 23-27, 2014. Bill
Thurston was one of the most profound and influential mathematical thinkers of
our time. He made fundamental contributions to a wide variety of mathematical
disciplines, but perhaps even more importantly he introduced new ways of
thinking about and of seeing mathematics. The connections he discovered between
disciplines broadened people's perspective and changed the way they approach
problems. He also had a deep interest in communicating mathematics and many
ideas about how this should be done. This meeting will bring together
mathematicians from many different areas to share recent advances and explore
future directions motivated by Thurston's transformative ideas. The meeting will
include events featuring different ways of communicating mathematics, both to
other mathematicians and to the general public.

This award supports participation by junior researchers and invited speakers in
this large conference, which is centered on the fundamental contributions of
Bill Thurston to topology, geometry, and dynamical systems. The goal of this
meeting is to bring together mathematicians from a broad spectrum of areas to
describe recent advances and explore future directions motivated by Thurston's
transformative ideas. Video archives of conference presentations will be made
available online. Details about the conference are available at the web site
www.math.cornell.edu/~thurston.