* 1406939
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Socially facilitated E. coli transmission in ringtailed lemurs: Social behaviors that prevent and promote the transmission of disease
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,243.00

Social interactions cause the spread of parasites but it is not known which
behaviors are particularly important in the promotion or prevention of
transmission events. To answer this question, both the behavior of the host and
the spread of the pathogen must be studied. By simultaneously analyzing social
data from wild ringtailed lemurs and genetic data from a common gut bacterium,
the researchers aim to identify the characteristics of the host and of their
relationships that tend to prevent or promote transmission events. This study
will provide one of the most direct tests of socially facilitated transmission
to date and in doing so, can inform predictive models for the future spread of
parasites in human populations. To this end, this study will also employ novel
genetic methods that can potentially be widely applied to many questions about
the mechanisms of parasite spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
examine if and to what extent patterns of association explain the transmission
dynamics of an actual bacterial organism by correlating the social interaction
network of ringtailed lemurs with incidences of shared haplotypes of E. coli.
They will collect data over the course of a year to assess how seasonal shifts
in social behavior influence the pattern of shared haplotypes, and to determine
the resident and transient nature of E. coli haplotypes across time. Individuals
typically harbor a unique resident haplotype, which when found as a transient
haplotype in a group member, can potentially inform each individual's role in
transmission. The researchers will use E. coli as a model "parasite" because its
ubiquity among mammals facilitates the determination of transmission dynamics
among all individuals and the extensive knowledge of its genome permits the use
of a novel one-locus high throughput sequencing approach that will allow rapid
differentiation of many more isolates than is feasible using traditional multi-
locus methods. High throughput sequencing methods that target one locus, as
proposed here, are currently used in microbiome research to differentiate
species or genera of bacteria, but they have not been modified to differentiate
strains of a single species. The researchers propose some of the first loci to
do this in E. coli. Data from this study will stored on "life.bio" server. All
sequence data will be uploaded onto GenBank.