* 1406673
* Controllable Polariton Patterns:  An Approach to Low-Energy All-Optical Communication Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Rudolf Binder, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 329,561.00

This project focuses on the understanding of physics required to implement a new
concept for optical communication systems with ultralow energy costs. This
involves the understanding and use of novel type of physical pattern, called a
polariton, which is a pattern of light and electrical energy bound together and
is capable of moving through small tubes and cavities in semiconductor chips.
Better understanding and use of polaritons is still a great challenge to
understand and predict how they will behave. This project will bring together
three disciplines of basic science/engineering, in order to develop a better and
more unified understanding of how polaritons behave for communication
application. The project involves a collaboration with France, which will
provide experimental tests of the new models, and collaborations on theory with
Germany and Hong Kong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of polariton
patterns for low-energy optical communication devices will have a significant
impact on the overall energy savings in electronic systems. PI intends to write
a graduate-student-level text book on nonlinear semiconductor optics, integrate
the outcome of his research into the teaching and training of graduate and
undergraduate students? course and train them in interdisciplinary research
concepts involving semiconductor quantum wells, excitonic interactions,
semiconductor microcavities and exicton polaritons. The PI further plans to
develop MATLAB codes for use by undergraduate students to simulate holographic
optical interconnection maps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring
together the physics of many-particle correlations in exciton systems (including
semiconductor quantum wells and semiconductor microcavities), the physics of
pattern formation, the mathematical branch of catastrophe theory and the
engineering science of communication devices. It will study the basic physical
mechanisms that can lead to pattern formation in polariton systems, in
particular generalizations of stationary Turing patterns to polariton quantum
fluids. For the initial phase of the project the examples of possible devices
include an all-optical switch or transistor and an all-optical controllable fan-
out interconnect.