* 1406521
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Direct and indirect effects of winter climate change on microbes: implications for nitrogen retention in temperate hardwood forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Pamela Templer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2016
* USD 21,254.00

Forests in the northeastern United States are likely to experience a reduction
in the depth and duration of snow cover during the next century as the climate
changes. Because snow insulates soils from below-freezing air temperatures, loss
of snow cover will increase the frequency of freeze - thaw events in winter.
Past studies show that soil freezing increases movement of nitrogen from forest
soils to nearby waterways and the atmosphere, but the causes of these patterns
are not well understood, especially the role of soil microbes. The goal of this
project is to gain a deeper understanding of the response of soil microbes to
these changes, and the consequences for nitrogen loss downstream. This project
will also produce a number of societal benefits. First, understanding
connections among soils, plants, and climate will improve predictions of the
response of temperate forests to climate change, critical information to better
understand feedbacks between the biosphere and a changing climate. In addition,
this research will provide new educational activities for students at multiple
grade levels. High-school students in the Boston public school system will gain
valuable hands-on, independent research experience and training in a range of
field and laboratory methods. Undergraduate students from Boston University, an
urban campus, will have a rare opportunity to take field trips to the Harvard
Forest Long-Term Ecological Research site to learn about winter climate change.
Finally, data generated by this research will be incorporated into an
undergraduate microbiology class and used to train undergraduate students in
current methods in this growing field.

Past studies have shown that reductions in snow cover increase the intensity of
winter soil freezing, which can increase ecosystem nitrogen loss via leaching
and gas loss to the atmosphere. Because the abundance and diversity of soil
bacterial and fungal communities can have significant effects on soil nitrogen
cycling, sustained changes in microbial community structure might explain the
positive effect of winter soil freezing on N losses from forest soils. This
project will determine whether soil freezing in winter negatively affects soil
microbes, and whether these effects are direct, via disruption of soil structure
and induced physiological stress, or indirect, through effects on plant roots.
This research will pair past measurements of soil nitrogen cycling at two winter
climate field experiments at Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest with new
measurements of the abundance and diversity of soil bacteria and fungi using
archived soils. Soil, microbial and plant samples from a natural climate
gradient will also be used to determine the effects of winter climate on soil
nitrogen cycling, plant-microbial interactions, and microbial community
composition.