* 1406753
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site for Sustainable Polymer Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2018
* USD 404,337.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of Southern Mississippi (USM) entitled, "RET in
Engineering and Computer Science Site for Sustainable Polymer Engineering
Research", under the direction of Dr. Sarah E. Morgan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Southern Mississippi proposes to host ten local community college
instructors and high school teachers per year for three year for a six-week
summer research experience with polymer science and engineering faculty members
to perform research in the area of sustainable sustainable materials. Teachers
will work in pairs with faculty and student researchers in efforts focused on
addressing 21st century grand challenges in engineering. The overall objective
of the program is to develop long-term professional relationships between
faculty researchers and local teachers by providing meaningful research
experiences in relevant polymer engineering research efforts and establishing
follow-up activities to extend the impact of the program throughout the school
year. Professional development and training in fundamentals of polymer
engineering, high performance teams, and scientific communication will be
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sustainable materials engineering
research platform provides the framework to build long-term relationships
between engineering faculty and teachers while providing cutting-edge research
experiences that are readily incorporated into high school and community college
science curricula. The increasing demand for energy and use of hydrocarbons
create a wide range of issues, such as the Deepwater Horizon BP Oil Spill of
2010 off the Mississippi Gulf Coast, as well as opportunities, such as
production of agriculturally based polymers and alternative energy development,
which have high impact on Mississippi teachers and students. The proposed RET
will immerse high school teachers and community college faculty in sustainable
polymer engineering research in three areas: (1) improved efficiency polymer
solar cells, (2) high performance polymers and composites from renewable
feedstocks, and (3) environmental impact of synthetic materials in sea water.
The proposed effort is a transformative platform for engaging the public in
sustainable materials engineering research through relevant research experiences
that will resonate with teachers, students and parents. Faculty and graduate
student mentors will participate in classroom activities during the school year
to ensure the impact of the RET program through the school year.