* 1406734
* The singular support of l-adic sheaves; the relative continuous p-adic K-theory and cyclic homology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Alexander Beilinson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2021
* USD 485,000.00

The characteristic cycle is a key invariant of singularities of complex spaces;
all its known constructions have transcendental nature. The aim of the first
part of the project is to develop a purely geometric approach to the theory that
can be used in characteristic p geometry. The idea is to use a geometric Radon
transform to see hidden components of the characteristic cycle, similar to the
way that computer tomography (based on a classical Radon transform) allows
imaging of the internal structure of the human body. The goal of the second part
of the project is to explain how p-adic cycles on a p-adic space can be
recovered from their rotation numbers (the periods of differential
forms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characteristic cycle of a constructible sheaf F
on a smooth algebraic variety provides information about the (total) dimension
of the spaces of vanishing cycles for all functions with isolated singularities
(with respect to F). Its construction is known, due to Kashiwara and Shapira,
for complex varieties, and it is purely transcendental. The goal of the first
part of the project is to find a purely algebro-geometric construction of the
characteristic cycle that can be applied in characteristic p geometry. The key
instrument is Brylinski's geometric Radon transform which is a powerful
generaliztion of the classical Lefschetz pencil theory. The second part of the
project aims to use a canonical isogeny between the relative continuous K-theory
of a p-adic ring and its continuous cyclic homology, as defined in a recent
preprint (arXiv:1312.3299) of the principal investigator, to understand
algebraic cycles on a p-adic manifold.