* 1406589
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Phylogeography and Speciation of Phrynosomatid Lizards of the Baja California Peninsula
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Tod Reeder, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 19,435.00

Baja California is one of North America?s last biological frontiers. Over the
past six million years, this peninsula rifted apart from mainland Mexico along
the San Andreas Fault system. Due to this complex geological history, Baja
California is an ideal location to study the evolution of new species. However,
the chief difficulty lies in disentangling the complex interactions of geology
and ecology, and their effect on speciation. We are taking an integrative
approach to this problem by studying a diverse family of lizards that is widely
distributed throughout the peninsula. By analyzing genomic data, we will shed
new light on the origin of species in this unique
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a high-biodiversity wilderness area, Baja
California is a top priority for global conservation efforts. Our research will
shed light on patterns of genetic diversity of lizard species in Baja California
and southern California. These patterns are an important tool for government
land managers interested in documenting and conserving as much biodiversity as
possible with limited resources. This research also necessitates meaningful
international collaboration involving researchers from San Diego State
University, University of California, Riverside, Universidad Nacional
Auto&amp;#769;noma de Me&amp;#769;xico, San Diego Natural History Museum, and
the U.S. Geological Survey.