* 1406274
* Lagrangian Floer homology and the geometry of homological mirror symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Denis Auroux, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2018
* USD 245,739.00

New ideas from theoretical physics have brought forth a convergence between
areas of mathematics as diverse as algebraic geometry (which studies spaces
defined by polynomial equations), symplectic geometry (which studies the phase
spaces of mechanical systems), and knot theory. This project aims to investigate
and establish some of the conjectured relationships between these fields. For
example, a deep connection between the symplectic geometry of monomial functions
on toric spaces and the algebraic geometry of spaces defined by a single
polynomial equation will be studied. The project will also explore a conjecture
of physicists Aganagic and Vafa according to which every knot in 3-dimensional
space determines a symplectic integrable system in 6 dimensions, whose geometry
is in turn related to a recently discovered knot invariant. By testing the
validity of recent predictions made by theoretical physicists, this work will
enhance our understanding of the emerging and still mysterious connections
between various areas of modern geometry.

This project will use Lagrangian Floer homology as a tool to explore various
geometric aspects of mirror symmetry and its connections to classical questions
in symplectic topology and low-dimensional topology. One main goal of the
project will be to establish Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry conjecture
(in both directions) for hypersurfaces and complete intersections in affine
space, relating the wrapped Fukaya categories and derived categories of affine
varieties and their mirror Landau-Ginzburg models to each other. In another
direction, this project will develop new constructions of exotic Lagrangian tori
in symplectic manifolds, and their relations to toric degenerations and to
cluster variety structures on the mirror spaces. Finally, it will seek to
provide an interpretation of new knot invariants (such as the quantum
A-polynomial recently introduced by physicists Aganagic and Vafa) in terms of
mirror symmetry and wall-crossing for Lagrangian tori in Calabi-Yau 3-folds.