* 1406065
* Link homology, cohomological operations, and categorification at roots of unity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Mikhail Khovanov, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2019
* USD 332,451.00

This research project aims to study categorification, a relatively new branch of
mathematics that has been successful at lifting previously known objects to new
structural levels. This includes transforming combinatorial systems that involve
natural numbers into higher-order structures built out of vector spaces whose
dimensions are those numbers, while vector spaces themselves lift to categories.
Integers are consistently lifted to complexes of vector spaces. Link homology
theories constitute such a lift of quantum link invariants. The latter boast
deep relations to quantum field theory, statistical mechanics, and many areas of
mathematics, and categorifying link homology extends these relations and
produces new ones at a higher structural level. The proposal will investigate
categorification at roots of unity, which should lead to such structural lifting
of the Chern-Simons theory and quantum 3-manifold invariants and, eventually,
parts of conformal field theory. The project also aims to enhance and unite
recent discoveries of cohomological operations on link homologies. These
operations rigidify link homology groups and exhibit connections to algebraic
topology; in the latter some of most profound result required studying not just
homology groups and their extraordinary counterparts, but entire systems of
cohomological operations on them. It is likely that understanding the full
algebra of cohomological operations on link homology will significanly advance
this subject as well as many areas of mathematics and mathematical physics in
its proximity.

The project will investigate categorification and link homology, find
cohomological operations that rigidify link homology theories, and advance
categorification at roots of unity for quantum groups, their representations,
and quantum link and 3-manifold invariants. Known cohomological operations are
likely just a small part of much bigger algebras of cohomological operations
acting on various link homology theories, in particular, on Khovanov-Rozansky
and Webster homology groups. Recent work on categorification of quantum groups
at roots of unity points to existence of a deep but undeveloped theory,
including an analogue of homological algebra where the role of complexes is
played by p-complexes. One of the project's goals is to categorify the Jones
polynomial and other quantum link invariants at prime roots of unity by further
developing categorification of quantum groups and their representations within
the framework of p-complexes and hopfological algebra.