* 1406695
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Migratory trade-offs:  Immune defense balanced against reproductive and movement behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Sonia Altizer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2016
* USD 16,964.00

Major activities require the use of large amounts of energy and commitment of
individual resources. At the same time animals need to be able to respond to the
challenges of possible disease and infection. The research will use the monarch
butterfly, which makes two major yearly migrations to determine how energy
extensive events like migration impact the ability of the immune system to
respond to challenges. Monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus) are iconic insects
that undergo one of the longest distance two-way migrations of any insect
species in the world, traveling from as far North as Canada to overwintering
sites in Central Mexico each year. Using monarchs as a model, this project will
investigate the effects of movement and reproduction on immunity throughout the
course of the annual migratory cycle. Because of their long journeys and
coverage of diverse habitats, migratory animals have far-reaching implications
for the spread of infectious diseases, and can harbor pathogens of known human
health risks such as West Nile virus, avian influenza virus and Ebola virus.
This project will help provide a framework for determining the points along
their annual cycles that migratory species might be most vulnerable to
infectious diseases.

This dissertation project has previously established that immune defense in
monarchs is resource-limited, trades-off against growth, and is associated with
migratory distances in the wild. The study proposed here will experimentally
manipulate reproduction and flight to measure their independent consequences for
components of monarch immune defense. One experiment will manipulate
reproductive diapause (a precursor to migration) to examine whether reproductive
maturity alone lowers host defenses, or if animals must actively reproduce to
experience these costs. A second experiment will mimic active flight in monarchs
and measure resulting changes in immune defense for both reproductive and non-
reproductive adults. In combination, these studies will help identify factors
that underlie immune variation in this and other migratory species. This
interdisciplinary project draws on concepts and methods from animal behavior,
physiology, ecology and immunology. The physiological and behavioral mechanisms
of migration remain under active study owing in part to recent advances in
tracking mobile species over long distances. Using an experimentally tractable
species, this work will advance general understanding of how immune defense can
change throughout the annual migratory cycle and how this depends on competing
demands of movement and reproduction.

Data storage and sharing: Data will be stored on an external storage device as
well as a secure server space in the Odum School of Ecology. In addition, UGA
libraries maintain an institutional repository for data storage. All main data
files will be shared as tab delimited text files at the Dryad Digital Repository
(http://datadryad.org/) in conjunction with publication or within 2 years of
completing the proposed research. Because the work involves a non-model insect
species with implications for researchers studying ecoimmunology and disease
ecology, the co-PIs will share pertinent experimental information (i.e.
optimized immune assay protocols) with the Research Coordination Network in
Ecoimmunology (http://ccoon.myweb.usf.edu/ecoimmunology.org/About_Home.html)