* 1406997
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Individual Responses to Environmental Change: Contrasting the Behavior and Physiology of two Chipmunk Species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2016
* USD 16,002.00

While climate change literature focused on animals tends to focus on climate-
matched range shifts in which species show movement upward in elevation or
latitude to track their climatic niches, there are many species that maintain
the same range boundaries. These species must be making in situ adjustments,
likely in behavior and physiology, to cope with their changing environments. The
lodgepole (Tamias speciosus) and alpine chipmunks (T. alpinus) in Yosemite
National Park, CA are two closely related species that have dealt with the past
century of human-induced climate change differently: T. alpinus's range has
moved upwards, while T. speciosus's overlapping range has not significantly
shifted. This research explores the question of why one species range would
shift while its co-occurring counterparts range does not. This research is
important because determining the immediate mechanisms that shape these
responses are critical to understanding what is happening, and predicting what
will happen, as environmental change progresses. Undergraduate field assistants
will work with the researchers and the National Park Service education and
outreach program in Yosemite, where the researchers will interact with visitors
and discuss ongoing research in the park. Additionally, the researchers will
work with Bay Area Scientists in Schools to develop and teach grade-school
lessons. One of the researchers will also tutor at Berkeley High School and
become a co-leader of the Berkeley Women in Science group, which is devoted to
increasing women's representation at all levels of science. These outreach
efforts will not only increase scientific literacy in the public, but also will
strengthen bonds between government and academic research efforts.

This research will examine the roles of stress physiology and behavior in
different parts of these species' elevational ranges. The researchers
hypothesize that elevational range boundary adjustments for T. alpinus are
determined more by intrinsic physiological tolerances than interspecific
interactions, as is thought for T. speciosus. Additionally, the researches
hypotheize that stress hormone levels are related to the animals activity
budgets. To test these hypotheses, the researchers will conduct vegetation
surveys, collect temperature data using iButton and collect fecal samples to
measure glucocorticoid (GC) metabolites. In addition, 6 chipmunks from each
species will be tagged with remote sensing units equipped with an accelerometer
& gyrometer, a light sensor, a pressure sensor (which will allow for
determination of elevation), and a temperature sensor. After the accelerometer
data have been automatically translated into behaviors using a semi-Markov
model, the overall percent time spent on each behavior for each individual will
be calculated. A generalized linear mixed model in the computer program R will
then be used to test how different environmental parameters (elevation, species
co-occurrence, temperature [daily average/high/low], time of day, vegetation
category, human impact score) are related to behavioral patterns and GCs.
Lastly, iButton data will be used to determine how time-of-day is related to
temperature and this information will be incorporated in statistical models to
test predictions about how each species partitions its activity over the day
relative to temperature and activity of the heterospecifics.