* 1407353
* Atomic Layer Deposition Barrier Layers on Large Silver-coated Mirrors
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Michael Bolte, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 01/31/2020
* USD 621,571.00

Even with all the dazzling technology that has been brought to bear on
astronomical observations, and the furthering of that technology in turn that
has been inspired by astronomical applications, it is still difficult to make a
metal mirror coating that is highly reflective at all optical wavelengths yet
durable enough to last in field use. Traditional aluminum coatings are durable,
but not highly reflective at all wavelengths. Silver has better all-wavelength
reflectance, but will develop pin-holes and flake away in a short time unless
clever methods are used to deposit it on a glass mirror blank. The development
of such methods is the goal of this investigation, and a goal with far-reaching
applications to many different kinds of future
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The essence of the technical approach to
improved durability, high-reflectance silver coatings, is Atomic Layer
Deposition (ALD). ALD is a relatively new, sequential chemical vapor process
taking advantage of self-limiting surface reactions. ALD coatings have several
desirable properties, notably excellent film structure, conformal coverage, and
excellent thickness uniformity and control. ALD is now a mature process used
widely in the silicon wafer industry. To date, however, ALD has been limited to
relatively small substrate sizes and is rarely used for optics, owing to its
relatively slow speed. This project will place ALD barrier layers on top of
silver deposited by conventional physical vapor deposition (PVD) to get films
more durable than PVD alone. The process proposed is a thus hybrid process, with
most of the coating done with PVD processes and the barrier layers added with
the ALD system. Improvements in ALD deposition speed are also planned to allow
coating of larger substrates in reasonable times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has immense broader impacts in that it enables dramatically improved
practical performance of a vast range of astronomical instrumentation. In
addition, students will be involved, and there is a strong commitment to plain-
language explication of the research and its
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by
NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.