* 1407161
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site:  Research Experience and Training in Cyber Security for Pre-College Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at
Polytechnic University of New York (NYU-Poly). The primary objective of this RET
site is to engage high school teachers in cyber security related activities and
involve them in introducing a topic of critical national need to students. The
project will introduce a cadre of teachers to the basic concepts of cyber
security and engage them in ongoing research projects at NYU-Poly. The teachers
and their students will participate in a nationwide high school forensics
challenge. The NYU-Poly RET team has an outstanding track record of achievements
in cyber security research, education, outreach, capacity building, and K-12
educational initiatives. The team plans to provide research and professional
development opportunities to teachers from urban, inner city schools and broadly
disseminate the curricular materials the teachers design to bring the cyber-
security topics and their research into classrooms in the greater New York City
area. Thus the project will develop a community of teachers and students who are
passionate about cyber security.

The project is abundant in intellectual strengths anchored by a research area
this is compelling and relevant to all citizens and by an exceptional faculty
team that has demonstrated expertise in both research and K-12 outreach. The
site features projects that are teacher accessible as well as connected to
current research and practice. The RET site includes sound evaluation and
dissemination plans that may provide models for secondary cyber security
education, filling an important disciplinary gap. The project could help
establish a sustainable/scalable pathway to an abundant group of US computer
scientists proficient in the next generation of cyber security concepts and
techniques.

The project also has many broader impacts. The project will provide professional
development to teachers from urban, inner-city high schools with socially
diverse, economically disadvantaged, and underrepresented student populations.
Teachers will develop and hone their research, communication, and presentation
skills, all of which are essential to their professional growth and success. The
project will build the technical capacity of teachers so they are capable of
developing and deploying cyber security topics at their schools. The project
team will disseminate the results of the project through the TeachEngineering
digital library, tutorials, and course materials for adoption by others.