* 1407744
* Gravitation and Black Holes: From Magnetospheres to Firewalls
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Theodore Jacobson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 801,404.00

This research is directed at developing an improved understanding in three
different areas of gravitational physics: 1) puzzling issues that arise when
applying quantum mechanics to black holes, 2) tests of possible deviations from
standard relativity theory, 3) theory of strong magnetic fields around
astrophysical black holes and in other systems. On the second topic, one project
involves calculating the predicted form of gravitational waves from spherical
collapsing stars and supernovae in a modified gravity theory. Another is a study
of the viability of such a theory in the quantum realm, and a third is to
develop alternative but similar approaches to quantum gravity. Topics in the
third category include the nature of astrophysical jets, and energy extraction
from black holes and stars spinning or moving in a magnetized cloud of charged
particles. Also, this work studies the impact of gravity on the generation and
properties of twisted magnetic field lines, and the mathematical structure of
the basic equations and their simulation on computers. All of these approaches
address fundamental questions regarding the structure of the universe. The
corresponding results will be disseminated through written articles, as well as
seminars, conference talks, colloquia and lecture series. The PI will provide
instruction and mentoring to a postdoctoral scholar, as well as graduate and
undergraduate students, regarding scientific research, writing, and verbal
communication. The PI will seek out opportunities to speak on this topic to
audiences ranging across the spectrum from the general public to specialists in
gravitational physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the quantum gravity realm, one
project concerns the black hole information paradox and the possible role of the
Wheeler-de Witt equation in resolving it. Specifically, this work studies the
redundant encoding of information into the local degrees of freedom described by
a wave function satisfying the Wheeler-de Witt equation. Another project
involves the relation of black hole entropy to vacuum entanglement and Noether
charge. This research will try to determine whether the entropy contribution
from non minimal coupling is balanced by a corresponding entanglement entropy
change in adiabatic physical processes involving matter crossing black hole
horizons. On the Lorentz violating gravity topic, this project studies whether
the proposal for a UV complete, "Lifshitz" quantum gravity can pass the
stability test, when all the higher derivative terms are taken into account at
the non-linear level. We will also examine whether the idea of Lifshitz scaling
can be applied in a spacetime with a preferred temporal threading but no
preferred spatial foliation. Finally, the magnetosphere topics are will
concentrate on the definition, computation and interpretation of magnetic
helicity in a general relativistic setting, and in the presence of boundaries
such as the surface of a neutron star or the horizon of a black hole. This
should be useful in determining the role of helicity injection and conservation,
and how it relates to energy minimization, in a general relativistic setting.