* 1407947
* Optical Cavity Enhanced Nanoscale Gas Chromatography
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Weidong Zhou, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2018
* USD 408,369.00

Proposal Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical Cavity Enhanced Nanoscale Gas
Chromatography&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Goal: &lt;br/&gt;The research aims
to pioneer a study on the development of an ultra-compact nanoscale gas
chromatography platform with integrated on-column photonic crystal cavity-
enhanced Fano resonance nanosensor arrays to achieve ultrafast and highly
sensitive gas analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and in-situ chemical vapor analysis
provides vital information in many applications such as environmental
monitoring, healthcare, industrial and workplace safety, and defense and
national security. Unfortunately, most gas sensors lack the detection
specificity, makes it challenging to analyze real-world samples that usually
contain tens to hundreds of volatile organic compounds. Although recent
advancement in micro-gas chromatography (GC) demonstrates great potential in the
development of powerful portable gas analysis devices, it still remains a grand
challenge to achieve ultrafast separation and detection while maintaining
adequate separation resolution and small footprint for effective gas analysis.
This research aims to develop a nanoscale gas chromatography device that
provides unprecedented gas analysis speed, separation capability, sensitivity,
ultra-compact size, and system scalability. The success of this research will
lead to the development of wearable and personalized gas sensors that can be
easily accepted and accessible by the general public for various applications.
Scaling from micro-GC to nano-GC presents a range of scientific and engineering
challenges, including the column design, polymer coating, mismatch between the
nanoscale column and the micro-scale detection/sensing scheme, high spectrally
and spatially resolved optical sensors, and system integration architectures. In
addition to technical advances, fundamental study of gas separation mechanisms
and processes in a nanofluidic channel provides unique insight into the
molecular interaction and gas dynamics within nano-sized confinement, which will
not only be important for discovery of new sensing and separation mechanisms,
but can also be extended to many seemingly unrelated areas (such as gas exchange
processes in the lung). The knowledge generated through the proposed project
will be instrumental to the development of new techniques and tools to push a
plethora of engineering fields to a new frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project offers extensive interdisciplinary education and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The research outcomes
will also be integrated into the outreach activities with local K-12 schools and
communities to attract students to STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to pioneer a study on the development of a nano-GC
platform with integrated on-column photonic crystal cavity-enhanced Fano
resonance nanosensor arrays to achieve portable, quantitative, ultra-fast, and
high separation resolution volatile organic compounds analysis in complex gas
mixtures. In the proposed work, nanofluidic channels are directly fabricated and
integrated with the coupled photonic crystal slab Fano resonance filters,
offering a unique capability in studying the gas separation in the nanoscale
confined environment. The specific research tasks include: (1) Fundamental study
of gas separation mechanisms and processes in a nanofluidic channel; (2)
Development of the photonic crystal cavity enhanced sensor array; (3) On-chip
integration of nano-GC channels with photonic crystal sensor arrays; and (4)
Prototyping of a nano-GC system for ultra-fast analysis of a panel of volatile
organic compounds in complex gas mixtures.