* 1407658
* Materials from High Molecular Weight Cyclic Polymers: Insights on Properties and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 353,381.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are ubiquitous; these
materials, made of long-chain molecules comprise all modern plastics, the fibers
of textiles, and the key molecules of biology including proteins and DNA. This
project will leverage a new method for creating large cyclic polymers to learn
how connecting a long molecule into a ring influences the properties of
materials generated from these cyclic structures. Cyclic polymers differ from
linear polymers by just a single bond, but this minor chemical change influences
how these molecules flow during processing, how they solidify and how they
interact with their environment in ways that remain poorly understood.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The planned research targets three specific aims. The
first aim focuses on the generation of new classes of materials derived from
cyclic polymers entrapped in cross-linked molecular networks to investigate how
such an entangled cyclic chain influences the properties of the material. The
second aim seeks to illuminate how cyclic molecules flow to gain a better
understanding of how ring-like molecules entangle with one another and with
linear chain molecules. The third aim focuses on the influence of a cyclic
structure on the shapes that these large molecules adopt in the liquid and solid
states.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will suport and educate two graduate
students, who will have the opportunity to collaborate with leading experts from
foreign countries and at US National Labs. The Principal Investigator and the
graduate students will engage in outreach programs at local schools to promote
increased scientific understanding in the community at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on investigations of the conformation, properties, and
applications of large cyclic polymers by leveraging previous advances in a new
synthetic method for generating large cyclic chains. Zwitterionic ring opening
polymerization (ZROP) produces large cyclic molecules by generating propagating
chains that contain both a positively-charged end and a propagating negatively
charged chain end. Three classes of polymers synthesized with this method will
be used to achieve the above-stated goals. Water-soluble cyclic
polyphosphoesters will be entrapped in three-dimensional, cross-linked hydrogel
networks to investigate how the entrapped cyclic chains influence the properties
of the resultant double-network hydrogels. These novel materials are anticipated
to exhibit enhanced toughness relative to gels lacking the entrapped chains. The
rheological behavior of high molecular-weight cyclic carbosiloxane polymers will
be investigated to illuminate how cyclic molecules entangle. These materials are
of a length approximately 125 times the entanglement molecular weight (Me) of
the corresponding linear chains -- a molecular weight regime previously
unattainable by any other synthetic method. These studies are aimed at
investigating whether large cyclic chains can exhibit a plateau modulus that is
typical of linear chain behavior. Neutron-scattering experiments of deuteriated
high molecular weight cyclic polycaprolactones will be carried out to validate
theoretical predictions that concentrated solutions of cyclic chains will
exhibit collapsed conformations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary
nature of this project will provide an exceptional educational environment for
students trained in polymer synthesis to interact with world experts in polymer
rheology, polymer physics, neutron scattering, and modern chromatographic
separations.