* 1407202
* Wearable Nanodevices, Linking Health and Environment: RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Veena Misra, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2017
* USD 499,746.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at North Carolina State University (NCSU) entitled, "Wearable
Nanodevices, Linking Health and Environment: RET in Engineering and Computer
Science Site", under the direction of Dr. Veena Misra.

The NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center (NERC) for Advanced Self-Powered
Systems of Integrated Sensors and Technologies (ASSIST), led by NCSU's College
of Engineering in partnership with three local school districts and NCSU's Kenan
Fellows Program, will provide a total of 42 middle and high school STEM teachers
(14 per year) with a 7-week summer engineering research experience focused on
developing and employing nano-enabled energy harvesting, energy storage,
nanodevices and sensors to create innovative battery-free, body-powered, and
wearable systems that monitor both internal health indicators and environmental
conditions.

This project combines exceptional research experiences in NCSU's cutting-edge
facilities with professional development to build teacher content knowledge and
curriculum development and pedagogical skills. The program will build on the
successful experiences of the ASSIST Center and individual mentors with RET
teachers and the strength of the NCSU Kenan Fellows model for teacher research
experiences developed through two previously funded RET Site programs. The
project design includes experiences with ASSIST research mentors and will take
place in exceptional nanofabrication and analytical instrumentation facilities.
It incorporates teacher leadership development activities while also developing
important pedagogical and instruction design skills. Participating teachers will
create engaging and innovative activities based on wearable nanosensors to bring
back to their classrooms.

ASSIST is developing new technologies that will lead to a paradigm shift in
health informatics by allowing doctors, patients, and scientists to correlate
health indicators with environmental conditions to better predict, manage, and
treat diseases. The wearable nanodevice research in this project will be
exciting for K-12 STEM teachers and their students while facilitating
integration of nanoscience and systems engineering concepts into their science
curricula. This RET Site will attract underrepresented students, including
minorities and females, to engineering by engaging teachers and their students
in exciting research experiences linked to personal health topics and global
health issues. Partner school districts serve high numbers of high needs and
underrepresented in STEM students; they will ensure participation of teachers
serving in some of the highest needs schools.