* 1407212
* The California Community Colleges Partnership for Innovation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Melissa Conner, Foundation for California Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2017
* USD 268,747.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program stimulates technological
innovation in the private sector by strengthening the role of small business
concerns in meeting Federal research and development needs, increasing the
commercial application of federally supported research results, and fostering
and encouraging participation by socially and economically disadvantaged and
women-owned small businesses. An additional opportunity is available to foster
partnerships between Community Colleges (CCs), which educate large numbers of
underrepresented students, and the small business community. This pilot project
is exploring a model to increase the numbers of Small Business/California
Community Colleges (SB/CCC) partnerships applying for SBIR/STTR Phase II-CC
supplemental funding. SBIR Phase II awardees within the corridor between
Sacramento and San Francisco are being identified. At the same time, local
community college faculty and student teams are being recruited. This pilot is
matching up to 20 SBIR Phase II companies with community college faculty-student
teams, and supporting the submission of proposals for supplemental funding to
support the research conducted by the faculty-student teams and the Small
Business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project personnel are conducting marketing
outreach and public relations to promote and encourage participation in the
program. The process by which companies are identifed, community college teams
recruited, and the match facilitated is being carefully documented. It is
anticipated that this effort may serve as a national model for developing SB/CCC
partnerships and increasing the numbers of partnerships applying to the program.