* 1407081
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Individual Quality, and Extraterritorial Forays in Field Sparrows (Spizella pusilla).
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Michael Ward, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,275.00

In this project Dr. Ward and Mr. Murillo will investigate the spatio-temporal
movements of birds within and between their territories and their extra-pair
interactions. The researchers will study the strategies that birds use to find
and select extra-pair mates, how often females produce young that are not sired
by their pair-mates, the influence of male quality on extra-pair mating and the
fitness consequences of extra-pair mating. This information will contribute to
the development of effective habitat and landscape management practices for
protecting shrubland birds, like the Field Sparrows in this study. This study
takes advantage of an automated tracking system allowing the researchers to
follow the movements of birds. It is often thought that because territorial
birds compete for nest sites, food, mates, and other resources they should try
to space themselves as far apart possible. This research tests an alternative
hypothesis that birds (both males and females) benefit from being near one
another. Therefore when trying to conserve this and other species the best
approach may be to manage large areas that can accommodate many nesting
individuals. In addition, Mr. Murillo, a Latino researcher, will develop "Go
Wild Field Day" at a local nature preserve to encourage Latinos from high
schools in the Champaign area to choose careers in science. During the field
day, students and teachers will learn a range of field techniques for studying
animals.

Paternity studies revolutionized our view of avian mating and reproductive
systems, yet, very little research has focused on understanding the behavioral
mechanisms used by males and females to acquire extra-pair matings, how these
behaviors vary among individuals and over time, and the relative contribution of
such behaviors to an individual's overall reproductive performance. The relative
use of each active search and passive mating sit and wait tactics may depend on
numerous factors, such as sex, age, and individual quality. Dr. Ward and Mr.
Murillo will use a novel technology, automated radio telemetry, to monitor
activity and extraterritorial forays in male and female Field Sparrows (Spizella
pussilla) over larger areas, long periods of time and at night. The researchers
will also examine the behavioral and morphological correlates of birds
conducting these forays. They will test the hypothesis that individual variation
in foray behavior appears to be linked to male individual quality (based on song
performance and body condition). Using previously collected blood samples of
offspring, the researchers propose to investigate the influence of mate and
extra-pair mate quality and cuckoldry on male and female foray behavior. The
data collected from this research will be archived within movebank
(https://www.movebank.org/); a free, online data repository of animal tracking
data hosted by Max Planck Institute for Ornithology. The movement/activity,
reproductive and acoustic data on Field Sparrows will also be archived at the
University of Illinois' IDEALs (Illinois Digital Environment for Access to
Learning and Scholarship) and in Dr. Ward's laboratory.