* 1407732
* Support Vector Machines for Censored Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Kosorok, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 410,000.00

Recent advances in medical research, including those related to the study of the
human genome, have led to the development of personalized medicine. Personalized
medicine describes medical treatment that is tailored to a patient based on the
patient's genetic profile and other personal biomedical information. Developing
personalized medical treatment regimens is challenging since it involves
learning from high-dimensional patient data. Moreover, data from personalized-
medicine clinical studies are typically subject to censoring, i.e., the data are
not fully observed, due, for example, to patients dropping out during the course
of a study. While statistical analysis of censored data is a well-developed
area, most of the existing statistical tools were developed under restrictive
assumptions that often do not hold for high-dimensional data settings. It is
therefore important to develop an approach for analysis of censored data that
can be applied to today's high-dimensional data sets. In this project we will
develop novel machine learning techniques that can handle both high-dimensional
and censored data. The algorithms that we will develop will be applicable not
only in the field of personalized medicine, but also in other disciplines in
which high-dimensional censored data are common, such as engineering, economics,
and sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, we will extend the
framework of support vector machines (SVMs) to censored data. First, we will
develop support vector learning techniques for different types of censored data,
including right censored data, interval censoring, current status data, and
multistage decision problems with censored data. We will then study the
theoretical properties of these estimators, including their finite-sample
properties and their asymptotic behavior. For this goal we will develop novel
methodology, including new finite-sample tools for censored data. Finally, we
will apply the tools that we develop to real-world data. We will compare the
proposed learning methods with existing methods using theoretical tools,
simulation, and analysis of real-world data. Finally, we will develop software
for each of the different algorithms that we study. This software will be
developed such that it can be integrated into existing machine learning
software.