* 1407000
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Architecture of Adaptive Evolution in Mitochondrial Physiology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Walter Eanes, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,743.00

Genetic architecture is the pattern and organization of genetic effects
controlling phenotypic variation. I take an experimental approach to dissecting
genetic architecture for the bioenergetic process of oxidative phosphorylation,
a metabolic pathway central to energy use. Using the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster, I will systematically alter each of the enzymes involved in this
pathway, and then measure the effect on the flow of electrons through the whole
respiratory chain. Because these effects define the genetic architecture of this
pathway and determine the response to natural selection, I hypothesize that the
strength of the effect dictates the mode of selection acting on genes of the
respiratory chain and membrane lipid metabolism. This metabolic control
hypothesis makes explicit predictions for molecular patterns of polymorphism and
divergence which I will test using genomic data from D. melanogaster and D.
simulans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of modern biology is understanding
the complexity of phenotypes and their underlying genetic architecture. Purely
statistical approaches to genetic architecture of complex traits (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease) have had mixed success. The type of metabolic control
analysis done in this study is routinely used to diagnose metabolic and
mitochondrial pathologies. By quantifying the full control distribution for this
complex trait we may better uderstand the causes of such diseases. In addition,
this project will involve the mentoring of undergraduate students.