* 1407048
* Synthesis of Complex, Multi-Phase Solid Electrolytes by a Vapor Phase Process
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Anil Virkar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 377,591.00

NON-TECHNICAL: This work focuses on the synthesis of materials that will be used
in batteries to store electrical energy generated by various renewable sources
(such as solar, wind) as well as using natural gas and biogas. The batteries
made using such materials are also ideally suited for load leveling, which means
storage of electrical energy produced during off peak times and used during peak
usage times. Load leveling batteries have the potential to reduce the size of
the carbon dioxide-producing power plants which has a direct influence on our
environment. The current method of making such materials used as electrolytes
involves high temperatures and the materials produced easily degrade under
typical atmospheric conditions. This approach builds on the very basics of
thermodynamic stability of materials and multi-species transport, central to the
fabrication of new types of oxide materials in various applications in chemical
industry and other processes, and has the potential to make durable materials in
environmentally clean ways. Two undergraduate students are recruited to work on
the project each year. At least one of the students is from an underrepresented
group. As well, one graduate student is being trained throughout the duration of
the project. The students are gaining expertise in science and engineering
related to ceramic processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Transport in ionically bonded systems most always involves coupling of fluxes.
This coupling is typically electrical. For years, all transport processes (e.g.,
amibipolar transport) have been described using diffusion equations applied to
single phase systems. For example, many studies have described transport through
single phase materials, e.g., alumina, magnesia, and zirconia. In such systems,
the slowest moving species dictates the kinetics, and thus governs the processes
such as sintering. This work shows that electrical coupling (which can in
principle be described by Onsager equations and linear non-equilibrium
thermodynamics) is not limited to single phase systems. Thus, it is possible to
envision parallel transport to multi-phase systems, which is still governed by
electrical coupling. The principal scientific advance is in using this concept
to increase the kinetics of transport by orders of magnitude. As a specific
example, transport in single phase alumina (or Na-beta"-alumina) is very
sluggish due to slow oxygen diffusion. However, by providing a rapid path for
the transport of oxygen (using an oxygen ion conductor as a constituent in a two
phase system), the process kinetics is enhanced. Additionally, this approach
allows a precise control over thermodynamics such that unwanted side reactions
are suppressed. This approach is not limited to oxides, but can be extended to
many other types of technologically important materials (halides, sulfides,
etc.) and can also be extended to more than two phases. The approach has the
potential to lead to processes for the synthesis of materials with novel
properties and new directions of research.