* 1407053
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Chemical Mediation of Multi-trophic Interactions: A Test of the Tri-trophic Interactions Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* M. Deane Bowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 12,246.00

Insects can be tremendously beneficial, enormously harmful, critical to sustain
important ecosystem services, and key to the success of agricultural crops. This
project will strengthen the fundamental understanding of insect dynamics by
examining the simultaneous effects of resources, competitors, and enemies on
insect dynamics. Application of the results will similarly improve agriculture
and management of biodiversity.

Natural populations are controlled by a complex of factors that include the
amount and quality of food available, competition with other individuals for
these resources, and the number and kinds of natural enemies present. However,
most studies of the dynamics of insect populations, for example, address only
pairs of these complex interactions. This project relies on a newly developed
hypothesis, the Tri-Trophic Interactions Hypothesis, to test the simultaneous
effects of food quality, diet breadth, and natural enemies on the regulation and
coexistence of insect herbivores. Two sets of experiments will use caterpillars
fed on plants and artificial diet to investigate how plant chemical defenses
mediate herbivore-predator interactions and herbivore immune response to
parasitoid threat. Using both laboratory and field experiments, the project
examines how plant secondary metabolites mediate herbivore performance on
different host plants and how those compounds further influence herbivore
interactions with higher trophic levels. The project will advance both basic and
applied ecology by examining the entire food web within which insects live. It
will improve an ongoing dissertation research, thereby enhancing the training
and expertise of a talented, early career, female researcher. The charismatic
appeal of wildflowers and butterflies extends the educational impacts of the
project to undergraduate students as well as to K-12 teachers and students.
Undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work on independent
projects, gaining hands-on experience with research, and an insect education
program designed for elementary schools that is under development will capture
students' interest and provide stimulating educational materials.