* 1407175
* Creation and Crystallinity Control of Artificial Ices Using Superconducting Vortices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Zhili Xiao, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 327,757.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
program of the Division of Materials Research supports a project to create
artificial magnetic structure called spin ice/vortex ice hybrid systems. Spin
ice is the magnetic analog of the atomic ordering in the (H2O) ice. In addition
to creating the structure the project includes tuning the degree of magnetic
ordering or "crystallinity" of the spin ices and vortex ices. The project
provides novel platforms to explore new properties controlled by the degree of
crystallinity. The research provides a foundation for understanding and
manipulating the new complex and collective effects that are expected in these
artificial ices in a controllable way. This project also supports the training
of graduate students, enhancing their academic knowledge and improving their
likelihood to succeed in future careers in academia, industry, or
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin ice systems are magnetic analogues of the
old problem of how hydrogen atoms order in the ice (H2O) lattice and have been
intensively investigated. This project examines both square and kagome vortex
ice systems created by patterning superconducting MoGe thin films with desired
configurations of nanoscale hole arrays. The scientists seek to obtain direct
images via magnetic force microscopy (MFM) of vortex ices; conduct transport
measurements in a cross-bar shaped setup to reveal their dynamic properties; and
couple simulations with tailored experiments to divulge information on the
vortex phases in a driven vortex system. In addition to fabricating vortex ices
through a pinning array of nanoscale holes, the scientists also control the
phases and crystallinity of the vortex ices by utilizing pinning effect of the
stray field of a spin ice consisting of ferromagnetic islands, which can be
conveniently tuned in-situ to different states through an applied in-plane
magnetic field. The objective is to open and showcase a new direction by
achieving a rarely accessible ground state of a square spin ice with vortices.
The experiments promise to yield new physical phenomena that can establish the
foundation of hybrid artificial ice systems. Graduate students will carry out
the experimental work. Thus, this project contributes directly to the training
of the future workforce and to the national competitiveness in the important
area of nanotechnology.