* 1407255
* SusChEM: Studies of Molecular Orientation, Degradation and Thermoreversible Gelation  in Environmentally Sustainable Polymers: Poly(hydroxybutyrates) and Their Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 495,020.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Plastic packaging is usually
disposed of in landfills or incinerated, adding to the air pollution which is
endemic in many regions of the world. Many third world countries, too poor to
recycle, have few sanitary landfills and few facilities for incineration. Most
of the current polymers used for packaging are not biodegradable and persist in
landfills for many decades. These problems could be addressed if packaging
materials were based on biodegradable polymers from renewable sources. However,
polymers that are biodegradable often suffer from reduced mechanical properties
in terms of strength and flexibility. This research group is trying to address
these issues using polymers that are biodegradable and biosynthetically
produced. This interdisciplinary research on the study of chemical and
biological degradation of a class of sustainable polymers,
poly(hydroxybutyrates) (PHB) and their random copolymers, combines approaches
involving chemical synthesis, novel processing using an electrospinning
technique, as well as characterization of the resulting materials using new
combinations of instrumentation. The group will assess the effects of randomly
incorporating a second component into the PHB polymer molecules in order to
improve their mechanical properties while maintaining the rate of degradation
and the nature of the degradation products. The ultimate goal is a sustainable
polymeric material that is inexpensive, processable, and degrades rapidly (30-45
days) in landfills, while providing improved properties of strength and
flexibility for packaging. If successful, this approach to the development of
optimized, sustainable, and biodegradable polymers may be extended beyond the
PHB systems and have significant impact on development and production of new
sustainable materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) is a biodegradable,
aliphatic polyester that can be produced by chemical processes or bacterial
fermentation. The facts that it can be produced biologically with the properties
of a thermoplastic and is naturally biodegradable have made it a subject of
research in many industrial and academic laboratories worldwide. However,
bacterially produced PHB results in a polymer that is brittle and lacks
flexibility. In order to modify these properties 3-hydroxyhexanoate (3HHx) has
been added as a co-monomer and these new materials, referred to as PHB-HHx,
exhibit a significantly reduced crystalline content, resulting in improved
mechanical properties and processability. While this approach definitely leads
to important improvements, there is always the question of concomitant changes
in other important properties like biodegradability. If the degradability of
these sustainable, thermoplastic polymers can be optimized so as to
enzymatically degrade rapidly (30-45 days) in landfills, this would be an
extremely important contribution to the environment and society with impacts on
land use, soil contamination, and the economics of material disposal. It is this
hypothesis that researchers will explore in this project using a wide range of
copolymers with varying amounts of 3HHX comonomer (0 mol% (pure PHB), 3.9 mol%,
5.8 mol%, 6.2 mol%, 7.6 mol%, 9.4 mol%, 11.9 mol%, and 13
mol%).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the researchers will explore the
correlation between structure, processing, and chain orientation/crystallinity,
and test the hypothesis that improved chain orientation in electrospun
nanofibers can increase modulus and tenacity even while crystallinity is
disrupted by appropriate comonomer compositions. They will also explore
alternate processing approaches to produce a fibrous structure similar to an
electrospun membrane without significantly changing desired properties.
Thermoreversible gelation, which has been discovered for PHB and PHB-HHx, offers
a route to a non-woven fiber-like structure when gelation is followed by
lyophilization. The researchers hypothesize that this processing method may
significantly improve throughput while maintaining structures with the same
range of properties as electrospun membranes.