* 1407731
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: (Re)Producing the Citizenry: Reproduction, Social Fragmentation, and State-Building
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Dennis Hogan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 7,749.00

SES-1407731 Dennis Hogan Weeam Hammoudeh Brown University

How are reproductive decisions and behavior impacted by larger socioeconomic
changes and state policies on fertility behavior within the context of ongoing
national conflict? This study examines ways in which institutional
transformations at the national and local level impact the social processes of
reproduction and family formation both at the level of social group and over the
individual life course. The researchers will study the case of Palestine,
focusing on how the creation and evolution of the Palestinian quasi-state and
socioeconomic change in these areas affect reproduction. While exceptionally
high Palestinian fertility has been featured prominently in the academic
literature and news press, dramatic drops in fertility have been noted in the
state building era, which was ushered in by the signing of the Oslo peace
accords. This project focuses on the relationship between state building and
reproductive practices in the occupied Palestinian territory. The study
addresses the changing conditions of social and civic life for citizens in the
state-building era and the impact of these on reproduction and family formation,
social processes embedded in a unique context. Through illuminating the link
between state building and reproductive practices, the research contributes more
broadly to understanding of family formation and reproduction and how national
transformations and reproduction are connected.

The researchers employ a two-staged mixed-methods approach that includes
secondary analysis of regional and sub-regional fertility rates, and a
comparative ethnography. Secondary quantitative data from a variety of sources
will be analyzed in order to provide a macro-level portrait of fertility trends
over time as well as to analyze changes in fertility trends and structural and
population characteristics on the reproductive practices Through comparative
ethnography, the projects goes beyond an examination of reproductive outcomes
and towards an understanding of the lived experience, meanings attached to
reproduction, and the mechanisms by which social and national transformations
impact reproductive practices. This project expands demographic theory of
fertility behavior and develops a conceptual framework for understanding
fertility behavior within the context of conflict settings.

Broader Impacts

The study generates information on reproductive health care delivery that has
policy implications on reproductive health provisions and needs in nations with
ongoing conflicts. The project will combine various datasets linking demographic
and health data with economic and geographic data allowing for richer analyses
of demographic and health outcomes. The project will also expand collaborations
between Palestinian researchers and US counterparts.