* 1407087
* EXTREEMS-QED: Undergraduate Research in Computational and Data-Enabled Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Daniel Anderson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 599,885.00

Computational and data-enabled mathematics plays an ever-increasing role in the
advancement of modern science and engineering. The main objective of this
project is to promote and enhance undergraduate research experience at George
Mason University (GMU) with the goal of preparing broadly trained computational
mathematicians by immersing them in significant applied research projects. This
research experience, while the students are still in formative stages of their
education, will increase the likelihood of success in graduate studies in
applied and computational mathematics and statistics. Recruitment from GMU's
diverse student population and collaboration with a majority Hispanic university
in Puerto Rico will promote participation of under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A student cohort consisting of eight GMU students
will be admitted to the two-year long intensive interdisciplinary training
program each year. In the summer, the students will be immersed in data-enabled
research projects, covering a wide range of topics and application areas, from
uncertainty quantification and bifurcation phenomena in large datasets, to
modeling complex physical or financial systems and constrained optimization
problems. It is expected that the students will conduct research for the whole
duration of the program. As part of the education program, the students will
attend a year long Undergraduate Seminar which will enhance their communication
and dissemination skills, as well as other preparatory work for possible
graduate studies in STEM fields. In fall semester, students will take a recently
designed Applied and Computational Partial Differential Equations course
followed by a new Advanced Topics in Computational Mathematics course in the
spring. The project will include several unique faculty development and outreach
opportunities, involving both GMU and non-GMU faculty. In addition, GMU will
host industrial workshops and faculty boot camps that will involve selected
students and faculty from a variety of institutions in hands-on data-driven
projects. The project is a team effort that builds upon a strong record of
successful undergraduate research and collaboration experience, including a
recently established connection with InterAmerican University of Puerto Rico
that will help to broaden the impact of the proposed training program.