* 1407205
* SCH: EXP: LifeRhythm: A Framework for Automatic and Pervasive Depression Screening Using Smartphones
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alexander Russell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 745,215.00

Because of its high prevalence and significant health and economic impacts,
depression is a profound public health problem. Currently, screening for
depression is based on physician-administered interview tools or patient self-
report. While physician-administered tools are more authoritative, availability
is constrained both by cost and lack of access to trained mental health
professionals. Patient self-reporting, on the other hand, suffers from recall
bias and inconsistent patient participation. In particular, neither approach
satisfactorily addresses the chronic and recurring nature of depression that
requires frequent assessment for monitoring onset and progress. To address
depression as a public health problem, there is urgent need for an objective,
accurate, easily accessible and scalable depression screening tool. The
ubiquitous adoption of smartphones around the world creates new opportunities in
automatic and pervasive screening of depression across large populations. The
education plan of this proposal includes developing and enhancing various
undergraduate and graduate-level courses, as well as disseminating the results
to medical students through clinical supervision and increasing the
participation from under-represented groups in research and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop LifeRhythm, an
automated system for automatic and pervasive depression screening using
smartphone data. LifeRhythm continuously monitors the behavioral rhythms of
individuals through their smartphones, extracts normalized features from the raw
data, and applies multiple machine-learning models for real-time diagnosis. The
project applies LifeRhythm to two settings that have complementary strengths.
The first setting uses "high-resolution" sensing data collected from
smartphones, which provides extremely rich and descriptive behavioral data,
allowing the best leverage for machine learning models. The second setting uses
"low-resolution" wireless association meta-data collected passively from large-
scale WiFi networks, which eliminates the need of data collection on smartphones
and can be especially valuable for a large organization, where it could
automatically provide depression screening of tens of thousands of people
simultaneously at very little cost. Development of LifeRhythm will be coupled
with several tightly related machine-learning research efforts, including novel
techniques for collaborative prediction, integrative learning, modeling of
temporal dynamics, and model refinement using multiplicative-weights-based
techniques. Though this proposal is primarily focused on development of
screening tools, future work could naturally develop an associated intervention
program. In addition, this research may lead to methodologies that are
applicable to other mood disorders such as bipolar illness. The broader impacts
will include dissemination of research results (and the annotated dataset) to
the technical communities. The project web site
(http://nlab.engr.uconn.edu/sch.html) provides access to additional information
on research and results.