* 1407882
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Developing A Physical-Channel Based Lightweight Authentication System for Wireless Body Area Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Honggang Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 155,912.00

Non-intrusive and ambulatory health monitoring of patients' vital signs over
Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) provides an economical solution to rising
costs in the healthcare system. However, due to the lack of security in the
operation and communication of resource-constrained medical sensor nodes, the
health and medical information provided by the WBANs may not be trusted. To
address this issue, lightweight security solutions that are suitable for
capability and resource limited body sensor devices must be provided to
authenticate the data transmission. The goal of this research project is to
develop a lightweight authentication system for resource-constrained WBANs.
Findings from the proposed project will provide support for ensuring real-time
delivery of accurate and secure medical information in WBANs. The proposed
research will also advance the fields of WBANs and trustworthy biomedical
computing for healthcare applications. The proposed theories, models, and
simulation code can be used by engineers and researchers to design and evaluate
security mechanisms for WBAN applications. In addition, an important education
objective tightly coupled with the proposed research is to recruit and educate
future generation of WBAN engineers. This will be accomplished through
curriculum development, student mentoring, and community outreach in these fast
changing technical fields of WBAN system engineering, security and mobile health
(mHealth).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims at realizing physical
layer security approaches for WBANs and developing innovative key agreement and
message authentication mechanisms. Unlike existing approaches (e.g., biometric-
based approaches), the proposed authentication system does not require
additional hardware, error reconciliation process and bit synchronization, and
thus is suitable for resource-constrained and capacity-limited medical sensor
nodes in WBANs. The proposed research tasks include (1) theoretical studies; (2)
design of key agreement schemes; (3) development of message authentication
system; and (4) system implementation and validation. The theoretical studies
focus on the connections between the channel reciprocity, channel dependency and
key generation. Based on the results of theoretical studies, practical key
agreement schemes that use a set of dynamic wireless channel features among the
communication partners will be developed. The project will then design a
lightweight authentication system that is adaptive to wireless channels for
securing medical data transmission in WBANs. Finally, the project will implement
the proposed physical layer security approach in a real resource-constrained
WBANs system and investigate the practical system performance limit through
experiments. The findings from the project can provide guidelines for physical-
channel based security system design and deployment of WBAN applications.