* 1407903
* Collaborative Research: Recovery of Waste Heat using Efficient Thermoelectric Devices Based on Laser Sintering of Doped SiGe Nanoparticles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Uwe Kortshagen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 226,296.00

A large amount of energy is wasted through heat dissipation in many industrial
processes and consumer systems. This waste of energy occurs as many of the
current systems such as refrigerators, automobiles, and industrial process are
fundamentally very inefficient and power is wasted as heat. Some of this waste
heat could be utilized with low-cost recovery technologies. However, current
waste heat conversion devices are very inefficient and are relatively expensive.
Hence, research needs to be carried out to find low cost and more efficient
solutions for waste heat recovery. The proposed research will investigate a new
thermoelectric (thermal-to-electric energy conversion) process for developing
efficient waste heat recovery at low cost. The research will also train future
scientists and engineers in the energy sector. The principal investigator and
co-principal investigator will involve teachers and students in the project and
will display materials at the local Science Museum and library as part of
outreach and educational activities. The growth of alternative energy
technologies will have an important impact on society to meet its energy needs
and will lower the nation's dependence on foreign oil thus improving the
nation's energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been
made in thermoelectric power conversion devices with efficiencies reaching over
10%. To realize the commercial potential of thermoelectric devices, further
improvements in efficiency, long-term stability at high temperatures and lower
cost of fabrication must be realized. A world-wide research effort is being
carried out to realize the above goals. Correspondingly, this proposal consists
of a multidisciplinary team of a faculty member from the University of Minnesota
(Prof. Kortshagen) with research expertise in novel gas phase synthesis of
nanoparticles and a faculty member from the University of Virginia (Prof. Gupta)
with research expertise in laser processing and device physics. The research
plan is to provide understanding of nanograined thermoelectric materials and to
achieve further enhancement in efficiency, long-term stability and reduced
fabrication costs. The hypothesis of the research is that nanograined materials
can enhance the overall thermoelectric device efficiency by reduction of thermal
conductivity due to enormous interfacial area causing enhanced phonon scattering
and an increase of Seebeck coefficient due to filtering of electron energy
producing a higher voltage. Another hypothesis is that nearly fully-dense films
and bulk materials can be realized by pulsed laser sintering of nanoparticles to
avoid major grain growth by nanosecond heating and cooling rates. The
realization of the goals will be achieved through the following tasks: (1) vapor
phase synthesis of SiGe nanoparticles of &lt; 20 nm in size, (2) p- and n- type
doping of SiGe nanoparticles during vapor phase synthesis, (3) nanosecond pulsed
laser sintering of vapor phase synthesized nanoparticles of SiGe to achieve
close to theoretical density, (4) fabrication of thermoelectric devices and
evaluation of high-temperature performance up to 1000 Â°C, and (5) enhancement of
research through collaboration with DOE funded thermoelectric materials and
device laboratory at Oak Ridge National Laboratory for fundamental understanding
of material and device properties at very high temperatures using state of the
art high-temperature characterization facility for crystal structures,
electrical and thermal properties.