* 1407219
* Collaborative Research: Functionalized Nano-Textured Surfaces to Isolate and Identify Bladder Cancer Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Yair Lotan, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 150,142.00

The high mortality rate of patients with invasive and metastatic cancer has
changed little over the past few decades. Early detection is crucial for better
treatment of cancer and to increase survival rates. Traditional diagnostic
approaches fail to detect some types of cancers at very early stages. Bladder
cancer is usually silent in early stages resulting in diagnosis at late and
often incurable stages. Occasionally, the symptoms of both benign conditions and
bladder cancer are nonspecific and very similar. In about 85% of cancer
patients, there may be red blood cells present in the urine. But the same
symptoms may be the result of an infection or inflammation in the urinary tract
(kidney, bladder, prostate). This proposal aims at providing a non-invasive,
low-cost, highly sensitivity, and ultra-specific approach using solid-state
microdevices and biochemical functionalization of chip surfaces. The
functionalization will target the molecules that are overexpressed on tumor
cells. Automation of the data acquisition and analysis will be done to determine
physical behavioral differences and biomarker expression levels between tumor
and normal cells. The molecules chosen for targeted detection of tumor cells
will add significant value as indicators and predictors of the outcomes of the
treatment. This proposal will change how cancers, and especially bladder cancer,
are diagnosed. The experiments will be done first with cultured cells, then with
cells isolated from the blood of animals bearing human bladder cancer
xenografts, and finally with real patient clinical samples. The multi-
disciplinary team will integrate the novel technology that will provide
educational opportunities for students on the whole continuum of K-Grad.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged and introduced to exciting
new dimensions of cell biology, biochemistry and solid-state fabrication through
development of a cross-listed course module on the cell-nano interface. The
research outcomes will be also used to develop participatory modules at College
of Engineering summer camps to attract future adults to STEM careers. The
results, data and outcomes of the research and education endeavors will be
disseminated not only through peer-reviewed articles and conferences, but also
through social and public media.

The novelty of the proposal lies in three elements: first, a special class of
probe molecules called aptamers will be used. Aptamers can be reversibly
denatured, and these will therefore provide a mechanism for the reversible
release of tumor cells in their native states. Second, the nanotextured
substrates will provide biomimetic environment to examine the cell behavior.
Third, dynamic behavior of tumor cells will be used to measure the temporal
evolution of cell-cell interactions over days at single-cell or sub-cellular
scales. This new tumor detector will serve as a non-invasive cell type reporter
(without "staining" the cell), and as a cell culture substrate with prescribed
behavior of cells for certain level of biomarker overexpression. Currently such
a platform does not exist. The technological integration described in this
proposal may therefore provide early means of identifying remission or
metastases, and even give some insights into how many and what types of
metastases may be present in a given sample.