* 1407338
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Spatial Theory of Trophic Cascades in Omnivory Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Kurt Anderson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2015
* USD 6,288.00

Identifying the characteristics of communities that affect their responses to
perturbations is a primary goal of both fundamental and applied ecology. Trophic
cascades occur when predators reduce their prey, indirectly affecting lower
trophic levels such as plants. This project combines mathematical models and
their predictions with experiments to determine why trophic cascades vary across
diverse communities. The investigators propose that omnivores - organisms that
eat both animals and plants - will stabilize communities based on convincing
preliminary data. This hypothesis will be tested using experimental food webs
consisting of mixed bacteria as resources, a single-celled prey species, a
protist predator, and a protist omnivore. The investigators will manipulate
colonization rates across experimental communities and measure changes in the
mathematical stability of each community in response to these manipulations.
Models will be fit to time series of data to provide new insights into the
causes underlying change in the structure and stability of omnivorous food webs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for this project will significantly improve an
ongoing doctoral dissertation project that has combined mathematical models with
field experiments to suggest that colonization rates result in consistent
changes in trophic cascades. The training of a promising young scientist will be
enhanced as a result. The project will involve a diverse assemblage of
undergraduates who will perform research at the interface of biology and
mathematics. Through participation in the United States Department of Education
RISE program, the investigators integrate deserving students underrepresented in
science fields into research labs when they transfer from local community
colleges. These students will receive training in microscopy, experimental
design, mathematical modeling, statistical analyses and basic usage of several
computer programming environments. Results from the research will improve
efforts to curb human alteration of habitats, production of commercially-
valuable crops, and control of animal vectors that spread human disease.