* 1407356
* Bridge to the Doctorate: 2014-2016 UT Arlington Cohort
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Benjamin Flores, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) will host a Bridge to the Doctorate Program (BD) at the University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA). The 2014-2016 UTA BD program is designed to recruit
and support a cohort of twelve highly qualified alumni of LSAMP institutions who
are committed to developing the necessary skills and knowledge needed to earn
doctoral degrees and achieve successful careers in Science, Technology,
Engineering or Mathematics (STEM). The program will collaborate and leverage the
resources of the Institute for Broadening Participation (IBP) and the Center for
the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning (CIRTL). UTA's BD Program,
building on past successes, will undertake a series of intervention strategies
that are focused on enhancing teaching skills, offering structured mentoring and
near peer mentoring, encouraging persistence, and providing networking/community
building as well as professional development opportunities. The proposed program
will lead to the enhancement of and discovery of additional effective strategies
for graduate student success of underrepresented groups, which may be applicable
to other universities and colleges. Moreover, it will contribute to the national
goal of increasing the numbers of talented students historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines with Ph.D. degrees and the numbers of STEM
faculty from underrepresented groups who can effectively teach and mentor future
STEM students.

UTA's LSAMP BD leadership team has a demonstrated track-record of recruiting,
mentoring, retaining, and graduating students historically underrepresented in
STEM disciplines. The leadership team will work closely with the UT Arlington
Office of Graduate Studies, academic advisors, and faculty mentors to provide a
multi-layered network of support to the BD Fellows. UT Arlington's Office of
Graduate Studies offer a variety of student support activities and programming
that include topics such as responsible conduct of research, goal setting in
graduate study, mentoring, professional communications, obtaining internal and
external funding, and dissertation preparation. It is expected that all BD
Fellows will participate in professional development, academic preparation, and
research activities beginning their first year of enrollment. BD Fellows will:
(i) attend a series of 1-credit hour face-to-face and online graduate courses
designed to assist in the successful completion of their doctoral studies, (ii)
engage in high-quality, faculty-mentored research while fulfilling Ph.D.
dissertation requirements, and (iii) receive training in the ON-TRAC
(Organizational Network for Teaching-as-Research Advancement and Collaboration)
program, a new STEM teaching excellence program offered by CIRTL. IBP, a non-
profit organization with more than ten years of experience in developing and
managing virtual communities, will assist the leadership team in developing a BD
virtual community. This virtual platform will allow for interdisciplinary
informal interactions between faculty, BD Fellows, and STEM professionals from
across the United States.