* 1407020
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of reproductive age in the mating behaviors and preferences of female hamsters
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Ned Place, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,952.00

What factors drive a female to choose a particular mate? This is an important
question to scientists interested in animal behavior, sexual selection, and life
history theory. Individual variation in female mate preferences and choice is
common. However, our understanding of the mechanisms behind this phenomenon is
still quite limited. There are a few proposed sources of individual variation in
mate choice, and the purpose of this research is to investigate the role of
reproductive age in female mate preference and choosiness. The research team
will experimentally accelerate reproductive aging in young female hamsters to
determine if reproductive age modulates mate choice behavior. This will be the
first study to assess the effects of reproductive aging on behavior in mammals.
The results of this project will lead to a better understanding of animal
behavior, the factors that might affect individual differences in behavior, and
animal reproduction.

Reproductive quality declines with age in female mammals at a more rapid rate
than other bodily systems. This rate varies among individuals, making it a
potential source of variation in mate choice behavior. To decouple the effects
of reproductive and chronological age on choosiness, young adult female Syrian
hamsters will be treated with 4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide (VCD), which
specifically accelerates ovarian aging through oocyte depletion without
compromising other physiological systems or life span. VCD-treated females will
be given an opportunity to choose between a dominant and subordinate male
hamster, and their preferences will be compared to vehicle-injected females.
Young females typically choose the dominant male in this situation. If the
preference for dominant male hamsters by young VCD-treated females is reduced
relative to controls, then this result will emphasize the importance of
reproductive quality, independent of chronological age, in explaining the
individual variation in female mate choice. The products of this research will
be widely disseminated and used for educational purposes. The project will also
enhance scientific training of both graduate and undergraduate students in the
fields of reproductive biology and animal behavior. Data generated by this
project will include video recordings of female mate choice behavior and the
tabulation of those data in Excel files. These data will be stored indefinitely
in eCommons, a digital repository system at Cornell University. All eCommons
content will be openly accessible worldwide.