* 1407149
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Local adaptation and fitness trade-offs in the California annual, Leptosiphon parviflorus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Emily Dittmar, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,860.00

The study of adaptation is central both to understanding the biological
diversity of natural ecosystems and to the development of agriculture. A common
observation is that organisms differ in traits that make them uniquely suited to
live in a particular habitat. This process, called local adaptation, is often
thought to result from adaptive "trade-offs", where traits that improve
performance in one environment reduce it in another. The current study examines
adaptive trade-offs in a pair of locally adapted populations of an annual
wildflower, Leptosiphon parviflorus, which lives on two contrasting soil types,
sandstone and serpentine, in a California grassland. There are several broad
impacts to this research. First, understanding how adaptive traits contribute to
biological diversity and whether they have fitness consequences in alternate
environments is important for predicting how species will respond to
environmental change. Although it is believed that plants may shift their ranges
as a result of climate change, it is important to understand how adaptation to a
particular soil type, such as serpentine, can limit their suitable habitat. In
addition, understanding how traits affect fitness in different environments has
implications for agriculture. Breeders need to understand whether traits that
increase crop yields in one environment can negatively impact yields in another
environment. Many physiological traits that will be studied through this
research are important agricultural traits, such as the ability to live on poor
quality soils, or to survive periods of drought. Increased knowledge of the
consequences of these traits on growth and survival in different habitats may
expand suitable areas for farming. Finally, the co-PI for this project works in
a rural middle school through the NSF GK-12 program, a program that aims to
teach scientific inquiry to K-12 students. Results from this project will be
introduced to students and teachers through lesson plans and workshops.

Sandstone soils have adequate levels of nutrients, while serpentine soils are
low in vital plant nutrients and have high levels of magnesium, which can be
toxic to plants. In addition, serpentine soils dry out more easily than
sandstone soils. Due to these characteristics, many unique plants live in
serpentine soils. Although the populations in the current study are in close
proximity, they differ in their flower color and flowering times, indicating
that these traits may contribute to adaptive trade-offs. This research
investigates the effects that these traits have on growth, survival and
reproduction within each soil type, and why traits that are adaptive in one soil
type decrease performance in the other.

Several methods will be used. First, an experimental evolution study in the
greenhouse with plants that represent a genomic mixture of the two parents, will
grow lines on both types of soil. After 5 generations, to determine the extent
of selection in the greenhouse experimental lines, they will be grown in both
habitats in the field along with a control non-selected line. If plants have
higher fitness on the soil from which they were selected and reduced fitness on
the foreign soil relative to the non-selected line, then adaptation to soil type
results in fitness trade-offs. The magnitude of these trade-offs can be measured
to determine if fitness advantages on the home soil are similar in magnitude to
fitness disadvantages on foreign soil.

Interestingly, flower color does not appear to affect pollinator visitation,
suggesting that it may contribute to soil adaptation through indirect effects on
drought tolerance or nutrient uptake. Flower color will be studied further using
plants produced from a series of cross-pollinations that have isolated the
flower color from one population and bred it into the genetic background of the
other. This allows us to measure effects of this trait independently of others.
The plants with the pink flower color locus from the serpentine population will
be introgressed into the genetic background of the sandstone population. With
these plants, the fitness effects of flower color in both habitats can be
measured to determine the magnitude of trade-offs due to this single trait.
Furthermore, we will explore the possibility that the flower color gene affects
other traits such as water use efficiency and nutrient uptake using these lines,
as they are implicated in soil tolerance and potentially share biochemical
pathways with floral pigments.