* 1407148
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic basis of population level divergence in flower morph production induced by variable threshold environmental conditions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Laryssa Baldridge, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,407.00

Unlike many animals, plants are sessile and unable to escape from unfavorable
environments, so they must rely on developmental flexibility to cope with
unpredictable changes in their environment. It is well known that plants
accomplish this goal by responding to seasonal cues such as temperature and day
length, and use these cues to initiate major life history transitions such as,
from vegetative growth to flowering at the appropriate time of year. One of the
most striking morphological switches is the shift between different flower forms
on the same plant. Such species can shift from a flower that is relatively large
and attracts pollinators that promotes mating between individual plants to a
flower that is relatively much smaller, in part because it does not need to
attract an animal to visit it to reproduce, because it is capable of mating with
itself. This developmental shift is thought to be triggered when an
environmental cue reaches a threshold. However, reproduction by each flower type
comes with different consequences; small self-pollinating flowers produce inbred
offspring that often suffer from a reduction in vigor compared to progeny
produced from matings between individuals. The researchers will uncover genetic
components of the pathways that result in populations exhibiting different
thresholds for variable environmental responses using Mimulus douglasii, an
emerging model plant that is capable of floral morph switching. They will
examine the selective advantage of the loci responsible for floral morph shifts
under natural field conditions. One prediction is that populations living in
harsh environments with limited water and nutrients will be selected to lower
their threshold and produce more self-pollinating flowers to save resources
despite the potential reduction in vigor following inbreeding. The results of
the proposed study could be used to enhance understanding of how agricultural
species sense and respond to the environment, and could be used to modify crops
to allow them to grow under novel environments. The ways in which plants can
adjust to novel habitats will be shared with elementary, middle school, and high
school students in the Durham area. Additionally the researchers will mentor
Duke undergraduate students in the lab and the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will (1) determine how a polyphenic environmental response threshold shift
can occur, by examining the molecular genetic basis of the difference in
threshold responsiveness and (2) assess the fitness consequences of these
genetic loci under natural field conditions to understand why the shift in
threshold occurred. To accomplish these goals two populations of M. douglasii
that occur at the extremes of environmental responsiveness will be hybridized to
form F2 individuals. First, a genetic mapping experiment will be done to find
the genomic loci that correlate with a change in threshold for the production of
particular floral morphs under long-day photoperiods. Mapped loci from this
objective will form the basis for the second line of investigation: F3 hybrid
individuals will be grown in two field common gardens. Correlates to fitness
that will be measured include germination, flower number, flower type, and total
seed production per plant. These fitness measurements will be correlated with
the genomic loci mapped for floral morph production thresholds. To gain greater
insights the researchers have the whole genome sequence data for M. douglasii,
its sister species M. kelloggii, and an assembled and roughly annotated genome
of a close relative, M. guttatus, where the latter two species exhibit only one
flower morph. Collectively these data will aid in the understanding of the
genetic basis of the role of threshold responses influencing the evolution of
life history strategies.