* 1407772
* Engineering Strain in InGaN/GaN Multiple Quantum Wells for Improved Optical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* S. Bedair, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 362,991.00

This grant is funded jointly by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices
(EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS) and by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).

The proposed research addresses fundamental issues related to material growth
and control of strain in Quantum-Wells through experimental and theoretical
studies. The outcomes of this work include new material growth techniques and
technology of optical devices that are vital for advancing the current state of
the art LED technology. An enormous advantage is expected in the cost of solid
state lighting by enabling device operation with higher injection current. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research and will be
trained in interdisciplinary areas. The proposed research is a unique
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students at to acquire
interdisciplinary training and research experience in the field solid state
lighting and optical displays. These students will be positioned to become the
next generation leaders in advanced lighting technology. The project's goal is
to integrate technical and scientific achievements through this requested
funding with industries.

Material growth approaches using Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD)
are proposed to allow control of the impact of strain on GaN based devices and
improve the characteristics of Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) such as quantum
efficiency and droop. Strain balanced multiple quantum well (SBMQW) structures
made of a thick InxGa1-xN template on which InyGa1-yN/GaN Multi-Quantum-Wells
(MQWs) with x < y will be grown. They will consist of tensile-stressed GaN
barriers and compressive-stressed InyGa1-yN wells. Different x, y values and
well, barrier thicknesses will be explored to evaluate their impact on emission
wavelength. Designs will be explored where the tensile and compressive stresses
are balanced out allowing MQWs to match the lattice parameter of the InxGa1-xN
substrate. The experimental studies will be supported by theoretical modeling of
strain. A special MOVD reactor will be employed to reduce gas phase reactions
and increase the InN composition. The growth rate and temperature will be
suitably adjusted to optimize the thick InGaN substrates. Planar and side-wall
LED structures will be explored to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed
material strain studies and obtain longer emission wavelengths and better
External Quantum Efficiency than conventional InGaN/GaN QW structures. The
research will advance the basic understanding of the strain in InGaN/GaN Multi-
Quantum-Wells through experimental and theoretical studies. It will allow to
advance the current state of the art LED technology.