* 1407788
* TWC SBE: Medium: Collaborative: A Socio-Technical Approach to Privacy in a Camera-Rich World
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Denise Anthony, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Cameras are now pervasive on consumer devices, including smartphones, laptops,
tablets, and new wearable devices like Google Glass and the Narrative Clip
lifelogging camera. The ubiquity of these cameras will soon create a new era of
visual sensing applications, for example, devices that collect photos and videos
of our daily lives, augmented reality applications that help us understand and
navigate the world around us, and community-oriented applications, e.g., where
cameras close to a crisis tasked with obtaining a real-time "million-eye view"
of the scene to guide first responders in an emergency. These technologies raise
significant implications for individuals and society, including both potential
benefits for individuals and communities, but also significant hazards including
privacy invasion for individuals, and, if unchecked, for society, as
surveillance causes a chilling effect in the public square. This research
couples a sociological understanding of privacy with an investigation of
technical mechanisms to address these needs. Issues such as context (e.g.,
capturing images for public use may be okay at a public event, but not in the
home) and content (are individuals recognizable?) will be explored both on
technical and sociological fronts: What can we determine about images, what does
this mean in terms of privacy risk, and how can systems protect against risk to
privacy?

Specific research challenges to be addressed include formulating technical means
through image and context analysis to improve the privacy of people captured in
images; exploring the unique privacy needs of camera owners and how image and
contextual analysis can improve privacy; and developing image transformations to
afford privacy as well as enable novel applications using the cloud and
crowdsourcing. Companion sociological studies will examine how context affects
privacy perceptions, the impact on perception of new technologies, and image-
sharing behavior. These studies will guide each other, ensuring that mechanisms
for image transformation/privatization, non-visual transformations (e.g.,
altering or obscuring image metadata) and other techniques can improve both
privacy protection against automated analysis and how they affect individual
perceptions of the invasiveness of the technology. Through a deeper
understanding of the privacy implications of such technologies from both a
social and technical perspective, the proposed research has the potential for
profound and positive societal impact by laying a foundation for privacy-
sensitive visual sensing techniques for a society where cameras are ubiquitous.