* 1407828
* Statistical Methodology and Applications to Engineering and Economics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Tze Lai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,663.00

The past three years witnessed the beginning of a new era in financial markets
and in the US health care system, following the health care and financial reform
legislation in 2010. A long-term objective of the research is to develop
innovative statistical methodologies and to combine them with advances in high-
performance computing and communication networks for addressing the challenges
in quantitative finance and health care in this new era. The research will lead
to advances and innovations in statistical methods in biomedicine, economics and
engineering, paving the way for timely applications to clinical and
translational medical research, health care, homeland security, environmental
change, and risk management. A broader impact of this research is the training
of the next generation of scientists in academia, industry, and government, by
involving graduate students in all phases of the research, and by developing new
course material built around the research and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects can be broadly divided
into four areas. The first is multi-arm bandits with covariates, also called
"contextual bandits" in machine learning, and their applications to personalized
strategies in medicine and electronic business, in particular, to genomic-guided
personalized cancer treatments and biomarker- guided treatments for depression
in neuroscience. The second area is fault detection and surveillance in network
models for manufacturing systems, for systemic risk in financial markets, for
homeland security, and for environment or global change. The third area is the
development of efficient adaptive particle filters in nonlinear state-space
models that have far-ranging applications in engineering and economics, with
robotics and stochastic adaptive control as the main focus in this research. The
fourth area includes dynamic empirical Bayes modeling of joint default risk for
multiple firms in credit markets, of loan loss risk in retail banking and of
insurance claims, macroeconomic time series modeling and forecasting, and data
analytics for health care cost and preventive management.