* 1407906
* SHF: Medium: Architecting 3D Integrated Circuit Fabrics at Nanoscale
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Csaba Andras Moritz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 725,000.00

In this project, a new nanoscale three-dimensional (3-D) integrated circuit
technology that can potentially revolutionize the microelectronics industry with
far-reaching socio-economic impact is being investigated. The current two-
dimensional (2-D) Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology is
the main workhorse for building integrated circuits for computers, mobile
devices, medical and space applications, industrial applications, and other
embedded devices. While this CMOS technology, that was invented in the last
century and ever since remained a key driver of global socio-economic progress,
is soon expected to reach fundamental physical limits and will not be able to
provide the improvements we are accustomed to. This project provides a new
direction for continuous miniaturization of integrated circuits enabling
continuous scaling with orders of magnitude efficiency benefits including
reduced cost, as well as, a reduction of the amount of power consumption
required to sustain applications at high performance. These improvements are
game changing and are expected to fuel innovation in many new application
domains. Another key aspect is the educational and outreach component,
benefiting students and the broader technical community. This includes
entrepreneurship mentoring, supporting undergraduate students for training in
advanced cross-disciplinary nanotechnology concepts, international
collaborations, and broad research dissemination through online technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While continuous scaling of the CMOS integrated
circuit architecture has been the major driver for the integrated circuits
industry, scaling to sub-20nm technologies is proving to be very difficult due
to fundamental physical limits. As the benefits are slowing, migrating to true
3-D eludes CMOS: its core requirements of customization and manufacturing are
not inherently compatible with fine-grain 3-D integration. This project proposes
a comprehensive 3-D integrated circuit fabric technology in which core fabric
aspects are developed in unison to achieve 3-D compatibility. Fabric
nanostructures with vertical nanowires and architected solutions for
connectivity and 3-D heat management, in conjunction with a cross-layer approach
across device, circuit and manufacturability, are essential to this approach.
Preliminary evaluations for this 3-D nanofabric, including a designed 4-bit
microprocessor, show more than 60x improvement in density with greater than
16.5x improvement in performance/watt and a potential for two orders of
magnitude for very large-scale designs. Analytical projections promise further
improvements over scaled CMOS. The research will focus on detailed design of
core fabric aspects at nanoscale including material choices and design rules,
comprehensive evaluation using a bottom-up methodology including material
considerations, and nanocircuit/architecture-level designs and simulations.
Experimental research will focus on validation of core fabric aspects. E-beam
lithography will be used along with standard semiconductor manufacturing
processes for experimental cleanroom demonstrations.