* 1407180
* Elucidating the Effects of Structure on the Redox Reactivity of Mycogenic Mn Oxide Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2019
* Owen Duckworth, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 415,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Owen Duckworth, Matthew
Polizzotto, and Leslie Sombers of North Carolina State University and Cara
Santelli of the Smithsonian Institution are working on a project that has
significant educational and training potential. An interdisciplinary team of
predominantly early-career investigators at NC State University and the
Smithsonian Institution has been assembled who will collaborate with a cadre of
international experts. The project will also provide research experiences for a
postdoctoral fellow, a doctoral student, and several undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).
The rich intellectual environment stimulated by interdisciplinary interactions
and travel to domestic and international collaborating laboratories will endow
students and postdoctoral researchers working on the project with the broad
perspectives and technical skills required to solve emerging problems in
environmental chemistry. Additionally, the Smithsonian Institution will provide
opportunities for scientists to educate and interact with the general public
through a variety of outreach engagements at the National Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on understanding how mineral
structure underlies various properties of Mn oxides produced by fungi.
Manganese-oxidizing fungi isolated from a Superfund site will be used to produce
Mn(IV) oxide nanoparticles doped with different metal ions, which will result in
structural variability, including changes to the site of dopant metal
incorporation, the number of structural defects, the Mn(III) content, and the
ordering of mineral layers. The particles will be carefully characterized by a
complementary array of cutting-edge spectroscopic, microscopic, voltammetric,
computational, and X-ray scattering methods to determine their structure and
electrical properties. Kinetics and products of redox reactions between the Mn
oxide nanoparticles and a set of substituted quinones, which function as probes
of redox reactivity, will be quantified to gain a holistic view of mycogenic
oxide properties. Potential outcomes will be to transform our view of surface
chemistry by developing new integrated conceptual models that link mineral
structure, electrical properties, and reactivity, and the development of novel
approaches to environmental remediation and other technologies.