* 1407807
* Collaborative Research: Surface Engineering and Atomic Layer Deposition of Dielectrics on Two-Dimensional Atomic Crystals for Device Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Qiliang Li, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2017
* USD 190,000.00

This grant is funded jointly by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices
(EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS) and by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).

Miniaturization lies in the heart of technological advancement in the
semiconductor industry. However, a substantial change in the design of the basic
building block which is the metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor
(MOSFET) is required as the current architecture and materials are reaching
limits imposed by the laws of physics. A solution to this conundrum is the use
of new materials such as two dimensional (2D) atomic crystals that we have only
recently begun to investigate in detail. Such materials are the ultimate small
medium allowing the fabrication of high quality devices. The goal of this work
is to exploit and further our understanding of the properties of these
nanostructured materials and to introduce device structures with operational
principles different than the conventional technology, while at the same time
continuing to benefit from the already existing vast experience with silicon
technology. This work responds to the widely recognized need for progress in
nanoelectronics and technology as the current paradigm is reaching the
fundamental physical and economic limit. The outcomes of this work also include
new nano-fabrication technology and nanoelectronic metrology which will add to
the national nanotechnology portfolio, a vital component for the future
technological dominance of the USA. Technologies cannot be advanced or applied
in the absence of highly qualified scientists and engineers. Two graduate
students, one from UMBC and one George Mason University will gain their Ph.D.
while interacting very closely with each other and our collaborators at NIST,
preparing them for careers in industry, academia and government. Many
undergraduate students will also be benefit, for example by doing their senior
design projects. Parts of the research will be integrated into graduate level
courses currently taught by both PIs and results will be presented in seminars,
conferences and peer reviewed publications.

The goal of this proposal is to produce new knowledge in the area of surface
preparation methods so as to enable atomic layer deposition of high-quality
dielectrics on two-dimensional (2D) atomic crystals MOSFET applications. The 2D
materials, such as the isolated monolayer and few-layers of MoS2 and WSe2 will
be grown at wafer scale for both in-situ characterization and circuit
integration. Their surface will be carefully engineered with self-assembled
monolayers of molecules to enable the formation of high-quality interface during
the atomic layer deposition of dielectrics. The surface preparation results will
be analyzed in-situ during the deposition of dielectrics, and compared with
physisorbed dielectrics. This surface modification will enable high-performance
2D atomic crystal MOSFETs and circuits which will nevertheless remain compatible
with silicon technology. These new devices will be characterized by better gate
control, faster operation and lower leakage power dissipation at reduced area
and cost. The acquired surface preparation technology will enable integration of
2D MOSFETs and electronic circuits, and act as platforms to demonstrate the
properties of materials and interfaces. This work will exploit the inherent
advantages of the 2D nanomaterials and devices, with the potential to have
transformational impact on the next generation of devices and electronic
circuits.