* 1407502
* Disorder and the Emergence of Inhomogeneous Phases in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research and education designed to
advance our understanding of materials containing mobile electrons that interact
strongly with each other, giving rise to new states of matter with novel
superconductive properties. Superconductivity is a quantum state of many
electrons in a metal that is characterized by the loss of electrical resistance
and consequently of all dissipation of energy. The materials to be investigated
include cuprate and Fe-based superconductors, as well as iridate systems. The
PI's group will use model calculations for electrons to study several problems
directed towards a broader understanding of how these materials work. In
particular the fundamental physics of defects and impurities that can destroy or
nucleate superconducting states under different circumstances will be studied.
These investigations will result in a deeper understanding of the nature of high
temperature superconductivity. Understanding properties of correlated electron
systems and the influence of disorder may lead to novel materials properties
that could be utilized in new devices and technologies, obtaining unusual
sensitivity operating near transitions between competing phases that occur in
highly correlated electron systems. This could have enormous technological
implications. The award will support training of graduate students. The PI's
group will engage in outreach activities to educate schoolchildren in the
Gainesville area about physics, hold public and colloquium talks on
superconductivity, and offer information on research activities at a public
level through the extensive website.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
address long-standing fundamental problems of quenched disorder and various
types of competing emergent order in correlated electron systems. The materials
to be investigated include cuprate and Fe-based superconductors, as well as
iridate systems. The Fe-based superconductors exhibit a wide variety of behavior
suggesting that the electronic responses to external perturbations that break xy
symmetry are extremely strong, and may be important for superconductivity. Both
electron-doped cuprate superconductors and Fe-based superconductors exhibit
phases where itinerant spin density wave order coexists with superconductivity.
Properties of electronic states in these materials will be studied through a
careful analysis of simplified models of interacting electrons on the lattice,
informed in some cases by microscopic density functional theory calculations.
The PI's group will also study the influence of impurities on electronic nematic
instabilities in Fe-based superconducting systems at temperatures above the
superconducting transition. To achieve research goals the full numerical and
analytical calculations of the superconducting critical temperature and order
parameter in the Hubbard model across its phase diagram, including the spin
density wave and coexistence phases within a fluctuation exchange interaction
approximation will be performed.