* 1407962
* Spin Waves in Disordered Potentials: Interplay between Disorder, Nonlinearity, and Incoherence
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 482,149.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave theory is fundamental to
physics, underlying everything from radar to fiber optics to cell phone
communications. Waves occur in magnetic materials, where the magnetic spin
precesses in a wave pattern, propagating energy and information. Magnetic
materials are important in many technological contexts, including solid-state
hard drives. In a perfectly ordered magnetic material a wave would propagate
smoothly; however, real materials have disorder, imperfections that lead to
localization of waves, so that information or energy gets trapped in a certain
location in the material. This research seeks to understand many unanswered
questions about localization of waves in disordered magnetic materials. In
particular, three main questions are addressed: (1) Does coherence matter?
Lasers, for example, are coherent, and spin waves can be too. (2) How does
nonlinearity destroy localization? Nonlinearity means the whole is not the sum
of the parts. In spin waves the strength of this effect can be controlled, and
its impact on localization explored. (3) Can chaos cause delocalization? Real
materials often exhibit chaos. Does chaos allow a localized wave to escape? To
support this research and create tomorrow's scientists, the project provides
extensive training opportunities for students at undergraduate and graduate
levels, especially interdisciplinary cross-training between experimental and
theoretical physics. Outreach to high schools in Colorado is accomplished
through the Colorado State University "Little Shop of Physics" program, focusing
on those in disadvantaged areas. Outreach to the broader scientific community
occurs via organizing of scientific conferences, workshops, and
symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anderson
localization and Aubry-André localization have both attracted rather
considerable interest across a number of disciplines in recent years due to
their ubiquitous nature. Theoretical studies have yielded many predictions about
the effects of coherence and nonlinearity on localization that are of great
fundamental importance but are often controversial or debatable. The research in
this project not only settles several current debates on localization, but also
provides first experimental justifications to a number of theoretical
predictions. As such, the project deepens the understanding of the interplay
between disorder, nonlinearity, and coherence in general. Furthermore, the
research enhances the understanding of spin-wave dynamics in magnetic thin films
and damping processes in magnetic materials with disordered defects.
Specifically, the studies make use of spin waves in yttrium iron garnet (YIG)
thin film strips. Disordered potentials for spin waves are developed by two
approaches: (1) the fabrication of disordered grooves on the surfaces of YIG
strips and (2) the development of disordered local field variations by
depositing meander lines on the YIG strips and passing electric currents through
the lines. Two types of disordered potentials are considered: random potentials
and quasi-periodic potentials. The former is used to study Anderson
localization, while the latter is used for the study of Aubry-André
localization. The research consists of both experimental and theoretical
efforts. It is carried out through integral collaborations between Mingzhong
Wu's experimental group at Colorado State University and Lincoln Carr's
theoretical group at Colorado School of Mines. The new program has
transformative impacts in view of promising potential applications of
localization effects. For example, the energy density within a localized mode
can be several orders of magnitude larger than that of the incident wave, and
this huge field enhancement has potential applications for energy harvest,
storage, and conversion. In addition to mentorship at undergraduate to graduate
levels and outreach as described above, the principal investigators are jointly
engaged in curriculum development, focusing on bringing up-to-date applications
and experimental demonstrations into graduate core courses in electrodynamics
and classical dynamical systems.