* 1407977
* High-Density Neural Recording Arrays with Monolithically-Integrated Nanopillar LEDs for Multi-Wavelength Optical Stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Euisik Yoon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

ECCS Prop. No. 1407977&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: &lt;br/&gt;High-
Density Neural Recording Arrays with Monolithically-Integrated Nanopillar LEDs
for Multi-Wavelength Optical Stimulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
Goal&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to achieve monolithic integration of full-
color micro-LED arrays directly on silicon-based neural probes&lt;br/&gt;such
that optical stimulation of single neurons can be specifically tailored by
wavelength and intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this work is to design,
fabricate and test an implantable neural probe capable of simultaneous optical
stimulation and chronic electrical recording in animals. Recent advancement in
optogenetics (optical stimulation of neurons) promises new possibilities for
selectively exciting or inhibiting individual neurons. However, to this date
there is still an unmet need for reliable implantable tools to precisely deliver
light to target neurons and simultaneously record from corresponding single
neurons in a behaving animal. In the proposed work, we will develop an
implantable probe with light emitting devices directly integrated on the
lithographically defined probe shank. The size of light emitting devices and the
recording electrodes have a dimension (~10 micrometers) similar to that of a
neuron, offering unmatched resolution for single-cell manipulation.
&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this result will be significant because the developed
probe can allow high precision, local stimulation of multiple, spatially
distinct inputs to a single neuron. Also, it will mitigate tethering problems
and minimize hindering to the animal movement as compared to the previous
optical fiber approaches, allowing practical scaling of light sources for a
behavioral study. To realize the monolithic integration of multiple light
sources on the probe shank, we adapt the display device technologies developed
for solid-state lighting. Wavelength of the light emitting devices can be
tailored by implementing nanopillar structures on the emitting surface.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will leads into the development of generic tools to
access individual neurons in the target region of brain with high specificity
for simultaneously recording and stimulation. The developed probes will open new
windows into understanding the function and organization of the brain in the
areas of brain mapping, memory storage, retrieval and plasticity in chronic
behavioral neuroscience. There is good reason to hope that these advances will
lead to dramatic improvements in our ability to treat some of mankind's most
debilitating diseases such as Parkinson's disease, epilepsy and
paralysis.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in
optogenetics provide a new capability to control action potential patterns by
selectively exciting or inhibiting the targeted neurons by light at specific
wavelengths. However, to date there is still an unmet need for reliable
implantable tools to precisely deliver multiple wavelengths of light to
manipulate neural activities at the cellular level and monitor the response of
affected neurons simultaneously. This research aims to achieve monolithic
integration of full-color micro-LED arrays directly on silicon-based neural
probes such that optical stimulation of single neurons can be specifically
tailored by wavelength and intensity. Monolithic integration allows precise
alignment between the recording electrodes and the LED array with submicron
accuracy. Multiple micro-LEDs in a cellular dimension (10 x15 micro-m2) allow
precise local delivery of light to the target neurons at single cell resolution.
The fabricate probe will be implanted in mice to perform a unique experiment
that will elucidate how memories are formed and maintained.