* 1407282
* SCH: EXP: Connecting surgical training software solutions on portable clients to interactive dynamics engines on the cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Eftychios Sifakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 305,802.00

The practice of plastic surgery is built on a dual foundation of science and
art. In planning reconstructive procedures for either trauma-induced or
congenital deformities, the surgeon needs to consider aesthetics, anatomical
function and post-operative health as deciding factors. The most important tool
at the disposal of a plastic surgeon is the use of topology change as a medical
remedy; in fact, most nontrivial repairs are designed as elaborate sequences of
cutting, suturing, tissue rotation and transposition. Mastery of this intricate
choreography of surgical manipulations is often the most distinguishing feature
between an accomplished surgeon and a surgical resident with limited experience.
Any opportunities that a surgeon in-training can leverage to develop this
cognitive skill away from the operating room have great value in reducing the
incidence of errors, minimizing post-operative complications and improving the
quality-of-life for patients. Today, the computational capacity of modern
multiprocessor systems suggests the strong possibility of computer simulation
aiding in this training exercise. In addition, the vested interest on behalf of
the visual computing community on functional modeling and simulation of virtual
components of our physical world provides a wealth of numerical and algorithmic
techniques that can be leveraged towards this goal. However, especially for
plastic surgery, a number of challenges remain before cognitive training of
plastic surgeons would become as computerized as pilot training on virtual
flight simulators: the contributing communities of mathematics, computer
engineering and clinical science need to develop a mechanism of intimate
collaboration and communication, and the fruit of such collaborative development
must become accessible to a broad base of clinicians as opposed to instances of
segregated research groups with access to exotic computing resources. This
interdisciplinary project seeks to generate an extensible, easy-to-deploy
testbed of virtual plastic surgery simulation, tailored to facilitate intimate
collaboration between computer scientists and clinical practitioners and provide
a foundation for training plastic surgeons in delicate cognitive skills. The
activities in this project combine the benefits of specialized, cost-effective
parallel computing platforms with the ease of use of lightweight front-end
clients, like tablets and mobile platforms, that can be deployed in private
practices or training facilities of teaching hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objectives of this project are: (i) Defining and constructing a pipeline of
algorithmic techniques and system components through which the capability of
simulating the mechanics of deformable biological tissues at high resolution
will be delivered as a network service to lightweight client platforms, (ii)
Refining the analytic governing laws of nonlinear tissue, and leveraging them in
a virtual computer-based simulation to assess, in a non-invasive manner, the
viability of surgical designs and provide preliminary predictions for the
outcome of procedures, (iii) Validate modeling assumptions, and improve the
understanding of practical algorithmic needs by performing trial deployments of
cognitive trainers for craniofacial repairs on actual users groups of surgical
residents and seasoned experts, (iv) Provide a blueprint for delivery of
computational dynamics as a cloud service for continuum mechanics applications,
by investigating the role of network latency and bandwidth limitations and
developing algorithmic remedies for balancing the needs of the software solution
to facilitate remote delivery. The projected products of this activity will
provide additional benefits to the curriculum of teaching health-oriented
institutions, by providing easy and inexpensive access to virtual simulators for
students in their early phases of study, without mandating exclusive use or
local deployment of specialized parallel computing resources.