* 1407564
* Collaborative Research: Climate Change, Cannibalism, and Reproductive Synchrony: The Effect of Food Shortages on Life History Strategies of Marine Organisms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Jim Cushing, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Higher temperatures associated with climate change can cause changes in marine
food webs, resulting in a diminished food supply for top consumers. In response,
these consumer species must change strategies and behaviors in order to adapt.
One change that has been observed in numerous species is an increase in
cannibalism. Another is the timing of reproductive activities. Such changes can
in turn lead to a cascade of changes throughout an ecosystem, affecting survival
of individual species and the well-being of the entire system. El Ni√±o events
mimic some features of long-term climate change on short time scales, allowing
for tests of some climate-related hypotheses in marine systems. This project
will examine the impact of climate-change-related food shortages on organisms
both theoretically, using mathematical models, and empirically, at a large
colony of seabirds that function as an important indicator species. The work
will provide cross-disciplinary training in mathematical biology for
undergraduate, masters, and Ph.D. students. The project emphasizes training
undergraduates and members from underrepresented groups. Undergraduate students
will be involved at every stage of the research process, from data collection
and analysis to joint authorship of peer-reviewed publications. The
investigators engage the general public and wildlife managers through public
lectures and interviews, and by working with biologists and managers from the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The results of this work have important
implications for the management of natural populations responding to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work the investigators demonstrated (1)
a strong positive association between rising sea surface temperatures (SSTs) and
increased egg cannibalism in glaucous-winged gulls (Larus glaucescens), which
are important indicators of marine environmental quality; and (2) the existence
of every-other-day ovulation synchrony in glaucous-winged gulls, with the degree
of synchronization proportional to colony density. Proof-of-concept mathematical
models suggest that the two traits may be co-adaptive, and that, in general,
rising SSTs may initiate a cascade of changes in life history strategies in
colonial seabirds. The objectives of this study are to (1) develop and analyze
general mathematical models for exploring the interaction of SSTs, reduced
environmental food availability, cannibalism, and reproductive synchrony in
terms of population and adaptive dynamic responses to changes in food
availability; (2) field test, in a specific system, predictions associated with
two general hypotheses suggested by the mathematical models, namely, that
cannibalism is an adaptive response to decreased food supply, which can be a
consequence of increased SST, and that reproductive synchrony is an adaptive
response to cannibalism; and (3) train undergraduate, master's, and Ph.D.
students in interdisciplinary STEM research involving mathematical modeling and
field research, intentionally emphasizing the training of underrepresented
groups.