* 1407279
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolution and functional morphology of trap-jaw ants in the genera Anochetus and Odontomachus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Andrew Suarez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,031.00

A central goal of biology is to explain the processes that generate patterns of
species diversity across the tree of life. One mechanism that may facilitate
ecological diversification is that of "key innovations", traits that permit
access to previously untapped resources. This project will investigate one
particular morphological innovation in ?trap-jaw? ants in the genera Anochetus
and Odontomachus: power-amplified mandibles used for prey capture, nest defense,
and individual escape from predators. The project will investigate how mandible
anatomy and performance has influenced the diversification of these ants, and
how key innovations affect patterns of species diversity. Specifically, the
project will: 1) generate a species-level molecular phylogeny for trap-jaw ants
in the genera Anochetus and Odontomachus, 2) use phylogenetic comparative
methods to investigate the relationship between jaw morphology and performance
and 3) use finite element modeling to examine the functional consequences of
morphological variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new
insights into the evolution of multifunctional animal movements, integrating
data from phylogenetics, morphology and engineering. In addition to graduate
student training, the proposed research will also directly train undergraduates
in multiple aspects of integrated organismal biology, including techniques such
as high-speed videography, motion analysis, animal husbandry and behavior, and
molecular sequencing.