* 1407603
* Collaborative Research: Physical Dynamics Aware Coding for Communications in Cyber Physical Systems: Analysis, Algorithms and Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Chih-Chun Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

In recent years, there have been substantial researches on cyber physical
systems. A typical cyber physical system is composed of both physical and cyber
parts. The physical part refers to the dynamics ruled by physical laws, while
the cyber part (which consists of sensor(s), communication and controller(s))
observes the physical dynamics, transmits the reports, and makes control
actions. Many practical applications can be considered as cyber physical
systems, such as smart grids, unmanned aerial vehicles, and robotic networks.
The communication part plays a key role in CPS since it conveys information from
the sensor(s) to the controller(s), similarly to the nerve system of human body.
When facing negative environments, source and channel coding schemes can improve
the efficiency and reliability of the communication system. Traditional coding
schemes are designed for pure data communications and are inefficient for
controlling the physical dynamics in cyber physical systems. This project
studies how to integrate the awareness of physical dynamics status into the
source and channel coding procedures, which improves the performance of the
operation of physical dynamics. This context awareness brings a paradigm shift
to the design and analysis of cyber physical systems and benefits many future
systems such as smart grids. The project is extended to education purposes,
including K-12 outreach, and undergraduate/graduate level course designs. The
achievements of the proposed research are disseminated to academia and industry
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes and develops new coding
schemes in the physical layer of communication for CPS, which imposes
significantly different design requirements than that of the traditional
networks. In particular, the project designs the coding schemes with the
awareness of the physical dynamics characteristics, instead of separated designs
of communications and controls. The first task is to designs new joint/iterative
channel decoding and state estimation schemes that are aware of the inherent
temporal/spatial redundancies in the physical dynamics observations. It begins
from simple block codes and extends the work to complicated codes with cycles.
Distributed source coding at the sensors is designed, which also takes the
spatial and temporal redundancies into account. In particular, the criteria of
source coding (e.g., the distortion) are made aware of the objectives of
controlling the physical dynamics. The proposed source and channel coding
schemes are evaluated in the context of smart grid monitoring and control. Both
co-simulation software and hardware testbeds are implemented for the performance
evaluation.