* 1407885
* A New Detector for Measuring Polarized Light: Modeling, Characterization, and  Testing for Significantly Improved Imaging Capabilities.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Kudenov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2018
* USD 377,998.00

Abstract Title: A New Detector for Measuring Polarized Light: Modeling,
Characterization, and Testing for Significantly Improved Imaging Capabilities.

Nontechnical Abstract: Current polarized light photodetectors suffer from low
spatial and/or temporal resolution, or they experience systematic error. This is
due to multiple detectors needed to fully characterize polarized light, which
often require measurements at different times. This limits high-resolution
polarized light imaging; a process that is critical for applications ranging
from astronomy to biomedical imaging to pharmaceuticals. The research under this
grant will investigate the development of a polarized light detector
(polarimeter) capable of overcoming existing limitations, as well as adding new
functionality not currently available. This will be achieved by taking advantage
of the unique optoelectronic properties of polymer semiconductors. Multiple
semitransparent organic photodetectors will be processed at a single spatial
location and the multicell stack will be optimized to develop a polarimeter with
advanced capabilities. This grant also provides an opportunity to develop
outreach activities to interest high school students, both locally and
nationally, in optical science and engineering.

Technical Abstract: The objective of this proposal is to investigate the use of
organic photovoltaic modules as inherently polarization sensitive detectors.
Current methods of polarization imaging or detection rely on either time-
sequential or instantaneous measurements taken after light transmits through
polarization sensitive elements. These, often complex, optical systems are
necessary because there are no current detector technologies capable of
measuring the complete polarization state, at a single spatial location, within
a single integration time. This results in several disadvantages associated with
existing technologies; chief among them are temporal and/or spatial
misregistration that causes errors in the sensed polarization elements. To
alleviate these errors, this proposal details a novel strain-aligned polymer-
based photodetector that is inherently polarization sensitive. The objectives
are to: (1) Create an optoelectronic model of multi-layer organic photovoltaics
(OPVs); (2) Create a free-space polarimeter design, using multiple semi-
transparent SOPD proof of concept devices; (3) Design and create an experimental
proof of principle multi-layer monolithic polarimeter based on S-OPDs; (4)
Leverage the model and concept to create calibration procedures; and (5) Explore
multi-spectral and multi-Stokes detectors, including their incorporation into
arrays and unique geometrical structures.

Polymer semiconductors commonly have a primary optical dipole transition that is
parallel to the conjugated backbone. Thus, uniaxially aligning the polymer in
one-direction results in anisotropic optical detection. The intellectual merit
of this proposal is through the study of the device performance opportunities
enabled by aligned polymer based polarimeters with inherent polarization
sensitivity. Merit is found in: (1) The optimization of OPV structures, biasing,
and circuitry for use in photodetection processes; (2) Developing insight into
how alignment and anisotropy influence energy conversion; (3) Establishing
advanced optoelectronic modeling of complex multi-layer anisotropic organic
photodetectors at various angles of incidence; and (4) Calibration procedures,
algorithms, and techniques for using OPVs as polarization-sensitive photovoltaic
detectors. The proposed endeavor has the potential to create broad new areas of
research in multi-dimensional monolithic optical sensing.

The proposed research has significant commercial potential, benefiting the
fields of telecommunications, remote sensing, and biomedical imaging. This
project will also provide support for two graduate student researchers in
polarimetry and device fabrication. Dissemination of research results will occur
through publications and outreach efforts to the general public will also be
conducted by both PIs. For instance, online tutorials to garner excitement for
polarimetric imaging will be produced that include fabrication tutorials and
software development that would place polarimetric imaging at the hands of
amateur hobbyists and students. Additionally, the PIs will contribute to a week-
long high school summer camp held at NC State to attract students to engineering
careers. In this camp, outreach modules related to polarized light in nature
will be created and disseminated.