* 1407094
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Behavioral and Reproductive Implications of Nanomaterial and Synthetic Estrogen Co-Exposures in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Nancy Denslow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,500.00

The number of potential applications for manufactured nanomaterials (NMs) is
growing exponentially around the world, without concomitant research into the
possible consequences of inadvertent or purposeful releases into the
environment. Fish and other aquatic organisms reside in bodies of water where
NMs are likely to be disposed. A growing body of evidence suggests that some
NMs, depending on their composition, size or surface functionalization, can
affect fish health. The goal of this study is to evaluate if NMs can interfere
with fish reproductive behavior. This project is important because alterations
in behavior can have devastating genetic and population effects. The research
proposed here will fill a large gap in the understanding of the ecotoxicological
implications of engineered NMs that may be released into the environment.
Ultimately, studies like this one will influence NM development by clearly
defining the characteristics that make NMs bio-active and that should be
considered in manufacturing and future environmental regulatory policies.

The overarching goal of this thesis research is that NMs introduced into fish
orally through gavage can penetrate through the intestine into the blood stream
and then partition into organs where they can further impact with cellular
mechanisms including steriodogenesis. Orally dosed quantum dots (QDs) cross the
gut epithelium and accumulate in various tissues including the gonads,
suggesting they may have profound effects on tissue function. This project will
specifically address a new hypothesis that NMs are able to interfere with
reproductive behaviors of fathead minnows. It is known that endogenous or
exogenous steroid hormones control reproductive behavior of fish. The specific
hypotheses to be tested are (A) that functionalized QDs will be internalized
into testis and interfere with steroidogenesis and alter male reproductive
behavior, and (B) that single walled carbon nanotubes will bind and sequester
exogenously added ethinylestradiol and inhibit feminization of male behavior.
These hypotheses will be tested using in vivo studies to determine the
interactions between NMs and environmental estrogen (EE) on gene expression and
competitive reproductive behavior in fathead minnows, Pimephales promelas. The
expected outcomes are that (1) SWCNTs will reduce EE bioavailability and
ultimately alter nest holding and defending behavior, (2) QDs will cause
reproductive behavioral deficits in FHMs, and (3) that the effects produced by
QDs will be exacerbated by EE co-exposure.