* 1407021
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The maintenance of genetic diversity in captive breeding programs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Janna Willoughby, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,928.00

Captive breeding programs have been used to supplement imperiled populations or
to re-establish locally extinct populations. Unfortunately, approximately one-
third of supplementation and reintroduction attempts are unsuccessful because
animals fail to survive and reproduce in the wild. Genetic diversity of a
population is a key variable that can influence fitness and, therefore,
survival. Because most breeding programs inadvertently select for adaptation to
captivity, genetic diversity is often radically altered. To examine the impacts
of captive breeding on vertebrate populations, we established six captive
populations of white-footed mice and propagated the populations using three
breeding schemes typically used in zoos. The existing pedigree will be
supplemented with DNA data to form a complete genetic picture of the captive
populations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through the use of a multi-faceted
assessment of genetic diversity via pedigree, marker, and sequence data, this
project will compare the evolution of populations bred and maintained in
captivity. By utilizing replicate, experimental populations of white-footed mice
propagated via different captive breeding protocols, we will also evaluate the
efficacy of theoretical approaches to limiting inbreeding, drift, and selection
in captive populations. The resulting data will be useful in understanding how
different genes and genomic regions evolve, which will be important in further
captive breeding programs for recovery of endangered species and for biomedical
research.