* 1407194
* nano@illinois RET: Research Experience for Teachers Site in Nanotechnology (RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Lynford Goddard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) entitled,
"nano@Illinois RET: Reseaerch Experience for Teachers Site in Nanotechnology",
under the direction of Dr. Xiuling Li.

UIUC proposes to develop and deliver the exciting nano@Illinois RET program,
which will expose a total of 42 (14 per year) in-service and pre-service STEM
teachers and community college faculty from across the nation to cutting-edge
research in nanotechnology over six weeks in the summer, with four follow-up
sessions during the school year. Specifically participants will be mentored and
trained in broad areas of nanotechnology, while delving deeper into their chosen
area of interest, including nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, nanomanufacturing,
nanomaterials, or nanobiotechnology. These participants will connect their
research experiences to their content areas, including physics, chemistry,
biology, math, and engineering. The specific projects are motivated by grand
challenges facing our society and the world in informnation
technology/communications, energy, security, health, agriculture, and
environment. More specifc topic areas range from scaling of current electronic
devices; creating new electronic or photonic nano-devices; reducing the cost of
sequencing the human genome; point of care detection of pathogens and diseases;
to creating highly pervasive energy harvesting ecosystems.

The Site will leverage institutional knowledge and educational resources
developed through the NSF Center for Nanoscale Chemical-Electrical-Mechanical-
Manufacturing Systems (Nano-CEMMS). This Site will bring a diverse group of
teachers together from three local school districts in an environment serving
the University's research, teaching, and learning goals. Participants will
benefit from continuous engagement with exceptional faculty and students; access
to unparalleled laboratories and equpment; and well-organized, executed, and
managed program components. The Site will provide an in-depth experience for
teachers and extend the teacher network established through Nano-CEMMS, from
elementary, middle, and high schools to community colleges.