* 1407928
* SHB: Large: Collaborative Research: Integrated Communications and Inference Systems for Continuous Coordinated Care of Older Adults in the Home
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Holly Jimison, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2015
* USD 582,386.00

NSF 10&amp;#8208;575 SHB: Large: Collaborative Research: &lt;br/&gt;Integrated
Communication and Inference Systems for&lt;br/&gt;Continuous Coordinated Care of
Older Adults in the Home&lt;br/&gt;PI Bajcsy, UC Berkeley, Co&amp;#8208;PI
Jimison, OHSU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project addresses the important problem of improving and maintaining peoples?
healthy lifestyles by inventing smart technology based on fundamental scientific
principles. The approaches are economically feasible and socially compelling
approaches, with a focus on maintaining the health and independence of older
adults in a home environment. The project uses a mix of networking and
monitoring technologies to connect older adults with a remote health coach (real
person facilitated by a semi-automated program) and remote family members. One
of the key design issues is how best to preserve privacy and enable the
participants to control the distribution and sharing of their data. The
intervention is designed to provide coordinated and continuous health
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research for this project uses the
integration of data from a variety of sensors in the home, yielding information
for activity monitoring, sleep monitoring, gait and movement analysis,
socialization measures, as well as a variety of cognitive metrics derived from
computer interactions with adaptive games. Rigorous computational engineering
models of the cognitive and physical functions of the patient, as well as
context and environment, are used to infer patient state and provide feedback
for the patient and the remote health coach. The modeling techniques include
Partially Observable Markov Process and Hybrid Control Modes. User models that
incorporate behavior change principles are then used to drive algorithms to
optimize automated feedback and recommendations that serve as prompts for a
health coach managing a large number of patients. These approaches to remote
health management are evaluated by leveraging an existing prototype platform
with the capability of collecting data from the homes of elderly participants.