* 1407460
* New Directions in Envelope Models and Methods with Applications to Public Health and Medical Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Zhihua Su, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Multivariate linear regression (MLR) is an approach to understand relationships
between predictors and responses, and it is broadly applied for estimation or
prediction in many disciplines. With the development of modern technology, it is
possible to measure more and more characteristics and potential factors for a
subject, resulting in very large data sets in many contemporary problems. In
such situations, MLR is inefficient because it fails to distinguish between
information that is useful to the scientific goal and a likely overabundance of
irrelevant information that can obscure the useful information. The envelope
model is a new area in statistics. By identifying the irrelevant information,
the envelope analysis is based on the useful information only and is therefore
more efficient. In this project, new directions will be explored to broaden the
applicability of the envelope models, especially the applicability in public
health and medical sciences. Students involved in the project will have
opportunities to interact with faculty from other disciplines, and gain crucial
experience on how to operate across traditional disciplinary boundaries.
Software will be developed to make the new methodologies available to the
statistical community.

This project will develop new models that enrich the area of envelopes, making
the envelope method more flexible and adaptive to more practical problems. For
example, prior information is often available from medical history, past
experience and other sources, the Bayesian envelope model will enable
investigators to incorporate prior information in the analysis. As medical
studies often involve missing data, envelope models that handle missing data
will be studied. While most existing variable selection methods are applied to
the predictors, sparse envelope model focuses on identifying inactive individual
responses, leading to more efficient and interpretable results. The project
connects the envelope model with several branches in statistics, including
Bayesian analysis, Markov chain Monte Carlo, variable selection and covariance
estimation, which will generate new theory, methods and algorithms in the area
of envelope models.