* 1407986
* Economically-Robust and Secure Auctions for Heterogeneous Secondary Spectrum Market
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Xiuzhen Cheng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Over the past few years a number of auction mechanisms have been proposed to
improve the channel utilization and benefit both the primary and secondary users
in a spectrum market. The major design objective of these auctions focuses on
truthfulness (economic-robustness) to prevent market manipulation, i.e., to
ensure that buyers and sellers cannot obtain more utility by cheating on bid
prices. This objective is typically realized by adapting classic auctions, such
as Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG), McAfee, and Myerson's Optimal Mechanism (MOM),
for spectrum reuse in homogeneous spectrum markets. There are unaddressed
challenges with this approach in a heterogeneous spectrum market, which is
characterized by bid diversity in both the spatial and temporal domains, i.e.,
buyers and sellers can bid different units of the spectrum bands with different
channel properties at different locations and in different times. VCG, MOM, and
McAfee all lose their truthfulness when bid diversity is considered for
heterogeneous spectrum markets. This phenomenon has been largely overlooked by
the current research. Additional challenges are that bidders and the auctioneer
may have an incentive to collude for profit maximization, and that the
disclosure of the bids to the auctioneer may reveal private information of the
bidders, resulting in economic espionage and other security concerns. The recent
research on secure auctions is sporadic, missing an in-depth study to address
the unique challenges of secure auctions in heterogeneous spectrum markets. This
project aims to address the challenges mentioned above. The proposed research
may foster the development of novel techniques and methodologies toward secure,
robust, and efficient spectrum access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desired
properties of an auction in a heterogeneous secondary spectrum market will
incent buyers and sellers to use spectrum efficiently. These include: i)
truthfulness, collusion-resistance, cheating prevention, and privacy
preservation to encourage users to join the market and discourage them from
predicting others' bids for market manipulation; ii) high revenues for
sellers/buyers and the auctioneer to incent them to participate; and iii) high
spectrum utilization. The objective of this project is to design economically-
robust and secure auctions that transform current auction models to achieve
these properties for heterogeneous secondary spectrum markets. The proposed
research can be summarized by the following activities: the design of
economically-robust auctions based on virtual valuations for fairness,
efficiency, and optimality to prevent market manipulation when addressing the
challenges brought on by bid diversity and spectrum reuse; the design of
collusion-resistant auctions based on the concept of virtual bidders and novel
pricing functions when bidder-bidder and bidder-auctioneer collusions exist; and
the design of privacy-preserving auctions based on Homomorphic encryption,
secure multi-party computation, and secret-sharing, under the assumption that
the auctioneer is not trust-worthy. The expected results of this project include
novel auction mechanisms, algorithms, and theories. The research findings will
be disseminated through high-quality publications, presentations in focused
workshops, and conferences. The project outcomes will provide guidance to
industry and may be adopted for market-based short-term spectrum allocations.