* 1407266
* RET SITE: Research Experience for Teachers in Engineering (RU RET-E) for Green Energy and Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2019
* Kimberly Cook-Chennault, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 489,609.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Rutgers University entitled, "RET SITE: Research Experience for
Teachers in Engineering (RU RET-E) for Green Energy and Technology", under the
direction of Dr. Kimberly Cook-Chennault. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RU-RET-E is a
critical link in Rutgers' educational pipeline in energy engineering education
from K-12, to undergraduate and further to graduate education and STEM fields.
It builds upon long-term collaborative relationships between the participating
school districts and the Rutgers School of Engineering. Participation of these
teachers will readily translate to the learning experience of their students and
subsequently their academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
project will build and improve upon a previous successful NSF RET project
(EEC-1009797). It will expand and enhance the previous project as a
comprehensive three-year program to host a total of 46 middle and high school
teachers for six weeks during the summer. Participating teachers will be
recruited from New Brunswick, Plainfield, and Scotch Plains-Fanwood which
collectively are home to high populations of underrepresented minorities,
economically challenged and special needs students. RU RET-E seeks to provide
teaching professionals the opportunity to engage in science and engineering
research, with intellectual foci centered around three research thrusts:
nanotechnology and materials, renewable and sustainable fuels, and devices and
energy management systems for energy generation, conversion, and storage. These
are areas where Rutgers has a critical mass of faculty interest, existing
academic and physical infrastructure, and funding. Each teacher pair will
develop Student Growth Objectives (SGO) rubrics, to be strategically, linked to
engineering units, which will be peer-reviewed over the summer. These units and
SGOs will be used to assess student comprehension, critiquing proficiency and
the ability to execute and construct lab reports, and aptitude for engineering
problem solving.