* 1407300
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: DETECTING SELECTION ACROSS SPATIAL SCALES AND ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Gordon Luikart, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,395.00

Species that inhabit Northern latitudes are expected to experience dramatic
climate changes in the coming century, and both basic and applied scientists
need information about the effect of these changes on living natural resources.
This project will produce useful statistical tools and baseline data for long-
term population monitoring and management, and deliver important information
regarding the ability of wildlife to persist in a changing landscape. One PhD
student will be trained through this research, and will communicate results to
collaborating public lands agencies for direct application to defining
management units, modeling future distribution and abundance of wildlife
populations, and planning for potential species range shifts. Results will also
be broadly disseminated through public forums including invited speaking events,
professional meetings, public radio, and school
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When climate and landscape patterns change
beyond an organism's physiological threshold, the options for persistence of
that population are limited to adaptation or migration. Reliable identification
of genes underlying signatures of natural selection is a necessary component of
detecting the spatial scale at which adaptation to local conditions occurs, and
provides critical information for understanding evolution and population
resilience. However, the relative sensitivity of statistical tests to detect
selection has not been rigorously examined, even less so for populations in
natural landscapes. This project investigates the accuracy and precision of our
ability detect local adaptation in naturally occurring populations at both
smaller, landscape level scales, and broader, species-level scales. A
combination of computer simulations and empirical information from novel genetic
techniques will facilitate investigation of the influence of environmental
variation, different population sizes, and migration rates on local adaptation
of a northern alpine wild sheep throughout its range.