* 1407277
* Indirect Excitons
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Leonid Butov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award
supports a project directed towards experimental studies of fundamental optical
and electronic properties of structures made of thin layers of semiconductors. A
special design of the structures on a length scale of a billionth part of a
meter allows the creation of new quasi-particles called indirect excitons. The
indirect excitons are unique because they can be cooled down to ultralow
temperatures. Furthermore, the indirect excitons are also unique because they
can be electronically controlled like electrons in electronic devices and can
shine optical signals that electrons cannot do by themselves. The project is
directed towards increasing our understanding of the physics of ultracold
indirect excitons. In particular it will address the transport and optical
properties of the indirect excitons in high magnetic fields. The specific
parameters of indirect excitons allow the realization of the high magnetic field
regime in the lab. The understanding gained through this research may lead to
the exciting possibility of developing advanced devices that make use of
electronic as well as optical properties, i.e. optoelectronic devices. The
students involved with this project have the opportunity to perform exploratory
research on the cutting edge of contemporary physics. The potential impact of
the project is in development of knowledge in condensed matter physics and
increase of fundamental understanding of the optical and electronic properties
of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator award supports a project directed towards experimental
studies of cold indirect excitons in coupled quantum well semiconductor
structures. Indirect excitons are formed by electrons and holes confined in
different quantum well layers. Due to their long lifetime, indirect excitons can
cool below the temperature of quantum degeneracy. This gives an opportunity to
study cold excitons. Due to their long lifetime, indirect excitons can travel
over large distances before recombination. This gives an opportunity to study
exciton transport. Furthermore, indirect excitons are dipoles and their energy
can be controlled by voltage. This gives an opportunity to create a variety of
potential landscapes for indirect excitons and use them as a tool for studying
cold excitons ? cold composite bosons in materials. Studies include exciton
transport and pattern formation in high magnetic fields. The specific parameters
of indirect excitons allow the realization of the high magnetic field regime in
the lab. The research is performed by students and is integrated with education.
The potential impact of the project is in development of knowledge in condensed
matter physics and increase of fundamental understanding of optical and
electronic properties of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;