* 1407932
* Improving the design and performance of polymer thin-film transistors for  circuit applications.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 06/30/2017
* USD 350,421.00

Abstract Title: Improving the design and performance of polymer thin-film
transistors for circuit applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Description: Polymer thin-film transistors are circuit components in which the
semiconductor material is not silicon or amorphous silicon, but a polymer. Such
components are being actively pursued for a variety of applications including
flexible displays, biocompatible electronics, and large-area electronics. The
attractiveness of polymer transistors for these applications, many of which are
flexible, stem from simple fabrication methods and low costs. It is possible to
deposit a polymer semiconductor by a simple process such as inkjet printing, in
which the ink contains the polymer. The printer defines the area where the
semiconductor is deposited. It is also necessary to deposit insulating layers
and conductors to complete the fabrication process. The aim of the proposed
research is to improve the design of polymer transistors so that they perform
better: possess higher speed and better switching characteristics. To do this,
we will study how charges move in such polymers so that we can devise ways to
increase their speeds so that the transistor will switch faster. We will develop
new and improved measurements so we can get a deeper understanding of transistor
operation. These improved polymer transistors will be used to build logic
circuits such as flip-flops and shift registers to see how they perform in a
circuit. This is important since most practical applications involve the
construction of circuits involving many components. The results of this research
will impact the fields of flexible and printable
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project will
analyze new field-effect transistor device structures that will employ polymer
semiconductors with the goal of realizing vastly improved device and circuit
performance. In addition to increasing the mobility and speed, attention will be
paid to device designs aimed at lowering the operating voltage. This project
will address in detail the measurement of Hall mobility in donor-acceptor
polymers and use the Hall Effect along with time-resolved current-voltage
measurements to get a detailed characterization and understanding of charge
transport in these polymeric semiconductors that show much promise. We have
developed methods to characterize devices at timescales ranging from &lt; 100 ns
to many seconds which will be employed along with Hall Effect measurements. Some
of the highest mobilities that have been hitherto achieved in polymer
semiconductors are in the 3-15 cm2/V-s range, with higher mobilities possible.
These relatively large mobilities will result in enhanced carrier
delocalization, which will be characterized in detail, leading to an improved
theoretical understanding of transport and device physics. We will also develop
advanced device structures that will involve new gate insulator combinations and
source/drain materials, the use of optimized process conditions to improve
molecular ordering and therefore mobilities and operating lifetime. We will
demonstrate low-voltage, high speed clocked sequential circuits such as D-Flip
Flops and shift registers. These new and improved devices and the circuits that
will be constructed with them will help the field of printed electronics.