* 1407360
* Large-scale Atmospheric Circulation and Multidecadal Variability of the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Yannick Peings, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2017
* USD 680,173.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) is a
form of sea surface temperature (SST) variation in which SSTs over a large
portion of the North Atlantic simultaneously warm or cool, with oscillations
from warm to cold taking place over a period of 60 to 70 years. The AMO has been
shown to influence precipitation over North America and Europe, and is linked to
rainfall and drought over Northeast Brazil and the Sahel. The AMO is thought to
be linked to the overturning circulation of the North Atlantic, so that slower
overturning results in the cold phase of the AMO, while faster overturning leads
to the warm phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous studies have focused on
the impacts of the AMO on precipitation and drought during the summer season,
work here addresses the possibility of an AMO influence on Northern Hemisphere
atmospheric circulation and consequent weather and climate impacts during the
winter. The particular effect hypothesized here is that the AMO influences the
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), a large-scale fluctuation of sea level
pressure and wind which affects the weather and climate of Europe and North
America. The expected relationship is such that the warm phase of the AMO favors
the negative phase of the NAO, which is characterized by a more meandering jet
stream and increased incidence of cold air outbreaks. Research to test this
relationship includes analysis of the 20th Century Reanalysis (20CR) dataset, in
which atmospheric weather and circulation fields are reconstructed based on
surface barometer readings from 1871 to 2010, along with SST records from the
same time period. The observational analysis is augmented with numerical model
simulations intended to capture the atmospheric response to imposed AMO SSTs,
and these simulations are further compared to the archive of coupled climate
model simulations prepared for the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version
5 (CMIP5). The research will also consider the possibility that the AMO affects
the NAO indirectly, as warm SSTs lead to reduced Arctic ice cover, which in turn
affects atmospheric circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
the effects of the AMO on the NAO is desirable due to the impact of the NAO on
the severity of winters in the US and Europe, particularly given that the slow
variation of the AMO could imply some level of predictability for winter
conditions. In addition to the societal benefit of the research results, the
work will have broader impacts by supporting a graduate student, thereby
providing for the future workforce in climate research. In addition, the
researchers will participate in an outreach program titled "Climate Literacy
Empowerment And iNquiry (CLEAN). The program is targeted at elementary and
middle school children.