* 1407239
* p-adic automorphic forms, p-adic L-functions, and Selmer groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Eric Jean-Paul Urban, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 285,000.00

This research project in number theory studies arithmetic properties of
automorphic forms, which are functions that satisfy certain transformation
properties. More specifically, the project is to study divisibility properties
of these mathematical objects by high powers of a given prime number. The study
of these properties has yielded significant advances in number theory in the
past few years: a proof Fermat's Last Theorem, a proof the Sato-Tate conjecture,
and a proof of the Iwasawa main conjecture for elliptic curves. The work
resulting from this project will give more insight into some of the current most
important problems in number theory. This project will enhance our knowledge of
the deep relationships between p-adic automorphic forms, Galois representations,
and their p-adic L functions -- a central focus of number theory -- as well as
have significant consequences for our understanding of mathematics in general.
The project will involve the training of graduate students.

The domain of research of this project is the arithmetic of p-adic automorphic
forms, their Galois representations, and L-functions. This project is a
continuation of the PI's work related to the construction and the study of
congruences between automorphic forms of various weights and levels and their
links with p-adic L-functions and Selmer groups. The project will continue to
build some of the foundations of the general theory of the p-adic automorphic
forms and p-adic Eisenstein series with an eye one the important applications
that will result. In particular, this theory applied to the case of unitary and
symplectic groups will have important applications to the so-called p-adic
Bloch-Kato conjecture and Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Studying the
dimension of irreducible components of eigenvarieties, p-adic deformations of
nearly over-convergent automorphic forms, critical p-adic L-functions, p-adic
interpolation of automorphic periods, construction of p-adic measures attached
to L-functions and Eisenstein series, p-adic Euler systems, and Kolyvagin
systems and their link with p-adic L-functions are some of the topics that will
be dealt with in this project.