* 1407838
* Bayesian nonparametric methods for spectral analysis of complex brain signals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Athanasios Kottas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Complex multiple time series are often recorded in several applied areas of
research such as neuroscience, environmetrics, and econometrics. This project
develops Bayesian nonparametric methods and related computational tools for
frequency-domain analysis of multiple time series. In particular, the
statistical approaches that will be developed in this project are motivated by
the need to analyze brain signals recorded in clinical and non-clinical studies
including electroencephalograms, fMRI data, and magnetoencephalograms.

A novel and flexible mixture modeling framework will be used to represent the
spectral characteristics of multiple time series. Computationally efficient
algorithms will be implemented, tested and used to analyze complex and large-
dimensional brain signals. These algorithms will make use of a variety of
computational methods for inference in Bayesian nonparametric models. The models
and methods that will be developed have the following key features: (i) they
will provide flexible representations of the spectral densities of multiple
signals as well as computational feasibility (ii) they will allow researchers to
investigate clustering patterns of multiple time series with similar spectral
characteristics, and (iii) they will incorporate hierarchical settings that can
appropriately accommodate neuroscience data sets involving multiple trials,
multiple subjects and/or relevant covariates. The research project has the
potential of impacting data-intensive neuroscience research that requires the
analysis of several complex brain signals.