* 1407747
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Improved Limits from DRIFT and R&D Towards Improved Directionality and Sensitivity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2015
* John Harton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2015
* USD 48,760.00

In this era of precision cosmology, measurements suggest that ordinary matter
represents only a fraction of the total matter density in the Universe. The
rest, whose effect we can see only gravitationally, is unknown in its nature and
is termed Dark Matter. Particle physics models suggest that dark matter is
composed of relic Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, left over from
the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our galaxy
may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located deep
underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays. Experimental efforts
to detect WIMPs are extremely challenging due to the predicted small interaction
probabilities and the existence of backgrounds that mimic the expected signal.
Fortunately, a number of unique dark matter signatures exist that can be used to
discriminate against backgrounds and decisively identify WIMP interactions. The
largest and most robust signature is the predicted dependence of the WIMP flux
on the Sun-Earth velocity through the Galaxy, yielding a sidereal modulation of
the nuclear recoil direction in the laboratory.

The Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT) dark matter experiment
is a leader in the field of directional dark matter detection, with sensitivity
to the powerful angular signature of nuclear recoils induced by WIMPs. The
intellectual merit of this award resides in DRIFT's powerful capabilities being
brought to bear on one of the most important questions in science today. The
collaboration will be testing their next prototype detector, DRIFT-IIe, above
ground at Occidental College. It features an inherently scalable design
including a redesigned field cage, a texturized, thin-film cathode, a new,
transparent wire readout which doubles the fiducial volume per readout, and a
new every-wire data acquisition system which allows for lower noise and
fiducialization in the detector plane.

The potential of DRIFT's capabilities have promising applications to Homeland
Security and double-beta decay experiments. Broader impacts of this work also
include the training of a diverse set of undergraduate and graduate students
(including underrepresented minorities) in increasingly rare small-scale
experiments, giving them exposure to a wide range of research experience.