* 1407649
* Probability Theory and Statistics in High and Infinite Dimensions: Empirical Processes Theory and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Vladimir Koltchinskii, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2015
* USD 23,000.00

The conference on "Probability Theory and Statistics in High and Infinite
Dimensions: Empirical Processes Theory and Beyond" will focus on empirical
processes and other methods of high-dimensional probability and their role in a
variety of problems related to statistical inference for high-dimensional data
as well as to nonparametric inference. The conference will be held on June
23-25, 2014 at the Center for Mathematical Sciences, University of Cambridge,
UK. The list of topics includes concentration inequalities, exponential and
moment bounds for Gaussian, empirical and other related processes, nonasymptotic
bounds for random matrices, complexity penalization methods and oracle
inequalities in high-dimensional inference, sparse recovery and low rank matrix
recovery, high-dimensional problems in machine learning, nonparametric
estimation and hypotheses testing, Bayesian nonparametrics.

High-dimensional probability and statistics have had impact far beyond
mathematical sciences. The methods of high-dimensional probability have been
crucial in understanding the performance of new machine learning algorithms and
in the design of contemporary methods of analysis of big data. Bringing together
researchers who have made and are currenly making important contributions to
this area would facilitate the exchange of ideas leading to much better
understanding of the role of high-dimensional phenomena in statistical inference
and machine learning. The conference would be especially beneficial for junior
participants entering these research areas. This award will support the
participation of approximately twenty US-based participants in the conference.

Conference web site: www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~nickl/Site/2014.html