* 1407059
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Feast or Flee: How do Microzooplankton Detect and Avoid Predators?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Alison Taylor, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 18,752.00

Animals sense a multitude of tactile, olfactory, visual, and aural sensory cues
from predators and prey, integrate these cues, and respond with appropriate
behaviors; avoidance or prey capture, respectively. Understanding how animals
integrate these multiple signals to evoke complex behaviors is one of the
central challenges in the biology of behavior. Single celled eukaryotes have
many of the same sensory characteristics, at the cellular level, as
multicellular animals and therefore provide excellent conceptual and functional
analogues of sensory and behavioral traits in higher organisms. The researcher
will use a marine microzooplankton ciliate, Favella sp., as a model organism to
investigate sensory mechanisms that allow them to perceive and integrate cues
from predators and prey in order to successfully capture prey while avoiding
predation. Because these single celled organisms represent an early evolving
group of eukaryotes, characterization of their sensory capabilities will provide
insights into the evolution of integrated cell signaling and emergent behavioral
traits in multicellular organisms. Moreover, understanding the predator-prey
interactions of these microzooplankton, a group of organisms responsible for
consuming ~60 % of marine primary productivity, will enable a better
understanding of the role they play in supporting marine food webs and in fluxes
of nutrients in surface oceans. Both of these larger ecosystem scale processes
have implications for marine ecosystem services (e.g. fisheries) and for
biogeochemical cycles that impact our climate. In addition to these important
science questions, the proposed research will foster cross-disciplinary
collaboration of the graduate student with experts in microzooplankton ecology.
Professional training, science communication and career development of the
researcher will be promoted with support to attend high profile scientific
meetings. The award will also allow the researcher to further develop and
implement teaching programs for high school students that will help attract them
to science and technology subjects at college level, and motivate them to become
involved in research as undergraduates.

Microzooplankton alveolates (ciliates and dinoflagellates) transfer substantial
amounts of energy from primary production to larger metazoan consumers.
Underlying these predator-prey interactions are complex behaviors that allow
them to efficiently capture preferred prey and evade predation by sensing and
integrating a variety of stimuli from each. Despite the ecological importance of
these behavioral interactions, no previous research has examined how
microzooplankton are able to differentiate between predators and prey despite
receiving similar types of sensory information from both. This proposal builds
upon dissertation research investigating the sensory mechanisms that marine
microzooplankton possess to sense and respond to signals from their prey. The
first objective is to determine the behavioral responses of Favella sp. to
dinoflagellate and copepod predators, and the effectiveness of these behavioral
responses. High-speed videomicroscopy (250 fps) and particle tracking techniques
will quantify the behavioral responses of Favella sp. to chemical, mechanical
(contact) and hydrodynamic stimuli from predators and prey. The second objective
will determine the mechanistic basis of behavioral responses to predators
identified in objective 1. This will be accomplished using a combination of
high-speed video microscopy, electrophysiology, and fluorescent ion-sensitive
dyes to determine how ionotropic and metabotropic mechanisms mediate signal
transduction and predator evasion behaviors. Particle image velocimetry will
also be utilized to determine how the flow field surrounding Favella sp. may be
modified during predator evasion behaviors to decrease its hydrodynamic
signature and therefore the likelihood that it will be ingested. In summary, the
proposed experiments will extend current research on ciliate-prey behavioral
interactions to address the question of how this single celled organism can
integrate microscale environmental cues to detect and consume appropriate prey,
and evade ingestion by predators.