* 1407645
* Functional Elastomers Based on Bottlebrush-Shaped Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2020
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2020
* USD 788,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly soft and elastic materials
are desired for uses in reconstructive surgery, cell differentiation, and
antifouling surfaces. The project goal is to design solvent-free ultra-soft
materials by constructing polymer networks of bottlebrush-shaped macromolecules.
The new materials will possess a major advantage with respect to multicomponent
polymer gels that are prone to segregation and escape of constituting liquids.
In addition, the bottlebrush architecture allows abundant incorporation of
specific chemical functionalities that provide new abilities such as shape
control, imaging contrast, and response to external stimuli. The research will
focus on the synthesis of advanced macromolecular architectures and fundamental
understanding of the structure-property relations between the hierarchical
structure of molecular bottlebrushes and mechanical properties such as
stiffness, elasticity, and toughness. This project may lead to novel materials
that offer a vast array of functions and stimuli responses enabling programmable
shape transformations and non-invasive manipulation of implants within
biological tissue. Moreover, the interdisciplinary research will ensure maximum
opportunity for integrating science and education based on the multidisciplinary
training of students and postdoctoral researchers, partnerships with high
schools, and involvement of underrepresented groups in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on the design of novel
functional materials possessing a unique combination of properties: neat
chemical composition, exceptionally low elastic modulus, programmable shape, and
acoustic response. Specifically, the research will explore elastomers
constructed of bottlebrush-shaped polymers that contain crystallizable and
H-bonding moieties in their side-chains and backbones. Through molecularly
constrained crystallization and abundant chain-end functionalities, finely
interwoven structures composed of a permanent covalent network and a temporary
scaffold of crystallites and hydrogen bonds will be created to enable stimulus-
responsive control of mechanical properties and object shapes in an
unprecedented range. The unique mechanical properties of bottlebrush elastomers
stem from the hierarchical structure, wherein covalent and excluded volume
architectural constraints amplify and direct molecular forces at different
length scales. Fundamental understanding of the hierarchical relation between
molecular forces and supramolecular constraints, and its impact on material
properties represents the core intellectual challenge of the project. Looking
towards practical applications, the research will explore the potential of
bottlebrush elastomers for creation of shape-changing implants that can be
navigated and activated inside a biological tissue non-invasively and remotely.
This interdisciplinary research project will ensure maximum opportunity for
integrating science and education based on the interdisciplinary training of
students and postdoctoral associates, partnerships with high schools, and
involvement of underrepresented groups in science and technology.