* 1407340
* EXTREEMS - QED: Directions in Data Discovery (Data Cubed) in Undergraduate Education
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Anne Dougherty, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2019
* USD 590,336.00

The Data Cubed project will prepare students for the challenges posed by the
analysis of large datasets. As governmental, scientific, and business
enterprises collect, store, and process more data, many technological challenges
are encountered. The analysis of big datasets requires a collaborative effort
between mathematicians, statisticians, computer scientists, and domain experts.
Computation (including algorithmic development), modeling (including
dimensionality/complexity reduction), and visualization are all needed. The Data
Cubed project will identify talented students early in their academic career and
give them appropriate mentoring and increasingly advanced statistical and
computational coursework. The students will proceed to data discovery research
under the guidance of faculty members and partner scientists. The ultimate goal
of the Data Cubed project is to increase the number of highly qualified
undergraduate students who are able to apply their skills as they enter the
scientific workforce and data analytics careers and to share the results of this
project with the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will learn
mathematical and statistical techniques and software systems to collect,
generate, store, analyze and visualize large amounts of data. In the Data Cubed
project, several new courses will be created to train students in the core
computational and statistical areas that underpin the analysis of large
datasets; the students will be provided with significant research opportunities
in the areas of geophysical modeling, analysis of unstructured social media
data, and dimensional reduction techniques and modeling. One of the research
projects will use large geophysical datasets from the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and will involve modeling heat stress in urban
environments and its relationship to public health. Another will examine the
role of oceans as a primary reservoir of heat for our planet, which plays a
significant role in the dynamics of climate change. Yet another project will
combine heuristics of social media data (e.g., tweets) during times of mass
emergency with a user's social graph to develop a more comprehensive picture of
the situation. These and other projects all require fundamental knowledge and
understanding of how to analyze large datasets.