* 1407650
* Spin Seebeck Devices for Thermoelectric Power Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2020
* Ashutosh Tiwari, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2020
* USD 255,000.00

The development and understanding of sustainable, "green" technologies has been
a dominant, driving force for research and commercialization over the last
several years. One such technology is thermoelectric power generation, which can
be used to convert the ambient heat present in our day-to-day environment into
useful electric power. These thermoelectric power generators have potential to
drive low powered sensors in variety of remote applications such as monitoring
the structural health of bridges, security systems, medical diagnostics, etc.
However, presently available thermoelectric power generators exhibit very low
heat-to-electricity conversion efficiencies. The proposed project proposes to
improve the efficiency of these generators by using the spin of electrons. The
fundamental limitations which affect traditional hermoelectric device
efficiencies do not apply for these devices. Therefore, spin-based generators
can in principle be significantly more efficient than the traditional devices.
If successful, the research outcomes will help in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and benefit the society at large. Graduate students and undergraduate
students from various disciplines will be provided with learning opportunities
within this project. Special efforts will be made to encourage the participation
of female and underrepresented minority students in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable a new class of
energy harvesting devices by utilizing the recently discovered phenomena of the
spin Seebeck effect (SSE) and the inverse spin Hall effect. The SSE refers to
the generation of a spin voltage in a magnetic material when it is placed in a
temperature gradient. The proposed research is based on the hypothesis that this
thermally generated spin voltage can be converted into an electrical voltage
using the inverse spin Hall effect. Making use of these two effects, in
preliminary studies, PI's group has demonstrated the feasibility of designing a
room temperature spin-current driven thermoelectric generator that employs a
thin film of a magnetic insulator and a high spin-orbit coupled metal, directly
coated on a non-magnetic substrate. The above demonstration opens a path to
crafting an entirely new class of energy harvesting technologies. However, at
present the efficiency of SSE devices is much lower than the traditional
thermoelectric devices. For any practical application, efficiency of these
devices needs to be enhanced. In this project, PI is proposing to perform in-
depth scientific investigations to achieve the above goal. The proposed approach
is four-fold: (a) Understanding the mechanism of spin wave transport in magnetic
insulators, (b) Enhancing the thermally driven spin-current at the magnetic
insulator/normal metal interface by improving the spin mixing conductance (c)
Discovering metals with large spin-Hall angles, (d) Device fabrication and
optimization.