* 1407435
* Broadband Conductive Atomic Force Microscopy for Studying Magneto-electronic Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

Conductive atomic force microscopy is a versatile tool for measuring nanoscale
variations in the electrical resistance. The goal of this research program is to
extend its capabilities over a broad range of frequencies to study magneto-
electronic devices. Computers and smart phones contain nanoscale storage and
logic devices that operate at high speeds, and in a race for smaller, faster,
and more energy efficient electronics, many novel magneto-electronic devices are
being explored. The new conductive force microscopy tool will enable rapid
testing of prototype devices at different stages of nanofabrication, which will
assist in optimizing the processing conditions and speed up the development
cycle. In addition, the relevancy of the technique will be for magnetic
hyperthermia cancer treatment, which uses excitation in the 100 kHz - 1 MHz
range, for magnetically controlled heating. The outcome of this research will be
related to educational and outreach activities of training graduate and
undergraduate students and by demonstrating the principles of scanning probe
microscopy through undergraduate research projects and the IEEE Magnetics
Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program will extend
conductive atomic force microscopy to investigate thermal noise and
magnetization dynamics in a spintronic devices at broad range of frequencies and
by validating it operation through measurements on nanoparticles and nanodisks.
Several kinds of magnetic nanostructures will be studied in order to test the
operation of the high frequency scanning probe, and to gain new knoweldge at the
nanosclae level. Crystallographically oriented nanoparticles will be patterned
lithographically for investigation of the size-dependence of thermal
fluctuations leading to superparamagnetic behavior, and isolated particles
behavior applied to patterned nanoparticle assemblies with significant
magnetostatic interactions. Patterned magnetic vortex structures will be
investigated near their resonant frequencies (100-500 MHz). In the GHz range,
the focus will be on ferromagnetic resonance of the oriented nanoparticles.