* 1407896
* GOALI: EAGER: CBET EE: Separating Salts from Water by Applying Supercharged Pulsed Jet Combustor to Hydrofracturing Water
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Fred Cannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 140,000.00

1407896&lt;br/&gt;Cannon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrofracturing is a relatively
new area with respect to shale-gas extraction. It holds the promise for the US
becoming an energy exporter; however, it is also possible that the extraction of
shale gas and the methods used for extracting shale gas may adversely impact
water resources in the US. Therefore, it is extremely important that
technologies to treat/remediate the process and produced water be found. An
important aspect of Environmental Engineering and associated programs, is to
insure that every effort is made to minimize adverse environmental impact from
hydrofracturing. This proposal addresses a new technology to minimize adverse
environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will separate salts from
water by applying a supercharged pulsed jet (SPJ) to hydrofracturing water. This
water may be either process or produced water. The process, once developed fully
will be simple, as the SPJ system is merely of a 3-foot long tube, consisting of
a rapidly alternating air-fuel intake, and a brine discharge nozzle. This SPJ
system will help American energy-independence, with new hydrofracturing in PA,
TX, WY, CO, WV, LA, and other places, thus, it will have applications in many
states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preliminary tests with this SPJ, the research
team processed hydrofracturing water (i.e., brine) that contained 12.6 % solids.
From this, the team captured 60 % of the brine?s salts onto a steel mesh. Also,
the water was atomized into a mist while using just 17 % of the energy needed to
ideally boil water at 1 atm pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to the
broader impacts of this project the PI will continue to serve as the PI of Penn
State's Sloan Minority Scholarship Program. This Sloan program will provide a
year's funding to 16 Minority Ph. D. students in STEM disciplines during the
course of the project.