* 1407683
* Broadband Terahertz Polarimetry for Photonic and Biomedical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Dale Winebrenner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,949.00

Proposal Title:Broadband Terahertz Polarimetry for Photonic and Biomedical
Appllications Institution: University of Washington

The proposed project will make significant contributions in imaging and sensing
applications of various types of objects and materials and will contribute
significantly to health monitoring, homeland security and medical applications.
The broad scientific importance of terahertz technology is attested by the
number of research programs and publications working to develop terahertz
metrology techniques for a broad range of applications, including medical
imaging, organic and polymer material science, and study of chiral molecules,
amino acids and metamaterials. In particular, polarimetric methods will
contribute to an understanding of physical interaction mechanisms and device
physics in a range of applications. Our effort includes support for active
dissemination of polarimetric capability to the broader research community.
Moreover, this project is structured so as to enhance undergraduate and graduate
research opportunities at the University of Washington, by providing training to
student instrumentalists in terahertz polarimetric methods. Additionally,
experimental results and research findings through this project will be
disseminated in the form of guest lectures in a graduate-level course in
Photonics. Finally, throughout this project, we will endeavor to identify and
recruit female, disabled and under-represented minority students, at both
undergraduate and graduate levels. Polarization measurement and ellipsometry are
essential research techniques for investigating properties of new materials in
many areas of basic sciences, which also find immediate industrial and
biomedical applications. Broadband polarization measurement in the terahertz
frequency regime presently suffers from several significant limitations: (1)
Current terahertz polarimetry techniques offer only coarse polarization
resolution and small isolation between orthogonal polarization channels, due in
significant part to (2) poor ability to calibrate THz polarimeters, as a results
of high frequency-dependent power loss in external polarizers; moreover (3)
current terahertz polarimetry techniques require rotation of external polarizers
to pre-determined fixed angles and positions, which burdens the system with
lower measurement speed and inaccuracies in rotational polarizer placement. We
propose development of a novel broadband terahertz polarimeter that combines two
recent advancements in terahertz source and detector technology: A. Coherent
control of complex polarizations of terahertz waves generated in gas plasmas,
and B. Measurement of sample-induced ellipticity and cross-polarization using a
novel full polarimetric broadband terahertz spectroscopy setup. Integrating
these two techniques, we will demonstrate a polarization-agile terahertz
polarimetry system capable of investigating cross-polarization and chirality of
a wide variety of natural and manufactured targets. We will in particular
demonstrate applications of the new polarimeter in two important applications,
namely diagnosis of healthy and burned mammalian skin tissue and
characterization of photonic devices based on graphene and nano-stuctured
materials.