* 1407370
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Effects of placentophagia on anxiety and paternal behavior in male California mice (Peromyscus californicus)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Wendy Saltzman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,754.00

Paternal care is rare in mammals, but can have a critical influence on offspring
survival and development in the species in which it occurs, including humans.
Although neuroendocrine and experiential influences on paternal behavior have
been studied in numerous species, the proximate regulation of the onset of
paternal care remains poorly understood. In female mammals, hormonal changes
associated with the onset of motherhood (i.e., with pregnancy, parturition and
lactation) activate maternal behavior in part by decreasing new mothers'
anxiety-like or neophobic responses towards their newborns. It is unknown
whether anxiety reduction plays a similar role in the onset of male parental
care, but several physiological and behavioral measures of anxiety have been
negatively correlated with aspects of paternal care. The aim of this research is
to study the role of reduction in anxiety "permitting" the expression of
paternal behavior by males. This research has great relevance to human and human
behavior and inadequate paternal involvement and care is associated with many
difficulties observed in family interactions and subsequent behavior of children
as parents. To test this researcher will study the California mice, which
displays many of the same social behavior and family structures as humans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ingestion of placenta by parturient female mammals is very
common, and can elicit behavioral and physiological changes in mothers that
enhance their care of offspring. In several biparental mammals, fathers also
ingest placenta during the birth of their young; however, the function of
placentophagia by males is unknown. Recent research conducted by the co-PI and
PI has found that when sexually inexperienced male California mice (Peromyscus
californicus) are administered placenta via oral gavage, they subsequently show
reduced latencies to approach a novel object or an unrelated pup, as well as
reduced neural activity (Fos-immunoreactivity) in the dorsal bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis, a brain region associated with anxiety. Thus, these behavioral
and neural results suggest that placenta ingestion may reduce anxiety in males.
Several studies have found indirect evidence for an inverse relationship between
anxiety and paternal care in this and other species. The proposed work will test
the hypothesis that placentophagia by male California mice reduces their
anxiety, and by doing so may increase their paternal responsiveness. First-time
expectant fathers and virgin males will be treated via oral gavage with placenta
in oil or oil alone, or left untreated, and subsequently tested for anxiety-like
behavior and paternal behavior. Plasma will be assayed for allopregnanolone (an
anxiolytic steroid produced in placenta), and neural activity (Fos-
immunoreactivity) will be determined in brain areas known to regulate anxiety
and paternal care, to determine if placentophagia may reduce anxiety in new
fathers through anxiolytic effects of alloprenanolone. Results will provide
novel insights into the functional significance of placentophagia by males as
well as possible influences on the activation of male parental care.