* 1407734
* Collaborative Research:Cross-Domain Built-In Tuning of Advanced Mixed- Signal Radio-Frequncy Systems-on-Chip For Yield Recovery and Electrical Stress Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Byunghoo Jung, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This research will make significant contributions to Integrated Circuits (ICs)
design which are critical components in all computing, communications and
sensing systems. The proposed research is multidisciplinary, spanning the fields
of mixed-signal/ analog/Radio-Frequency (RF) design and simulation as well as
computer science. It also contains a comprehensive plan for outreach activities
and integration of research and education which are essential for enhancing the
scientific and engineering workforce.The graduate students working on the
project will receive cross-disciplinary training across diverse areas of
electrical and computer engineering and computer science. In addition, the
multi-disciplinary links to other system-level design disciplines will be
explored and developed. The students will participate in summer internship
programs with industry and work on real industry test cases. This will
facilitate technology transfer to industry and will also challenge the PIs and
students to address practical issues that impact commercialization of the
technology developed in this research. The research will be disseminated through
conference and journal papers, patents as well as demonstrations of working
hardware prototypes. The PI and co-PI will make maximum efforts to involve
undergraduate students at Georgia Tech and at Purdue in the research project. It
will also be possible to involve undergraduate project students in this research
through senior design projects. Thus, funding for this project will support the
goals of recruiting more U.S. citizens, women and minorities to graduate
programs at G.Tech and Purdue&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Mixed-signal/RF/mm-wave
Circuits and systems of the future, manufactured with aggressive CMOS processing
technologies will need to be tuned aggressively for performance throughout their
life cycle using built-in self-tuning mechanisms. New algorithms and on-chip
infrastructure need to be developed for tuning large numbers of parameters (e.g.
bias currents, matching networks) of these devices efficiently to improve
manufacturing yield and reduce field maintenance costs. Without such tuning
mechanisms it will be difficult to introduce new advanced electronic products
into the marketplace at low cost. This research will develop new engineering
principles for cross-domain (across different circuit modules including digital
compensation) built-in tuning of high performance wireless communication systems
using multi-dimensional optimization and supervised learning techniques.
Intelligent built-in testing methods will be used to expose the process
parameters corresponding to each device. This information along with process
data from wafer maps and test response data from built-in sensors will be used
to tune complex wireless systems for Multiple-Input-Multiple Output (MIMO)
beamforming and polar radio. In addition, field tuning will also be applied to
extending the useful life of devices in the field by redistributing electrical
stresses from electrical degradation. The core concepts developed will be
applicable to a host of mixed-signal/analog/high-speed devices such as Wired-
Local-Area Network(WLAN) systems, sensor networks, automobile control
systems,and others.