* 1407908
* Understanding and Modeling the Impact of Occupant Energy Usage Characteristics in Building
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Carol Menassa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 252,726.00

1132734 (Menassa). The objective of this research is to understand and model the
effect of the difference in occupant energy use characteristics on total energy
consumption in commercial buildings. To achieve this objective, data will be
collected from public databases, real time monitoring of four buildings, and
surveys of different building and occupant groups. The results will be used to
develop and validate an agent based model (ABM) that simulates occupant energy
use characteristics in commercial buildings. The research is targeted to result
in fundamental contributions related to advancing the knowledge, understanding
and modeling of occupant energy use characteristics for choosing and designing
sustainable building systems. First this research explores a major problem
facing building decision makers, and that is how to reconcile predicted and
actual energy consumption in buildings by studying the effect of differences in
occupant energy use characteristics. The second aspect of the proposed research
is that it will develop, test and validate a model that studies interactions
between different occupants in the buildings and their effect on energy
consumption using ABM. This approach is designed to result in more accurate
estimates of building performance because it will simulate occupants? energy use
characteristics, schedule, as well as their location in the building at any
given time during the da., and generate a list of equipment they are using to
achieve reliable energy consumption estimates. Another important aspect of this
model is the feedback during the building operation phase that will allow the
decision maker to test energy conservation opportunities, and determine which of
these will result in greatest and fastest influence on the occupants to change
their energy use habits. This approach to understanding and modeling of occupant
energy use characteristics focuses on the building occupants and the way they
use energy, as opposed to the traditional approach that focuses on building
systems and their expected energy requirements. There is a lack of information
about how building occupants affect the energy consumption in buildings through
their different approaches to energy usage. The results of this research are
targeted to advance the knowledge related to occupant energy usage
characteristics, and significantly affect the building design process. In
addition, the dissemination of the project results through different media are
designed to have significant impact of educating building occupants about their
energy use characteristics, and its spiraling effect on the amount of energy
used to support their activities. Building occupants will learn which energy
usage characteristics result in significant reduction in energy usage, and how
to apply this learning in their daily routines without affecting their
productivity and overall wellbeing. In addition, the proposed research will
incorporate student participation that is balanced as to gender,
national/international representation and inclusion of underrepresented women
and minorities through collaboration with the Center for the Integration of
Research, Teaching and Learning (CIRTL) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
(UW). Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged in the data collection
and modeling phases. In addition, this research will provide unique
opportunities for recruiting and retaining women and minority engineers through
the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) and the International
Engineering Studies and Programs at the University of Wisconsin - Madison. This
will be supplemented by outreach to K-12 students through participation in
summer activities organized by Expanding Your Horizons (EYH) Program.