* 1407518
* Collaborative research: A major leap forward: Optimal designs for correlated data, multiple objectives, and multiple covariates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Min Yang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 211,019.00

Designed experiments form an integral part of the scientific process in many
areas of research, such as the biological sciences, the health sciences, the
social sciences, engineering, marketing, education, and others. A well-chosen
design facilitates the collection of data that maximizes the information for the
scientific questions of interest at a fixed cost, or that minimizes the cost for
a desired level of information. Many experiments deal with correlated data,
multiple objectives, or multiple covariates, but little is known about the
identification of good designs in such settings. This project establishes how to
find efficient designs for these types of problems for the most commonly used
statistical models. The tools developed in this project have a tremendous
potential for impact on society because designed experiments are used so often
to further knowledge in many different fields. Results from the project will be
made available to researchers in other areas through easy-to-use software that
implements algorithms that are developed. Graduate students will be trained to
become researchers in design of experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
of this project constitute a major leap forward in understanding and knowledge
of optimal design of experiments. Recent contributions by the principal
investigators and others have had a significant impact on the advancement of
optimal design of experiments for nonlinear and generalized linear models.
However, these results have for the most part been limited to (i) independent
data; (ii) use of a single optimality criterion; and (iii) use of a single
covariate. While these results are arguably important in their own right, this
project will extend methods and tools to problems with correlated data, multiple
objectives, and multiple covariates. The latter could consist of a mix of
covariates that can be chosen by the experimenter and covariates that, known or
unknown at the design stage, cannot be controlled by the experimenter.
Preliminary results indicate that this is an opportune time to make these
challenging but critical steps. Building a framework for deriving and
identifying optimal designs for these types of problems will provide a much
needed addition to our collective design toolbox. Current results are very
sparse and only for very specialized problems that are mostly motivated by
mathematical feasibility. The project develops tools to select efficient designs
for models and conditions that are far more realistic than those that have been
considered so far.