* 1407967
* Nanoscale thermal processes in devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kevin Pipe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Thermal management is a significant concern for current and emerging electronic
devices, which increasingly operate with high power densities and dissipate
power into ever-smaller volumes. Furthermore, devices are increasingly composed
of numerous material interfaces, which strongly impact the flow of heat and
cause literature values of a device material's thermal conductivity to be more
and more irrelevant when describing how heat is transferred from the device.
Using a recently developed tool that can map the temperature in a device with
unprecedented spatial resolution, the research team will study heat dissipation
in fundamental device building blocks such as material junctions as well as
critical technologies such as high-power transistors and lasers. From measured
temperature profiles, the team will develop general design principles for better
managing heat in devices, which can provide better performance and better
reliability for numerous device types including light-emitting diodes, lasers,
transistors, solar cells, and thermoelectric generators/coolers. From a broad
perspective, these advances will aid the performance of technology platforms
such as mobile electronics, communications systems, and energy harvesting
systems. This work will also train undergraduate and graduate students on the
topics of device physics, nanoscale energy transport, and solid state physics,
through direct research activities as well as developed course materials.
Furthermore, the team will engage high school students and underrepresented
minorities in science and engineering activities related to energy and
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to use high-resolution thermal measurements in conjunction with coupled
electron/phonon models to obtain fundamental insight into the processes that
govern nanoscale thermal transport in devices. Such devices increasingly operate
with high fields and high power densities, leading to electron, optical phonon,
and acoustic phonon systems that are often out of thermal equilibrium with each
other. Furthermore, material interfaces can strongly impact phonon scattering
and phonon dispersion. While the implications of non-equilibrium on heating in
nanoscale devices (especially Si FETs) have been studied computationally for
over a decade, most of the proposed models and the large number of assumptions
made within them remain experimentally untested due to a lack of instruments
that can directly probe temperature fields with nanometer resolution. The
research team will utilize an ultra-high vacuum scanning thermal microscope they
have recently developed that is capable of probing temperature fields with
unprecedented spatial resolution (10 nm) and temperature resolution (15 mK).
This tool will provide the first experimental insight into the temperature
fields in biased devices, and in conjunction with electron and phonon transport
models will reveal the nature of electron-phonon and phonon-phonon coupling at
device junctions and hotspots. The study will begin by first probing biased
single heterojunctions and homojunctions, and will then expand to prototypical
devices such as p-n diodes, diode lasers, and HEMTs. The understanding gained by
the proposed work will enable device engineers to better analyze bottlenecks to
device heat dissipation, engineer thermoelectric refrigeration within a device,
and better engineer electron-phonon scattering for processes such as phonon-
assisted tunneling and nonradiative transitions.