* 1407473
* Development of a New Transistor for Flexible Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* P.Paul Ruden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract Title: Development of a New Transistor for Flexible
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract. This proposal describes a
collaborative, interdisciplinary effort at the University of Minnesota to
understand, design, fabricate and test a new class of switching devices for
flexible electronics, namely electrolyte gated transistors (EGTs). The two
Principal Investigators, Frisbie (chemical engineering and materials science)
and Ruden (electrical and computer engineering), have a strong track record of
scientific collaboration in transistor development extending over the past ten
years. In this proposal, they again join their respective experimental and
computational expertise to understand and develop EGTs as a novel class of
devices for applications such as flexible displays and wearable sensors. This
project will produce experimental and theoretical results that advance the field
of flexible electronics; it will support the training of PhD students and
undergraduates, and it will also produce educational aids for teaching about
electronic materials and devices at the high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract. In prior work by the principal
investigators (PIs) it has been established that electrolyte gated transistors
(EGTs) have many advantages for building circuits on impact resistant, bendable
plastic substrates. These advantages include: sub-2 V operation compatible with
thin film batteries, excellent ON/OFF current ratios of order 106, complementary
circuit designs (i.e., p-type and n-type channels), high ON-state
transconductances &gt;1 ÝS/Ým, fast switching speeds approaching 1 MHz,
excellent bias stress stability, good air stability without encapsulation, and
easy, near-room-temperature fabrication procedures compatible with plastic.
These very promising characteristics motivate the PIs to continue to improve
EGTs and to develop accurate computational models of their operation that both
reflect a deep understanding of the device physics, and facilitate device design
for integration into complete circuits. There are a number of challenges
associated with understanding EGTs because the gate insulator layer contains
mobile ions. For example, the mechanism of EGT switching depends on whether the
semiconductor channel is permeable or impermeable to ions, and new transistor
models must be constructed to take account of these differences. In addition,
the operation of EGTs, and in particular the channel carrier mobility, depends
on the type of mobile ions employed in the gate/electrolyte/ semiconductor
stack. These effects, and many others, must be understood in order to optimize
EGT performance. &lt;br/&gt;EGTs also open up substantial opportunities for
changing circuit fabrication paradigms in flexible electronics. In particular,
the ability to make EGTs entirely from electronically functional liquid inks has
inspired the PIs to propose a new, self-aligning fabrication strategy based on
nanoimprint lithography and capillary flow. This process, termed SCALE (for
Self-Aligned Capillary Flow Lithography for Electronics), will be extensively
investigated and developed in connection with fabrication of p-type and n-type
EGTs. The PIs will also expand the materials sets compatible with EGT
architectures, e.g., new gate electrolytes based on ion gels and ceramic ion
conductors, and the incorporation of both organic semiconductors and amorphous
oxides as the channel materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this proposal will be in human resource development and the creation of
educational tools for teaching semiconductor electronics and materials science.
Specifically, this grant will support the training of PhD students and
undergraduates in the fabrication and characterization of electronic devices,
new microelectronics processing methods, novel device architectures, and
sensors, i.e., areas that are important to national workforce development. The
PIs will also develop prototype ¡§Flexible Circuit Fabrication Kits¡¨ that will
allow high school science students to explore the interplay between
microelectronics and materials. These kits will include embossed plastic
substrates and non-toxic, environmentally friendly electronic inks that can be
easily delivered to the substrates to create circuits that can then be tested
using simple supplies such as a battery and a resistance meter.