* 1407959
* Closing the terahertz gap with a new-family of terahertz devices based on  two-dimensional materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Berardi Sensale-Rodriguez, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

(Non-Technical) The goal of this project is to develop a new generation of
electronic devices capable of efficiently operating at frequencies well above
those attainable in current state-of-the-art electronic devices, into the
terahertz region of the spectrum. Over the past decade, the terahertz frequency
regime, the region of the electromagnetic spectrum located between the microwave
and the infra-red, has become the subject of much attention due to its wide
range of unique applications in diverse areas such as astronomy, imaging,
spectroscopy, security, communications, and so on. Although significant progress
has been recently achieved, there is still a need for devices efficiently
operating at these frequencies. In particular, there is a necessity for low-
cost, compact sources of terahertz radiation. In this context, the research
targeted in this proposal tries to provide an answer for a long standing problem
for the terahertz community: how to achieve power gain at terahertz frequencies
in compact, electronic devices at room-temperature. The proposed devices can
offer low cost of manufacturing, and therefore will find many potential
industrial applications in future compact terahertz systems (e.g. "terahertz
chips" for communications, security, and biomedical applications). This research
vision is interlaced with an educational vision of mentoring new generations of
graduate and undergraduate students in the field of materials, high frequency
electronics, terahertz, and optics and stimulating their critical thinking and
curiosity by providing them with hands-on experience in cutting-edge research.
This is of significant importance given the future projected needs for highly
trained engineers and scientists in the United States, and in particular in the
state of Utah. The proposed research and educational plans will leverage the
ongoing research activities on materials, electronics and optoelectronics and
the current outreach programs at the University of
Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(Technical) This project aims to develop active
terahertz electronic devices (terahertz detectors, oscillators, and amplifiers)
based on the interplay between resonant tunneling and electron plasma waves in
stacked two-dimensional material layers. These devices promise power gains
&gt;7dB at frequencies above 2 THz when in amplifier configurations, which has
been proven to be difficult to achieve in traditional high-frequency electronic-
devices. The fundamental mechanism enabling gain at terahertz frequencies in
these devices is the interplay between negative differential conductance (NDC)
and the electron plasma waves in a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), i.e. the
NDC provides a gain medium for the plasma waves excited in the semiconductor
2DEG. All the challenges associated with these devices are going to be
identified and addressed at the materials, device fabrication, and design
stages. Of these 2D materials, graphene, can be an excellent platform for
plasmonic transport owed to its large room temperature mobility thus low
plasmonic damping. Moreover, its intrinsic 2D nature, and its ease of transfer
to arbitrary substrates can allow for unlimited degrees of freedom of
integration, reduce the cost with respect to that in III-V semiconductors, and
allow for more simple fabrication processes. We will also answer questions
regarding high quality 2D material preparation: control and optimization of
domain size, integrity, inclusions, interface boundaries, contamination,
fidelity of crystallography / alignment between stacked layers, and terminating
carbon bonding.