* 1407318
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Demographic consequences of  sexually dimorphic responses to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,083.00

To understand how natural populations of plants and animals will respond to
climate change, one needs to investigate, not just the effects of climate on the
mean rates of birth and death in a population, but also whether effects differ
between important subgroups within a population, such as males and females.
Previous work in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado by the researchers on this
project has revealed that the ratio of males to females changes greatly in
response to climate in the widespread plant, edible valerian or Valeriana
edulis: warmer or drier conditions favor males. This project will build on that
discovery and investigate the mechanisms by which climate affects males
differently from females. The project will also test how the differential
effects of climate on males and females affect the growth of whole populations.
For example, if females become very rare, birth rates may fail to match death
rates, causing a population to decline. Results will yield improved tools for
understanding how climate change may imbalance natural populations and diminish
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have four main broader
impacts. First, the investigators will engage the local community in data
collection. Volunteer citizen scientists will contribute data while gaining an
appreciation for how ecological data can be used to address local and global
challenges. Second, the data collected will be integrated into an interactive
and publicly available online learning module aimed at undergraduate students.
Third, this work will broaden the research training of a doctoral student and
provide a research experience for undergraduates. Finally, the work increase
societal capacity to manage economically and ecologically important species.