* 1407067
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science SITE: Research Experience for Teachers on Cyber-Enabled Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Sitharama Iyengar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 498,000.00

Developing computational-thinking competencies in K-12 schools to prepare
students to join the 21st Century workforce is a critical need. The Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at Florida International University (FIU)
focuses on cyber-enabled technologies in order to address the need for enhancing
computational proficiency in the K-12 community.

The goals are to: 1. Increase K-12 teachers' knowledge of cyber-enabled
technologies; 2. Expand K-12 teachers' technology competencies through research
and professional development programs; 3. Support teachers' development of best
practices incorporating research and cyber-enabled technology into the K-12
classroom; and 4. Build long-term collaborative partnerships between K-12 STEM
teachers and the research community;

Under the coherent theme of cyber-enabled technologies, the proposed site will
offer state-of-the-art research experiences for teachers in demanding new and
emerging research fields in order to foster increased research-based curricula
and activities implementation in the schools. Teachers from the Miami-Dade
County school district, the fourth largest school district in the United States,
are invited to apply. Approximately 72% of the teachers in this school district
are from minority groups. The district services a majority - minority population
and contains approximately 23% of the state's identified 'high poverty' schools.

The RET Site provides a total of 48 middle and high school science teachers
within commuting distance of FIU professional development and research
opportunities. A total of 16 teachers per year for 3 years engage in high-
quality, cutting edge research working directly with research faculty for six
weeks during the summer. Research projects target emerging cyber-enabled
technologies including cloud computing, social networks, security and privacy.
An important objective of the program is the transfer of the teachers' research
experiences into the classrooms. Teachers work closely with faculty, staff,
students and each other to collectively explore methodologies to effectively
communicate the technologies and the research concepts and processes to
students, identify and link these skills across the curricula, and design
educational modules based on technology and research gains resulting from the
RET experience. Other career development program activities include weekly
seminars, field trips, workshops and faculty mentorship throughout academic year
and beyond as the collaboration matures.