* 1407371
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Advanced Content in Computational Engineering and Science Standards for Teachers (ACCESS 4Teachers)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 11/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at
the University of Southern California (USC). The USC Viterbi School of
Engineering has partnered with the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD)
to develop an integrated engineering and computer science RET Site targeting
middle school science and math educators. The resulting program is a
collaborative research-based professional development effort that combines the
computer science, engineering, technological, and pedagogical expertise of USC
faculty with inner-city teachers in 6th- thru 8th-grade science and math
classrooms in the LAUSD. The primary goals of the program are to: (1) increase
teachers' knowledge of computationally-focused science and engineering
technologies; (2) increase middle school teachers' disciplinary pedagogic
competence in computer science, engineering, and applied math through a
comprehensive program that includes targeted lab-based research experiences
focused on computer science and engineering aligned with Next Generation Science
Standards, Common Core Math Standards, and advanced lesson study; and (3) build
and maintain long-term collaborative partnerships between LAUSD middle school
teachers and the research community that positively impact student achievement
and career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in the strong research foundation at the core of the RET Site combined with
a leadership team that excels at both research and educational outreach. This
RET Site is focused on innovative, societally relevant computer science and
engineering research and brings this research to high-need middle school science
and math teachers using lesson-study focused professional development
approaches. The goal is to facilitate team teaching between math and science
teachers to integrate their subject areas with engineering and computer science
problem solving aligned with the Next Generation Science and the Common Core
Math standards. This project effectively translates research into educational
practice and provides exemplary models for weaving computing and engineering
concepts into K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET Site program has
significant broader impacts. It will result in innovative curricula that not
only address new curriculum standards, but also address an area of significant
need in middle school content. It will provide video-based middle school lesson
exemplars and units of study for teachers nationwide to use in their classrooms.
The LAUSD, the second largest public school district in the United States, has a
significant population of students from under-represented groups. Thus this
project has the potential to have a positive influence on many students who are
traditionally under-represented as computer scientists and engineers.