* 1407294
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring species formation in southern Africa: A comparative approach using broadly distributed and distantly related squamate reptiles.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Brice Noonan, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 18,504.00

How new species form is a central question of evolutionary biology. Scientists
strive to understand how the natural processes that promote genetic and
biological variation in diverse, natural habitats lead to new species formation.
Local climate and geographic conditions are important components of this
question, which often interact with species subsets (i.e., populations), leading
them down independent evolutionary paths. Southern Africa has a geologically
complex landscape, containing rock outcrops nearly as ancient as the Earth?s
formation. Unlike temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, the climate of
southern Africa has been predominantly warm and dry over most of its history.
The combination of varied terrain and stable climate has produced an abundance
of distinct habitats and microhabitats that promote diversity in both plant and
animal life. This project focuses on three arid-adapted, rock-dwelling lizard
species native to southern Africa, although these patterns will likely be
comparable to other ecologically restricted, non-reptilian species. The
investigators will explore whether species-specific ecological requirements,
prehistoric climate history, and geology produce similar patterns of genetic and
biological differentiation among these contemporary, co-distributed, and
ecologically restricted lizards species and populations.

We will be able to test the strength of genetic barriers on population
connectivity and diversification by making comparisons over the complete
geographic distributions of multiple, non-model organisms. The integration of
genome-wide data with traditionally-used morphological trait data and
prehistoric climate data will allow an integrative and revolutionary approach
that has never before been applied to southern Africa's unique wildlife. Broader
impacts include educational outreach via mentoring promising undergraduates,
some of whom have been from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines, and
participating in local and regional science fair programs. This project includes
developing expertise in genomic bioinformatics, which will then be passed on to
the international research team in The University of Mississippi Biology
Department. Dissemination of results will occur through peer-reviewed
publication in open-access journals, presentations at scientific meetings, and
all data will be made publicly available.