* 1407461
* Nonparametric Maximum Likelihood Estimators for Multivariate Distributions and Related Inference Problems with Various Types of Censored Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jian-Jian Ren, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

In the analysis of multivariate survival data, we frequently encounter the
situation where one or more components of a vector are not completely observable
due to censoring. One common type of such data is when the survival time is
subject to various types of censoring, and the covariate variables, such as
treatments, gender, etc., are completely observable. Data examples of this type
have been encountered in important medical research on bone marrow transplant,
breast cancer, AIDS research, heart disease, etc. Another common type of
censored survival data occurs when both components of the random vector are
survival times that are subject to univariate or bivariate right censoring. Data
examples of such type have been encountered in medical studies on skin grafts
and kidney disease. The objective of this project is to study the empirical
likelihood-based nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator (NPMLE) for
multivariate distribution function with various types of censored multivariate
survival data and to provide solutions and theoretical understanding of several
important nonparametric and semi-parametric inference problems in survival
analysis. The statistical methodology developed in this project will provide
tools for multivariate survival data analysis, which has direct impact to
medical research, epidemiology, and social and behavioral sciences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that nonparametric distribution estimator of that of
random vector X based on multivariate survival data is of great importance,
because it provides tools to study the relation among the components of X and
plays vital roles in modeling and testing, etc. It is also known that to study
the effects of covariate Z on survival time T under semi-parametric model
assumptions, such as linear models, the Cox model, accelerated life model, etc.,
the estimators under the model setting often can be expressed as statistical
functional of the distribution estimator, thus the asymptotic properties of
these estimators can be studied via the differentiability of these statistical
functionals and the asymptotic properties of distribution estimators. However,
most existing estimators with above mentioned survival data are ad hoc, and are
not likelihood-based in the usual sense. Also, most of them either contain
negative probability masses, or are kernel and bandwidth dependent. Since Owen
(1988), the empirical likelihood function has been generally accepted as the
nonparametric likelihood function. The essential idea of empirical likelihood-
based NPMLE ensures that it is a proper multivariate distribution function,
which is desirable in practice. But, the empirical likelihood-based NPMLE for
aforementioned multivariate survival data had not been carefully considered in
literature until a recent paper by the PI of this project, in which she
discovered many surprisingly nice properties of the bivariate NPMLE with
censored survival data, and studied its asymptotic properties for discrete
covariate Z. In this proposed empirical likelihood, weighted empirical
likelihood, asymptotic methods and simulations will be mainly used, and the
issues under consideration include: (a) Derivation of empirical likelihood-based
NPMLE for various types of censored multivariate survival data; (b) Computation
algorithms and asymptotic properties of the resulting NPMLE; (c) Derivation and
asymptotic properties of the statistical functionals under several important
semi-parametric survival models. This project will provide a general methodology
for constructing the multivariate distribution estimators with various types of
censored multivariate survival data, which generally possesses desirable
properties, and will provide solutions to several important and challenging
statistical inference problems associated with some widely used survival models.