* 1407454
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: An App-Centric Transport Architecture for the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Joan Feigenbaum, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The Transmission Control Protocol and its socket interface are used by most
network applications today---viewed as a software program, it is likely the most
popular one in the world. Over thirty years old, this program is now showing
signs of age. Web, mobile, and embedded applications use it in unanticipated
ways (many interacting flows of different lengths with different objectives); it
does not properly support mobile devices with multiple networks; it does not
allow an application to adapt quickly to changing network conditions; it does
not work well in fast datacenter networks; and it has a fruitless, adversarial
relationship with in-network "middleboxes".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;App-Centric
Transport (ACT) aims to solve these problems. Unlike today's transport
architecture, ACT takes application objectives into account in making its
transmission decisions. ACT uses a computer-generated transmission control
program, which takes models of the workload and objectives to automatically
synthesize protocols. This program (Remy) serves both as a way to implement
protocols and as a design tool to answer fundamental questions about congestion
control. ACT explores centralized control over transmission and path selection
for datacenters, and uses machine learning classifiers to select the best
network on mobile devices. It aims to resolve tussles between endpoint transport
and in-network middleboxes by viewing middlebox interposition as a
generalization of multi-path transport. Project participants are collaborating
with Facebook and Google on some of these ideas. The education plan introduces
protocol design contests where students can run and measure their protocols over
trace data and compare their protocols on a leaderboard.