* 1407666
* Development of environment-controlled enclosures for the Network of Robotic Echelle Spectrographs
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Timothy Brown, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2016
* USD 61,691.00

&lt;br/&gt;Just a few decades ago, scientists discovered the first planets
around other stars. Since then, it has become apparent that these "exoplanets"
are very common in the universe, and a large catalog of them has been compiled.
Detailed followup study is generally difficult, owing to the faintness of their
light, but is vital to understanding the exoplanets and their contribution to a
chain of reasoning that ultimately bears on the question of how common life
itself might be elsewhere in the universe. Very specialized instrumentation is
needed to study exoplanets thoroughly once they are detected, and the shortage
of that instrumentation is a significant bottleneck addressed by the
construction of the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope (LCOGT), a
worldwide network of primarily 1-meter telescopes. LCOGT will be equipped,
through recent NSF funding, with precise spectrographs appropriate to exoplanet
study. The current proposal addresses an improvement to the instrumentation in
the form of a better enclosure that will be thermally controlled to allow
optimum spectrographic precision to be achieved. The prototype to be constructed
will demonstrate an important element in overall system
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LCOGT project addresses a specific
recommendation of the ASTRO 2010 (decadal) report calling for making increased
telescope time available to radial velocity (RV) exoplanet work, even if
limiting precision were not improved from then-current levels. LCOGT will
roughly double the nationwide capacity for RV studies of exoplanets, and will
allow accuracy of 3m/s in exposure times of less that an hour for stars brighter
than V=12. With its multiple locations, LCOGT provides a powerful combination of
quantity and quality of data acquisition. The ultimate LCOGT spectrographs are
cross-dispersed echelles with resolving power R=53,000 and almost full
wavelength coverage over 380-860 nm, designed for efficiency, stability, and
ease of wavelength calibration. The new enclosure design is called an "igloo",
and is carefully insulated and temperature-controlled. An RV accuracy of 3 m/s
requires temperature control to +/- 1 C. The NRES system will enable astronomers
to characterize exoplanet candidate host stars, validate transiting companions,
search for multiple planetary systems, and derive masses and orbital elements
for a wide range of planets. Candidates will be supplied by ground-based transit
surveys, such as HATnet, SuperWASP, and Qatar, and from NASA's TESS
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LCOGT project is active in education,
operating an extensive program of student observing on their telescopes.
Numerous students from high-school to university seniors are employed as
interns. Designs developed for LCOGT are open-source, and science data are made
available to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is
being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.