* 1407548
* Flexible Statistical Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Trevor Hastie, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 10/31/2019
* USD 499,996.00

The abundance of data in science, medicine and commerce, and the current state
of computing technologies gives us opportunities in statistical modeling never
seen before. We are able to build powerful predictive models for the risk of
breast cancer, heart disease or stroke, for example, using genomic markers. We
can predict the risk of credit-card default or fraudulent insurance claims.
Predictive models are able to recommend movies or music to a customer, based on
their past behavior and preferences and that of customers like them. Using data
on locations of sightings of multiple animal or plant species, we can build
distribution maps over a geographical domain. With large amounts of data, it
becomes necessary that these models are built in an automatic way; the goal of
this project is to ensure that the resulting products remain
interpretable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generalized additive models are both
interpretable and somewhat powerful, but were originally intended for a
relatively small set of predictor variables. This project will use methods in
convex optimization to automatically build such models using potentially
thousands of variables. The method will automatically omit irrelevant variables,
as well as select the amount of nonlinearity needed for all those retained.
Convex methods will also be used to incorporate side information in matrix
completion problems, as well as a variety of multivariate methods where we have
traditionally worked with low-rank representations. Ecologists often struggle
with combining data from multiple species and different sampling schemes. This
project will provide a unified framework using inhomogeneous Poisson process
models for combining these data, and producing high-quality distribution.