* 1407804
* Digital Instrumentation for the Radio Astronomy Community
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Dan Werthimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 895,977.00

Radio astronomy has opened up new and unexpected windows on the cosmos for many
decades now, and continues to provide the most definitive views of many aspects
of the universe. Construction of many new and exciting instruments and
telescopes is underway or planned for the near future. The investigators on this
proposal have a strong commitment to making cutting-edge radio astronomy
instrumentation available to the broadest possible user community at minimal
cost and duplication of effort. They have pioneered open-source design of the
common elements that many astronomers need, and in so doing have synergized a
community spirit and team effort that have gone beyond expectations and helped
to fuel the current surge of exciting radio astronomy research. In this project,
they will continue that effort with a new generation of the general-purpose
electronic hardware that lies at the heart of many radio
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CASPER collaboration represented by this
proposal has been extremely successful in delivering open source hardware and
software to the wider radio astronomy community, leading to a resurgence in
radio astronomy instrumentation development at the university, national
observatory, and international level. The associated science return in the last
decade has been immense. This proposal would continue this work with delivery of
a new generation of digital hardware through a number of new initiatives,
including development of the next-generation ROACH processor board used of the
kind used at observatories worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
wide-ranging broader impacts in enabling improved performance at reduced cost of
a wide range of radio astronomical instrumentation. In addition, student
involvement is strong, community dissemination of design practices is broad, and
there is a clear commitment to stimulation of community cooperation and sharing
the excitement of advancing the state of the art of radiofrequency
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.