* 1407815
* Defect Manipulation in Pi-Conjugated Semiconducting Polymers and their Effect on Microstructure and Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers
are under intense development for use in organic light-emitting diodes, thin-
film transistors, and solar cells. However, the understanding of their
performance in many applications is limited because of the difficulty in
establishing a detailed correlation of structure-property relationships. This in
turn requires deeper understanding of structure development and formation of
these classes of materials, which is currently hampered by the synthetic
chemists' inability to precisely control defects in pi-conjugated semiconducting
polymers. The goal of this proposal is to develop model pi-conjugated polymers
with precisely controlled defects, so that a more complete description of their
microstructure can be developed and therefore elucidate how the microstructure
affects optoelectronic properties. The model polymer will be
poly(3-hextylthiophene) (P3HT) to begin with, and as the project moves on other
polymer systems will be investigated. To simplify the model, polymer nanowires
will be characterized rather than the semi-crystalline thin film so that the
crystalline domains can be studied extensively. As the work progresses, the
degree of disorder in the films will be systematically increased in order to
explore the interplay between the crystalline and amorphous domains, and the
role of disorder in optoelectronic properties of pi-conjugated semiconducting
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to further the understanding of an increasingly
important class of materials, namely pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers.
These polymers have been attracting a lot of interest in the general area of
flexible electronics, where the aim is to develop portable electronic devices in
a more cost-effective and energy-efficient manner. These polymers are
increasingly being used in commercial applications, for example in organic
light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). Furthermore, they are actively being developed
for use in renewable energy as the light absorber material in solar cells.
Despite their widespread usage, there is much that remains unknown about how
defects (for example, kinks in the polymer chain) affect the polymers'
properties. In this proposal, the defects in the polymers will be systematically
altered so that a more detailed understanding of these materials can be
developed. The proposed research will be enhanced by community outreach
activities through the Pacific Science Center, the Science Cafe, and through
mentoring activities for underrepresented minorities (URMs) and for women. The
project also includes educational activities for undergraduate and high-school
students.