* 1407158
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing the Evolutionary Significance of Recurrent Horizontal Gene Transfer of a Chimeric Photoreceptor in Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Kathleen Pryer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,410.00

This study will provide a deeper understanding of the systematics of ferns and
the genes that allow them to grow in shady habitats. The presence of neochrome
-- a novel chimeric photoreceptor that fuses red-sensing and blue-sensing
photoreceptors into a single gene -- is linked to the ability of ferns to thrive
in low-light conditions. Despite its potential importance in adaptation, the
evolution of neochrome has remained unexplored. This study will investigate the
evolution of neochrome and test the hypothesis that the distribution of the gene
is the result of recurrent horizontal gene transfer among ferns. This award will
support the research and training of a female doctoral student and undergraduate
researchers in diverse molecular and systematic methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is common in prokaryotes
and is often a key driver of adaptation and evolution. However, most documented
examples of plant-to-plant HGT involve mitochondrial DNA and/or parasite-host
transfers; only a handful of cases include functional nuclear genes, and even
fewer have possible adaptive implications. Consequently, plant-to-plant HGT
generally has been overlooked as a noteworthy factor in plant evolution. The aim
of this research is to use targeted next-generation sequencing of neochrome from
diverse fern species to further elucidate the frequency and timing of the
seemingly large number of neochrome horizontal gene transfer events in ferns.
Because neochrome may have played a major role in promoting the radiation of
ferns under low-light environments, this study has important implications for
better understanding the evolutionary significance of plant-to-plant HGT.