* 1407011
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Gene flow by seed and pollen: implications for plant adaptation to changing climates
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Nancy Emery, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,020.00

A critical challenge for ecologists today is to understand how species will
respond to projected shifts in climate. Particularly lacking are approaches
considering how genetic connectivity among populations will influence local
adaptation to novel climates. In flowering plants, gene flow occurs through seed
dispersal and pollen movement, and these processes can have different
consequences for the distribution of genetic variation in traits that determine
climatic tolerances. This project will incorporate estimates of seed and pollen
movement into an analysis of local adaptation in Lasthenia fremontii
(Asteraceae), a plant species that is endemic to vernal pool wetlands of western
North America. The distribution of genetic variation, due to seed versus pollen
movement, will be analyzed across the species range using molecular markers.
This analysis will make it possible to evaluate the consequences of gene flow on
the potential for plant populations to adapt to changing climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change presents a major threat to the
world?s biodiversity. Species with patchy distributions, fragmented habitats and
limited dispersal abilities, including many rare plant species, are particularly
vulnerable because they cannot shift their distributions to track changing
climatic regimes. Our project will significantly contribute to restoration and
conservation efforts for narrowly distributed plant species in the face of
climate change. We will develop a practical guide for the study of population
genetics in vernal pool plant species that will be distributed to state and
federal agencies, research institutes, and non-profit organizations involved in
the conservation and management of vernal pool ecosystems. In addition, the
project will provide research experience to undergraduate students, including
individuals from groups underrepresented in the sciences.