* 1407765
* Understanding the Nature of Interfaces in Two Dimensional Electronic Devices(UNITE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Robert Wallace, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

The ability to reduce the size of the basic switch in computers, the transistor,
is being seriously challenged. Materials that have been used for decades, such
as silicon, are anticipated to soon reach the limit of their performance. This
will impact applications where reduced power is needed, along with high speed
switching, such as portable electronics and cell phones, as well as larger power
intensive operations, like data storage and server centers. The collaborative
international team of researchers in this program will focus on determining the
feasibility of using the ultimate limit for such switches: atomically-thin, two-
dimensional (2D) layers. The materials to be studied, called "transition metal
dichalcogenides," are unique when produced in atomically thin sheets, and
exhibit promising properties that may enable efficient low power, high
performance computing. A key property that will be studied is the surface and
interfaces of these materials as they are combined to form the transistor, and
how the chemical and physical properties of these interfaces impact and improve
the transistor electrical switching behavior. The research results could enable
the possibility of reducing the power consumption associated with the broad
spectrum of electronic devices, which drive the information and communication
age. This will be good for society in terms of extended battery life in portable
devices and also good for the environment in terms of reducing the total
electrical energy consumed by information and communication technologies. The
project, entitled "Understanding the Nature of Interfaces in Two-Dimensional
Electronic Devices (UNITE)," brings together leading researchers from the USA,
the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, each funded by their respective
government agencies through the US Ireland R&amp;D Partnership Program. The
project will provide training to five graduate students in the USA and Ireland,
and will include student exchanges between the Institutes providing a broader
scientific and cultural experience for the graduate students supported through
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNITE project will investigate the
synthesis, device fabrication and characterization of 2D transition metal
dichalcogenides semiconductors for applications in low voltage tunnel field
effect transistors. We will explore two separate routes to large area synthesis
through van der Waals epitaxy and atomic layer deposition. In parallel,
characterization and understanding of the surfaces and interfacial regions
between commercially available bulk crystals and technologically relevant
contacts and insulators will be conducted. This will be accomplished using a
combination of in-situ and ex-situ characterization covering questions such as:
how can 2D semiconductor surfaces be functionalized to allow uniform and
continuous oxide thin films to be formed by atomic layer deposition; can
capacitance-voltage based metrology be applied to metal-oxide-semiconductor
systems on 2D semiconductor surfaces; what is the nature of conduction for metal
contacts on 2D semiconductors; and how are the atomic scale electrical
properties related to larger area contacts' It is noted that the development of
growth methods for large area substrates will not only demonstrate the potential
to move 2D semiconductor based transistors from research to production, but will
also provide a source of technologically interesting 2D semiconductor materials
for basic study which are not commonly available through geological sources.
Finally, the growth and characterization studies will be applied to the
fabrication of a tunnel field effect transistor based on two dimensional
semiconductor heterostructures. If the UNITE team can successfully understand
the issues relating to large area 2D synthesis, uniform insulator deposition,
ohmic contact formation, and charge transport in single or few layer 2D
semiconductors, this knowledge will be relevant to a range of potential device
architectures.