* 1407006
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional behavioral analysis of positively selected genes in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Rob Kulathinal, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,254.00

Behavioral isolation rapidly evolves between species, yet relatively little is
known about the genetic basis of pre-mating reproductive isolation, particularly
the role of behavioral genes involved in courtship. This knowledge gap is
important to fill since behavioral cues are generally species-specific and
thought to evolve under strong selective pressures. Using a combination of
computational, genetic, and behavioral approaches, the researchers propose to
address three main objectives: 1) to identify positively selected genes in the
fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, that are not specifically expressed in the
gonads, 2) to characterize the effects of reducing gene expression in adaptive
genes on mating and aggression behavior, and 3) to characterize the adaptive
genes involved in behavioral interactions by tissue and molecular function.

The proposed work will extend our understanding of the genetic bases of pre-
mating reproductive barriers and their role in early species divergence. Data
produced from this proposal will advance the training of students in the areas
of genetics, bioinformatics, computational biology, and genomic analysis.
Second, this project will implement high school curricula designed to expose
students to new high-throughput methods in biology, along with applied hands-on
experience using modern genetic and behavioral techniques. Third, the
development of a portable high-throughput behavioral lab will be used to
increase awareness and engagement in STEM fields to a broader non-scientific
audience.