* 1407777
* GOALI: Slotted nanobeams for creating and controlling gradient optical forces
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Sharon Weiss, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 389,400.00

This work will investigate the potential of the newly established slotted
nanobeam platform for creating and controlling extreme gradient forces using
light. These generated optical forces could be used to manipulate fluids in
point-of-care diagnostic tools or for applications in homeland security or
environmental monitoring where there is a critical need for high sensitivity
detection of small molecules and nanoparticles in low concentrations and limited
volumes. Further, the optical forces created by slotted nanobeams could be used
to advance key capabilities of communications systems, computers, and portable
electronic devices where higher bandwidth, lower power, more stable, more
compact, and lighter weight devices are increasingly needed. The proposed
research will also help to educate and train skilled workers in STEM fields. In
particular, this program will (a) bridge the gap between graduate-level and
industrial research by exposing students to IBM facilities and personnel in a
collaborative setting; (b) promote integrated teaching and research, including
undergraduate research experiences; and (c) foster interest in STEM for K-12
students through participation in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
advance the understanding of gradient optical forces through the design,
fabrication, and characterization of slotted nanobeam structures. The approach
is to first explore through finite-difference time-domain simulations how
changes in the critical dimensions of the slotted nanobeams affect the quality
factor, mode volume, mechanical stability, and gradient optical forces of the
structures. Slotted nanobeams with desired properties will then be fabricated
and characterized for optical sensing and manipulation of small molecules and
nanoparticles, as well as optomechanical interactions. The intellectual
significance of this activity involves: (a) development of design rules to guide
understanding of whether high quality factor or low mode volume is most
beneficial for various applications; (b) advancement of optofluidic capabilities
to detect and capture small molecules and nanoparticles in trace quantities or
in limited analyte volumes; and (c) advancement of optomechanical capabilities
to actively manipulate nanostructures and reconfigure active optical components.