* 1407580
* High Sensitivity and Wide Dynamic Range IR Sensors Based on Electrostrictive Effect in Thin Film Barium Strontium Titanate.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

IR and THz sensors are widely used for monitoring the environment and advancing
our understanding of nature. They have many applications in healthcare, public
safety, security, and scientific instrumentation. For example, early detection
and containment of an outbreak is possible by placing IR imaging systems in
hospitals and transportation hubs. IR and THz imaging have also shown great
promise in the detection of breast cancer, which is estimated to have caused
almost 40,000 deaths in the United States in 2011. Other very important
application of IR imaging is visibility enhancement for nighttime driving and
reducing road-traffic fatalities. Such systems are also especially critical in
the rapidly growing industry of autonomous vehicles. IR imaging is used for the
detection of wildfires, firefighting, and determining the conditions of crops.
Finally, IR and THz remote sensing offer an effective method to detect chemical
and biological agents. In addition, to the direct impact of the proposed
research outcomes, there will also be broader impacts associated with the field
of acoustic wave devices for wireless communications In spite of the numerous
applications, many limitations of currently available IR and THz sensors need to
be addressed to fully utilize their potential. The objective of the proposed
project is to develop a new class of resonant-type uncooled IR sensor array that
employs the electrostrictive properties of thin film ferroelectric barium
strontium titanate (BST) to exceed the high performance levels that are
traditionally associated with cryogenically cooled photon based IR sensors. The
PI proposes to involve undergraduates through the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU). Collaboration with Michigan?s Summer Undergraduate
Research in Engineering (SURE) program will also involve undergraduates from
under-represented minorities in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
resonant mode IR sensors will utilize the large temperature coefficient of
frequency versus impedance, high quality factors, and bias voltage dependent
piezoelectric response of optimally designed thin film BST film acoustic wave
resonators to achieve room temperature operation, high sensitivity, small pixel
area, and high resolution images. The research on novel ferroelectric resonant
uncooled IR sensors is based on modeling and simulations, material growth and
optimization, fabrication and characterization, and finally evaluation of the
sensor for IR detection. The proposed research is transformative as it is
expected to pave the way for the development of novel low power, high
sensitivity, and highly scalable resonant based IR sensors arrays that surpass
performance of the state-of-the-art room temperature IR sensors. The basic
principle for thin film BST resonant sensors will also be applicable to the
development of sensor arrays operational at THz frequency range.