* 1407623
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Sparse Polynomials, Complexity, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shuhong Gao, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 253,554.00

Solving equations quickly is what gets modern technology off the ground:
Transmitting conversations between cellphones, sending data from space-craft
back to earth, navigating aircraft, and making robots move correctly, all rely
on solving equations quickly. In each setting, the equations have their own
personality -- a special structure that we try to take advantage of, in order to
find solutions more quickly. In this project, the principle investigators will
study equations involving sparse polynomials -- polynomials that have few terms
but very high degree.

But solving equations is more than just calculating quickly -- it also means
understanding, and using, computational hardness. For example, classical results
in Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry give us specially structured equations
that, after centuries of research, still can not be solved quickly. These are
the equations that are actually the most useful in Cryptography and complexity
theory: Computational hardness can be used to secure sensitive data by forcing
an adversary to spend a prohibitively large effort before successfully stealing
anything. However, truly understanding hardness is subtle: Every day, codes and
cryptosystems are broken because of a missed theoretical detail or a newly
discovered backdoor.

The principal investigators on this project are world experts in Algebraic
Geometry, Number Theory, Complexity Theory, and specially structured equations.
They bring sophisticated new tools, never used before in Complexity Theory, in
order to better classify what kinds of algebraic circuits define intractable
equations. Their interdisciplinary approach is well-suited toward attracting
mathematically talented students to theoretical Computer Science, Cryptography,
and Number Theory.