* 1407880
* Implantable, Wireless, and Power-Efficient Trimodal Neural Interface for Electro-Optogenetic Manipulation of Visual Cortex in Small Freely Behaving Animals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Omer Inan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 505,000.00

ECCS Prop. No. 1407880

Proposal Title:

Implantable, Wireless, and Power-Efficient Trimodal Neural Interface for
Electro-Optogenetic Manipulation of Visual Cortex in Small Freely Behaving
Animals

Award Goal This proposal aims to realize an integrated, wireless, trimodal opto-
electro neural interface to tackle the critical challenge of high-resolution
spatiotemporal mapping and closed-loop control of visual cortex, which will
enable better understanding of the structure and function of brain networks
during visual processing of small, freely behaving animals.

Nontechnical Abstract

Blindness has affected millions of people worldwide, and at present is
incurable. A cortically-based visual prosthesis is believed to provide a
therapeutic solution for all causes of blindness. However, restoration of visual
senses to a useful level has not yet been achieved with cortical implants,
mainly due to the complex organization of visual cortex and visual preprocessing
in the retina and the lateral geniculate nucleus. Therefore, the objective of
this proposal is to realize a novel neural interface for high-resolution
stimulation and recording of neural activity in visual cortex, which will enable
better understanding of the structure and function of neural networks during
visual processing. The proposed technology development of this research will
yield novel and enabling tools for seamless communication with brain networks of
small animals, by which neuroscientists could significantly move fundamental
neuroscience knowledge forward. The developed ultra-low-power microelectronics
and advanced microfabrication techniques can be applicable to other implantable
devices and biomedical systems. In addition, the proposed project will offer
unique training opportunities for students at multiple levels. Integrated
outreach activities will effectively convert state-of-the-art science and
technologies into educational resources accessible to local K-12 schools and
communities. To reach broader audiences, the results will be disseminated
through science fairs, publication, workshops and conferences.

Technical Abstract As the core of this proposal, a wireless, trimodal neural
interface will be developed to form the most comprehensive interface with the
central nervous system of awake, freely behaving animal subjects. In particular,
a multichannel opto-electro array will incorporate epidural light emitting
diodes, intracortical microscale waveguide, and microelectrodes in a single
platform, capable of optogenetic/electrical stimulation and electrical recording
of neural activity of specific cell populations. Implantable, ultra-low-power
microelectronic system-on-a-chip will be able to receive and process neural
recording data and drive the optical/electrical neural stimulating array.
Wireless telemetry links will be implemented to transfer power and data
efficiently between the external data-acquisition/control units and implanted
neural interface. These key components will be integrated on a mechanically
flexible substrate and encapsulated by a hybrid biopolymer package. The
integrated wireless neural interface will be implanted and characterized in the
primary visual cortex of anesthetized and freely behaving rats, in order to
validate its efficacy for wireless neural recording and stimulation. The
proposed research activities will be conducted by a collaborative team with
complementary research expertise in the areas of bioMEMS, microelectronics, and
neurophysiology. Achievement of the goals of this research will pave the road
towards the development of a fully functional, cortically-based visual
neuroprosthetic system capable of generating artificial vision for completely
blind individuals. While the proposal is specifically tailored for studying the
visual function of the brain, the developed technologies can also be used for
functional mapping and controlling of other regions of the brain and nervous
system, particularly those related to motor functions (e.g. spinal cord and
peripheral nervous systems).