* 1407876
* EAGER: Quality of Configuration in Large Scale Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 04/30/2018
* USD 299,353.00

The management of the emerging data centers involves substantial complexity due
to numerous resources that must be properly configured at all levels from
individual devices to entire systems and services. The complexity of
configuration management leads to numerous opportunities for misconfigurations
and attacks. It has been estimated that misconfigurations are responsible for
62% of downtime and 65% of security exploits in current computer systems. These,
already high percentages, are expected to continue increasing due to current
trends of extensive virtualization, architectural heterogeneity, and increasing
size.

This project attempts to devise quality metrics to characterize the
vulnerability of the given configuration to bad parameter values (set
accidentally or by a malicious entity). The quality metrics are also expected to
provide guidance for evaluating alternatives to proposed or required
configuration changes. The main challenge in characterizing configuration
quality is that in practice specifications of correct configuration are not
available and the viability of the configuration must be determined by analyzing
the application behavior. The key issue to consider in devising the quality
metrics relates to the configuration management structure and the
direct/indirect dependencies that it implies. The project will examine methods
ranging from discovering the configuration structure to flow analysis of the
source code along with methods to correlate the discovered information. In many
cases, the dependencies are not definitive and hence the quality metrics need to
consider fuzzy values and their composition. The project will evaluate the
usefulness of the metrics in the context of current open-source software such as
Apache web server.

Reducing misconfigurations and detecting them quickly is expected to have a
substantial impact on computing systems with respect to their availability,
functional correctness, usability, and resistance against hacker attacks. The
metrics explored in this project are expected to provide important insights into
improving the configuration of systems at various stages including design,
deployment, and dynamic reconfiguration.