* 1407155
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological mechanisms of multilevel selection in Silene vulgaris
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 10/31/2016
* USD 20,434.00

Some of the most important interactions in plant populations are mediated by the
actions of other species, such as pollinators. This project seeks to understand
how population level properties influence these cross-species interactions,
thereby driving differences in plant reproductive success. Work will be
conducted in wild and experimental populations of the flowering plant Silene
vulgaris. Natural populations of this species maintain incredibly variable sex
ratios, from 7 to 70% female. The large variability of sex ratio among
populations provides an excellent natural experiment to test the hypothesis that
differences in sex ratio among populations create differences in the recruitment
and behavior of pollinators. Pollinator movement and behavior will be recorded,
and compared with measurements of reproductive output assessed with molecular
markers to determine whether and how social context affects an organism's
fitness.

Understanding how population level properties drive ecological interactions is
fundamental to understanding the evolutionary process. Determining how social
and ecological context influence pollination biology has the potential to inform
agricultural practices, which increasingly rely on natural pollinator
assemblages with the recent and continued decline in domestic bees. This grant
will provide support for the training of a PhD student and support research
opportunities for undergraduate students at the Mountain Lake Biological
Station.