* 1407051
* Heavy Ion Physics in ALICE at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Austin Harton, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 90,000.00

A major benefit to undergraduate students pursuing careers in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) disciplines, is the opportunity to
experience first-hand the application of technology and scientific techniques in
real world settings. This project is part of a research program that studies
heavy ion collisions within A Large Ion Collider Experiment (ALICE) at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). The primary goal is to
provide students with research experiences that stimulate an interest in science
and technology, exposes them to techniques used in experimental high energy
physics, allows the development of global relationships and prepares them for
careers in science and technology. The project on which the students will work
has a focus centered on understanding the behavior of extremely dense matter,
similar to that existing a fraction of a second after the Big Bang. This is
achieved by colliding atomic nuclei at very high energies and studying the
remnants of these collisions using highly sophisticated detectors. The students
involved in this project will analyze the resulting sub-atomic particles
generated by these collisions, and will contribute to the design of new
detectors that will enable even more sensitive experiments in the future.

As stated earlier, the focus of ALICE at CERN is to understand the behavior of
matter at very high density, similar to the matter that existed a fraction a
second after the Big Bang. This state of matter, consisting of a very hot and
dense medium of quarks and gluons, is often referred to as a Quark Gluon Plasma
(QGP). By colliding nuclei at very high energies it is possible to create a QGP
in a controlled environment that facilitates the study of its properties.
Chicago State University (CSU) students will investigate the flavor
characteristics, specifically strangeness, of jets resulting from high-energy
proton-proton and lead-lead collisions and their use as probes in the study of
QGP formation. In addition, CSU students will be involved in a research and
development program devoted to the upgrade of ALICE sub-detectors, thereby
participating in the hardware development of important components in the ALICE
experiment.

Collaboration with a large international laboratory such as the Large Hadron
Collider at CERN allows students to work with world-class scientists and "state
of the art" technology, thus preparing them for STEM careers. Additionally, a
program such as this has the potential of creating a cadre of students who
become ambassadors for STEM; students who demonstrate to their peers the
benefits of pursuing careers in science, engineering, math and technology. Also,
students who participate in this program may serve as mentors and role models
for students of high school age and younger, thereby, contributing to the
creation of a pipeline of students actively preparing for careers in STEM.