* 1407655
* Advanced Statistical Tools for Ultra-High Dimensional Functional Data with Spatial-Temporal Correlation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Hongtu Zhu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project concerns developing innovative advanced statistical tools for the
analysis of ultra-high dimensional functional data with spatial-temporal
correlation. The primary motivating application is neuroimaging analysis,
relevant to the BRAIN Initiative. (However, the developed methods and theory are
applicable to a much broader range of fields involving spatial-temporal
modeling.) The research program has a strong multidisciplinary collaborative
component, with key team members drawn from biostatistics/statistics, computer
science, psychiatry, radiology, and psychology. The tools and software under
development can have immediate impacts in clinical research, and have wider
applications in medical studies of HIV/AIDS, major neuropsychiatric and
neurodegenerative disorders, normal brain development, and cancer, among many
others. The problems addressed are also of broad interest to general society,
since they relate to pressing issues such as health care policies and social
security planning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With modern imaging techniques, many
large-scale studies have been or are being widely conducted to collect a wealthy
set of functional data and clinical data. Functional data share four common and
important features: (i) extremely high dimensional, (ii) piecewise smooth, (iii)
temporally, and (iv) spatially dependent. The analysis of such data and
integration of them with clinical data have been hindered by lack of effective
statistical tools and theory, underscoring the great need for methodological and
theoretical development from a statistical perspective. The project addresses
challenges from three broader perspectives in both time and frequency domains.
The first perspective develops spatial-temporal models for adaptive function
estimation. The models can effectively extract informative markers from noisy
functional data. The second perspective concerns reduced rank models for groups
of functional data with spatial-temporal correlation. In addition, the third
perspective develops advanced functional mixed effects models for modeling
varying association function between repeated functional responses and a set of
covariates of interest, while accounting for complex spatial-temporal
correlation.