* 1407589
* The Evryscope: the first full-sky gigapixel-scale telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2016
* Nicholas Law, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 462,534.00

Astronomy traditionally deals with precise and detailed observations of
celestial objects taken one at a time. A complementary approach is becoming more
important, which is to patrol large areas of sky over substantial intervals of
time, and a wide range of important science is enabled by this approach. The
"Evryscope" robotic telescope being built under this project covers a very wide
field of view on the sky, using an array of twenty-three individual apertures of
7 cm diameter, each outfitted with large-format detectors. This telescope will
produce a complete record of Northern sky events, and will be able to monitor
the light output from all Northern stars, down to significantly faint levels. By
these observations, sensitive searches for planets around other stars will be
carried out, as well as studies of stellar outbursts and activity. The system
will also be sensitive to the famous gamma-ray burst (GRB) sources, nearby
supernovae, and possible counterparts to any gravitational wave detections that
might be made by gravitational wave observatories now in
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evryscope utilizes 29 Megapixel imagers on each
individual telescope, and each covers 394 square degrees of field. The design
sensitivity is such that Northern sky events down to 19th magnitude will be
monitored. Light curves of better than 1% precision, with high cadence and many
years' duration, will be obtained for every Northern star brighter than 16th
magnitude. The system will be capable of detecting transiting exoplanets around
every solar-type star brighter than 12th magnitude, providing at least few-
millimagnitude photometric precision in long-term light curves. Around the
brightest and closest stars it is expected to double the known number of
transiting hot Jupiters. The Evryscope will also search for small planets
transiting nearby M-dwarfs, for planetary occultations of white dwarfs, and will
perform eclipse-timing searches for exoplanets around exotic stellar systems
inaccessible to other planet-finding methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will integrate undergraduates into the research program, and plans an innovative
collaboration with planetariums to create zoom-able images of the sky that will
involve the general public in astronomical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by
NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.