* 1407364
* RAPID/Collaborative Research:  Liquefaction Triggering & Consequences for Low-Plasticity Silty Soils, Christchurch, New Zealand
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 129,997.00

There is a pressing need to investigate the seismic response of silty soils at
sites that were strongly shaken during the 2010-11 Canterbury, New Zealand (NZ)
earthquakes but did not exhibit evidence of liquefaction, although state-of-the-
art liquefaction procedures indicate that significant ground failure should have
occurred. The overestimation of liquefaction-induced ground failure by current
procedures could potentially waste millions of dollars during the Christchurch
recovery in addition to costs incurred worldwide, because engineers are
requiring expensive ground improvement or building foundations where these
procedures indicate that liquefaction is likely. The NZ government is keen to
fund research on this important topic and desire international participation. A
comprehensive NZ proposal has been developed to perform additional testing to
advance their understanding of the role of fines in liquefaction triggering and
ground failure. They are eager to partner with US researchers in this effort.
The over-prediction of liquefaction triggering by established procedures appears
to be a result of their inability to capture the response of silty soils. The
empirical database used to develop these procedures consists primarily of
triggering data from clean sand sites. Conservatism of the empirical
liquefaction triggering procedures also contributes to the over-prediction of
liquefaction. To evaluate conclusively the liquefaction potential of low
plasticity silty soils requires advanced laboratory testing. As the Christchurch
recovery continues, engineers are faced with a dilemma - How can the prediction
of significant liquefaction in these silty soils using established liquefaction
triggering procedures be reconciled with the contradictory observation that
little or no liquefaction damage was observed during strong shaking on multiple
occasions? The question is of great importance for developing practical
engineering solutions that strike a sensible balance between risk and
affordability.

This research takes advantage of the substantial work already performed in NZ to
guide the rebuilding of Christchurch. The NZ government funding agencies are
only interested in this effort if it can be performed quickly so it can assist
engineers and planners during their rebuild. Thus, the work is urgent, and U.S.
researchers must participate during the compressed NZ work schedule. This work
leverages prior and current research in Christchurch funded by the NSF and does
not duplicate ongoing efforts. The high-quality case studies and associated
laboratory testing and analysis developed through this research will advance
ongoing research regarding the liquefaction of silty soils and enable widespread
benefits worldwide. Documenting and learning from observations after design
level earthquakes are invaluable to advancing our understanding in earthquake
engineering. Investigating the occurrence or nonoccurrence of liquefaction of
silty soils and evaluating the effects of liquefaction on buildings and
lifelines provide invaluable information that will serve as benchmarks to our
understanding of soil liquefaction. This project will provide high-quality data
from post-earthquake observations, geotechnical investigations, and laboratory
testing to the worldwide research community. These data can be incorporated into
the existing international dataset to help improve empirical correlations
regarding soil parameters, liquefaction triggering, and consequential effects.
Most of the research data currently available relates to sandy soils, so
addition of this information regarding silty soils will assist greatly in
broadening the applicability of empirical design methods. Lastly, the proposed
research supports an international research partnership that will advance
knowledge worldwide in liquefaction engineering while providing critical
information to NZ engineers during their urgent rebuild.