* 1407587
* African American Parents' Beliefs about Race and Discrimination, Socialization Practices, and Their Adolescents' Socioemotional Functioning
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Stephanie Rowley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 106,518.00

The goal of this postdoctoral fellowship award is to facilitate the professional
development of a young scientist. In this project, the PI seeks to understand
the nature of African American parents' beliefs about race and discrimination
and how those beliefs impact their emotion- and race-related socialization and
their adolescent's socioemotional functioning. This research highlights the
importance of utilizing a mixed methods approach to understand how parenting
patterns relate to the meaning-making around race in the socialization agenda of
African American parents. The research audience gains a better understanding of
how certain parenting patterns contribute to a variety of adolescent
socioemotional skills, particularly in racially integrated academic settings.
The research also examines a diverse sample of African American parents,
allowing for the identification of pattern similarities in parenting
experiences, despite socioeconomic background. Findings are disseminated among
the scientific community, scholars, and community stakeholders and will advance
the current literature on the importance of both general and race-specific
parenting processing in African American families. In addition, this research
broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in social science research
by involving minority undergraduate and graduate students as research
assistants. Through data collection and management, undergraduate and graduate
students gain skills in conducting survey research, interviewing, and they also
receive the opportunity to present the findings from this research at national
conferences. These opportunities help prepare minority students for later
success in the pursuit of graduate degrees and academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several models of parental socialization suggest
that parents' beliefs are important for both parenting behaviors and also for
children's outcomes. Currently, there is little empirical work examining the
role of parental beliefs associated with race and discrimination in guiding
general and race-specific socialization and subsequent relations with adolescent
competence in African American families. This line of inquiry is particularly
relevant given the history of African Americans being targets of racial
discrimination and parents being faced with the challenge of raising their
children to be successful in a society in which their racial group is often
devalued and made victims of individual/institutional racism and race-related
violence. Further, although there is growing scholarship on examining racial
socialization among African American families, there is little consideration of
the role of emotion-related processes surrounding the experience of and
preparation for race-related experiences (e.g., racial discrimination). We know
racial socialization contributes to adolescents' overall well-being and ability
to cope with discrimination, yet it is still unclear how race-related
socialization processes work independently of and/or jointly with other general
socialization processes (e.g., emotion socialization) that are known to have
great impact on children's socioemotional competence. The current study builds
on the principal investigator's previous work by using a mixed-methods approach
with both interview and questionnaire data to examine the content of parents'
beliefs about race and discrimination, the contribution of these beliefs to
their emotion and racial socialization practices, and the existence of parent
profiles by their beliefs and socialization behaviors. Finally, parents'
profiles are examined as predictors of their adolescents' socioemotional
functioning. The participants are 300 African American parents, their 6th grade
children, and the adolescents' teachers. Families are followed for three years.
In year 1, parents participate in semi-structured interviews and students and
teachers will complete surveys. In subsequent years, parents, students, and
teachers complete online surveys. The sample is drawn from three racially and
economically diverse schools in Southeastern Michigan. The current study
contributes to theory and research seeking to understand how parents' beliefs
about race and discrimination play a role in their parenting strategies and in
their children's development. The framework being developed in this research
will inform future research and interventions aimed at understanding and
fostering parental strategies that contribute to the positive development of
African American youth.