* 1407540
* US-Ireland Collaborative Research on Nanostructured Gallium Nitride (GaN) Power Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Zheng Shen, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 427,575.00

The world is facing serious challenges in conserving energy resources and
reducing carbon emissions as demand for energy consumption expands. The demand
for electricity is expected to increase significantly with further
electrification of our world driven by renewable energy usage, electrification
of transportation, expansion of efficient electrical heating and cooling,
expansion of information traffic, increased industrial motor usage, and new
smart grid development. Advanced wide bandgap (WBG) semiconductor power
electronics will play a critical role in all phases of the electricity life
cycle including generation, distribution and consumption, and have the potential
to improve electricity efficiency by 10-25%. Gallium Nitride (GaN) power devices
offer a high performance solution in electric vehicles, motor drives, grid-tied
renewable inverters, ultra-compact power supplies, and many other energy
conversion systems. However, material defects in today's fabrication processes
prevent full realization of this potential. This international collaboration
project between the US, Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland investigators
will address the fundamental challenges on GaN material defects, reliability,
and cost, and potentially has a large impact to the WBG power electronics
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to explore high
voltage vertical device architectures based on GaN nanowires, and advance the
fundamental understanding of materials growth and defect mechanisms, electrical
breakdown and transport properties to establish a viable nanotechnology building
block for power electronics applications. The approach is to model, fabricate,
and characterize high voltage Schottky barrier diodes, merged PiN Schottky
diodes, and gate-all-around field effect transistors on nano-GaN materials grown
with selective area metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) on silicon
substrates. The US-Ireland collaborative research project combines the MOVPE
growth and nanofabrication capabilities at Tyndall National Institute in
Ireland, the material analysis capabilities at Queen's University Belfast in
Northern Ireland with the device modeling, design, and testing expertise at
Illinois Institute of Technology. The intellectual merit of this research is to
open up a new direction in reducing or eliminating dislocations and improving
reliability of wide WBG power semiconductors, leading to novel high voltage GaN
device architectures on a silicon platform. This is distinctly different from
the mainstream lateral GaN device architectures based on heteroexpitaxial thin-
films. The project will address fundamental and applied research related to
nano- and micro-scale device design and modeling, nanoheteroexpitaxial materials
growth and characterization, and device fabrication. It will advance the basic
understanding of one-dimensional semiconductor epitaxial growth kinetics and the
effects of facet surface states on carrier transport and device breakdown
properties.