* 1407092
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic mechanisms of size control and allometric growth
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Matthew Harris, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 22,836.00

Species have been identified and classified by taxonomists using morphological
traits for millennia, but only recently has it been possible to understand the
genetic changes causing these differences. Flying fishes (Exocoetidae) have
extremely exaggerated paired fins and an extended lower caudal lobe that allow
them to glide for extended periods out of water, whereas the closely related
halfbeak group (including Medakas) have normal fin extensions. In this project
researchers will test the hypothesis that Potassium channel genes that are
affect caudal fin lobe length variation in zebra fish are also regulating caudal
fin morphology in flying fishes. A new analysis pipeline will be developed to:
1) identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) correlated with differences
in fin length within exome sequences of flying fishes and Medaka, and 2) map
these SNPs onto the zebra fish genome to allow for functional
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will train a graduate student in
diverse developmental, genetic, systematic and evolutionary techniques and will
deposit extensive genome sequence data from flying fishes in public databases.
The analysis pipeline developed to analyze the SNP data will also have broad
applicability for other researchers interested in investigating the genetic
basis of morphological evolution in non-model species.