* 1407681
* SusChEM: IUPAC: Harnessing the Unquenched Reactivity of Novel Frustrated Lewis Pairs for Transition Metal-Free Hydrogenation Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Clemens Krempner, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 09/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Clemens Krempner of Texas Tech University examines the use
of frustrated Lewis pairs (FLPs) as replacements for expensive, less abundant,
and toxic precious metals used in the catalytic hydrogenation of unsaturated
organic species. FLPs are sterically-encumbered Lewis acid-base pairs of
unquenched reactivity due to their inability to form classical Lewis-acid-base
complexes. Novel combinations of Lewis acids and bases, capable of reversibly
cleaving dihydrogen, are identified by a combined computational / experimental
approach. Attractive weak Lewis acids include boronic and boric esters, as these
compounds are readily synthesized from inexpensive starting materials or are
commercially available at low cost. Phosphazenes and guanidines are used as the
base components. Progress in catalyst development is amplified by the
combination of modular FLP synthesis, detailed catalytic testing, and
computational investigations on novel catalysts and the underlying catalytic
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is performed in collaboration
with Professor Shuhua Li (Nanjing University, Nanjing, China) and Professor
Juergen Klankermayer (RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany). Together, these three
groups combine their separate areas of expertise to produce transition metal-
free hydrogenation of imines, ketones and olefins - important substrates in the
pharmaceutical industry. The broader impacts of this work include leadership
training for postdoctoral fellows and graduate and undergraduate students and an
international exchange of ideas and expertise.