* 1407035
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Capacitive Sensing for Environmental Control and Physical Therapy for Patients with Paralysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* James Parkerson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 145,417.00

An estimated 1.5 million individuals in the United States are hospitalized each
year because of strokes, brain injuries and spinal cord injuries. Severe
impairment such as paralysis, paresis, weakness and limited range of motion are
common sequels resulting from these injuries, requiring extensive
rehabilitation. This project is developing invisible sensing systems embedded
into bed sheets, pillows, wheelchair pads, and clothing, for environmental
control and physical therapy for such paralysis patients. The system detects
gestures regardless of evolving environmental and patient conditions and
provides explicit real-time feedback to the user. Through the use of low-cost
and ultra-low power capacitive sensing, the system reduces hospital visits and
therapy costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system addresses the
limitations of existing assistive care sensors through three novel technical
contributions: (1) The use of a self-sustainable hierarchy of sensors; textile-
based capacitive sensor arrays (CSA) and inertial sensors on the human body; to
improve the accuracy of gesture recognition while consuming minimal energy. The
inertial sensors train the capacitive sensor arrays for different body
positions; (2) A self-learning algorithm that determines gestures automatically
regardless of the position of the patient's body and conditions using templates
of gestures and patient conditions over time; and (3) Seamless integration of
the patient in the feedback loop using amplification and animation to provide
explicit real-time feedback to the user on how she/he is performing on his/her
physical therapy, and how the system is interpreting his/her gestures.
Additionally, the PIs are developing a cross-disciplinary undergraduate and
graduate course that focuses on developing sensing systems while being cognizant
of the actual needs in a rehabilitation hospital. The PIs are also using local
university initiatives to engage minority and women researchers in the project.