* 1407583
* NeTS: Medium: Networking Out of Thin Air
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* David Wetherall, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project proposes to lay the algorithmic foundations for ambient
backscatter, a novel communication mechanism that transforms existing wireless
signals (e.g., TV, cellular, and Wi-Fi transmissions) into both a source of
power as well as a communication medium: thus, enabling communication without
requiring additional bandwidth and/or power. Ambient backscatter networks have
the potential to introduce a new practical model of communication; reduce world-
wide battery usage and energy consumption of small computing devices; and reduce
the human and economic costs of maintaining power. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research, if successful, can open up ubiquitous communication
applications in multiple domains including Internet-of-Things, wearable and
mobile devices, as well as infrastructure-free localization. As small Internet-
of-Things devices are increasingly embedded in objects and environments such as
thermostats, books, furniture, and even implantable medical devices; a novel
primitive like ambient backscatter would enable ubiquitous communication at
unprecedented scales (without batteries or wires) and in location and times that
were previously infeasible (day and night, indoors and outdoors). Further, since
ambient backscatter consumes orders of magnitude lower power than traditional
radio communication, it can enable always-on communication for battery-operated
mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets as well as wearable devices such
as head-on displays and smart watches. Finally, since with ambient backscatter,
battery-free devices can communicate with each other, they are aware of their
context and the devices around them; this enables missing-item localization in
warehouses and medical facilities that are infeasible with existing RFID
technologies, without an extensive deployment of power
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will produce
algorithms, designs, circuits, and system implementations that will enable
communication and networking out of thin air. The key challenge in achieving
this is that existing signals such as TV, cellular, and Wi-Fi transmissions
already carry data and are fast-changing signals; transmitting additional
information on top of these signals can be challenging. Further, since the
proposed devices are powered using these ambient signals, circuit designs that
can harvest energy from them efficiently are needed. This research will design
algorithms for enabling communication without requiring additional bandwidth
and/or power. This project will also design a complete network stack for this
new communication primitive that will enable multiple such devices to co-exist
with each other as well as with legacy receivers and leverage algorithms and
techniques to enable new functionalities such as battery-free localization and
demonstrate their applications in a number of domains including inventory, and
healthcare.