* 1407187
* RET: Partnerships for Research, Innovation, and Multi-Scale Engineering (PRIME)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Jamila Cola, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2018
* USD 486,407.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Georgia Institute of Technology entitled, "RET: Partnerships for
Research, Innovation, and Multi-Scale Engineering (PRIME)", under the direction
of Dr. Baratunde Cola and Dr. Jamila Cola.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PRIME RET
site is a collaboration between faculty in the College of Engineering
(Mechanical, Chemical, and Biomedical Engineering), K-12 outreach specialists at
Georgia Tech's Center for Education Integrating Science Mathematics, and
Computing (CEISMC), Clayton and Rockdale County School Districts, K-12
educators, and Art Consultants. The PRIME RET site will immerse 48 STEM middle
and high school teachers (16 per year for 3 years) in a 7-week mentored research
experience with engineering faculty at Georgia Tech. The PRIME RET site will
increase engineering literacy and improve understanding of fundamental science
and math principles central to the engineering domain by developing and sharing
art-infused engineering lesson plans based on cutting-edge engineering research
across multiple length scales. Saturday follow-up sessions, and a wiki site,
will allow teachers to refine and share their lesson plans with other science
and math teachers interested in attracting and retaining students, especially
underrepresented minorities and women in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRIME
RET participants will develop art-integrated engineering lesson plans that will
explore and build various habits of mind that are important in engineering as a
profession. These engaging lesson plans will foster a student and teacher
culture of creativity and engage the growing underrepresented minority student
population in Atlanta. Over the course of three years, 48 arts-engineering
lesson plans will be developed and refined to excite and engage students with
multi-scale engineering. These materials will be disseminated through conference
workshops and websites.