* 1407604
* Statistical inference for space-time models involving stochastic differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Peter Craigmile, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 288,343.00

Many fields have experienced a recent growth in the use of stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) to model scientific phenomena over time. Examples
include applications in oceanography, ecology, and public health. SDEs can
simultaneously capture the known deterministic dynamics of the variables of
interest (e.g., ocean flow, the chemical and physical characteristics of a body
of water, the presence, absence and spread of a disease), while enabling a
modeler to capture the unknown dynamics and measurement processes in a
stochastic setting. This proposal develops statistical methodology for building,
fitting, and diagnosing the fit of multivariate and spatially-varying SDEs. Such
models, which are often inspired by mechanistic modeling, can incorporate the
complex dynamics of the variables of interest. Although statistical methods for
the fitting and analysis of SDEs models using data at a single location are
becoming more widely used, accurate statistical methods for multivariate SDEs
and SDEs indexed in space are far less developed. This project will derive
improved approximate methods of inference for one- and multi-dimensional SDEs
that are more accurate than the commonly used, but naive, Euler approximations.
Spatially-varying SDE models will be built for modeling spatio-temporal data
observed potentially irregularly in space and time. This research will be
applied to address problems in applied disciplines. Education of students in
statistical methods for SDEs will be an important goal of this project. In
addition, a number of outreach programs will be used to educate a broader
audience.