* 1407166
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Between-class gene flow in complex mating systems: The evolution of breeding systems in Silene vulgaris
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2017
* USD 19,628.00

In most plants and animals, males and females differ in size, shape, or color
because natural selection drives the sexes in different directions. The
evolution of this dimorphism is constrained by the mixing of genes among males
and females during mating known as between-class gene flow. This work
investigates the effects of between-class gene flow in a plant Silene vulgaris,
in which individuals are either hermaphrodite or female. In species with such
complex mating systems, the rates of between-class gene flow vary among
populations, allowing their effects to be more easily detected. Using genetic
markers, this work will estimate the strength of natural selection in
hermaphrodites and females, as well as the patterns of gene flow among
hermaphrodites and females for multiple populations. These estimates will be
combined with estimates of heritability to determine if between-class gene flow
limits the evolution of differences between sexes.

This work will test the importance of between-class gene flow as a factor
affecting adaptation in natural systems. The understanding of this process will
inform strategies for artificial selection of agriculturally important species
such as cattle (Bos primigenius), in which males and females have different
desired traits, and species with complex mating systems, such as maize (Zea
mays). Finally, this work directly supports the training of a doctoral student
as a researcher and mentor and provides opportunities for undergraduate students
to engage in research in quantitative genetics and molecular ecology.