* 1407835
* Using the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich Effect to Measure AGN Feedback
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Evan Scannapieco, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 07/31/2018
* USD 498,199.00

This program will use the Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ) effect (scattering of certain
kinds of light by electrons) to assess, through data analysis and simulations,
the impact of quasars on heating the gas between galaxies and influencing galaxy
evolution. Broader impacts of the work include training of undergraduate and
graduate students. The project will also include a significant component
targeted at communicating the work to the general public. At the national level,
Dr. Scannapieco will continue to contribute to popular science journals such as
Scientific American, and present lectures at REU programs. At the local level,
he will give regular public lectures, which will be coordinated through the Mars
Education Project (http://marsed.asu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SZ effect
occurs when inverse Compton scattering increases the energy of cosmic microwave
background (CMB) photons passing through hot, dense gas. In this way the SZ
effect acts as a calorimeter, indicating exactly how much energy was added to
the intergalactic medium and when. Dr. Scannapieco will employ stacking of
public archival data from the South Pole Telescope (SPT), analyzing a suite of
simulations using three codes, and making targeted observations to determine the
way that energy deposits from active nuclei affect galaxy evolution.