* 1407597
* Solar Multi-Conjugate Adaptive Optics Experiments on the 1.6 Meter Solar Telescope in Big Bear
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Philip Goode, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 700,137.00

This project will carry out experiments to study the performance of advanced
strategies for adaptive optics, a cutting-edge modern technology that uses fast-
moving deformable mirrors to rapidly compensate for the fluctuations in image
quality produced by the shimmering atmosphere. Adaptive optics has flourished in
recent years, delivering dramatically sharper images but usually only over a
rather limited portion of the sky. The technical innovations to be investigated
under this program will utilize multiple deformable mirrors optically matched to
different layers of the turbulent atmosphere, and this "multi-conjugate"
approach will result in high-quality corrected images over a substantially
larger region of the sky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adaptive optics system at the
1.6 meter solar telescope at Big Bear, CA, has delivered high-quality solar
images in a single-deformable-mirror mode, providing detailed information about
complex spatial structures on the surface of the sun at unprecedented spatial
scales. The system features three deformable mirrors, each having 357 actuators,
and multiple pupil positions in which the deformable mirrors may be placed. When
considering the more complex architecture of an adaptive optics system capable
of a multi-conjugate observing mode, a number of technical issues have yet to be
addressed. These issues include such fundamental questions as the optimum
placement in the beam train of deformable mirrors and wavefront sensors. The
current project will address these issues directly, experimentally. A number of
science goals, including the onset and evolution of solar flares, flare
triggering mechanisms, and magnetic reconnection events, require diffraction-
limited observations over the large field of view promised by the multi-
conjugate observing mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing training
for the next generation of instrumentation scientists, these investigations by
their potentially path-finding nature will provide a vital form of broader
impacts in advancing the art of adaptive optics at many observatories, for both
solar and night-time observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project
is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its
Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.