* 1407335
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An empirical test of species range limit evolution using the world's largest amphibian invasion
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrew Storfer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,630.00

Invasive species are one of the key drivers behind the global loss of
biodiversity. The cane toad (Rhinella marina) is on the 100 World's Worst
Invasive Alien Species list maintained by the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (www.issg.org). This large, Neotropical toad has invaded
over 40 countries worldwide and has detrimentally impacted native ecosystems in
many ways. The largest, and arguably most damaging, cane toad invasion site is
in Australia. There, cane toads have imperiled numerous native wildlife species
through their effects as novel toxic prey items, predators of invertebrates and
small vertebrates, and competitors with native frogs. This study will reveal
which environmental factors and evolutionary processes are contributing to the
cane toad's extraordinarily successful invasion of Australia. This knowledge
will help land managers implement control measures to protect native species
from cane toads, as well as potentially limit the overall extent of the
invasion. Moreover, species' invasions also provide unique, albeit unfortunate,
natural experiments for elucidating the processes that control species'
geographic range limits. Understanding the mechanisms underlying species' range
limits is a longstanding goal in the fields of ecology and evolution. It has
become urgent in light of the fact that global climate change may necessitate
geographic range shifts for many of the world?s species.

Cane toads are ideally-suited to investigate species' range limits because have
an extraordinarily well-documented history of invasion since their deliberate
introduction to Australia in 1935. In turn, this allows predictive models of
their future invasion based on landscape-dispersal relationships to be validated
with historical data from the actual invasion. Cane toads also have both stable
and actively-expanding range edges across Australia, providing a unique
opportunity to compare range limits versus expansion in geographically-
replicated areas. The cane toad's invasion of Australia will be investigated
using a combination of landscape genetic and genomic analyses with controlled
laboratory rearing experiments. Cane toad dispersal patterns will be correlated
with key landscape factors to determine which habitats restrict and/or enhance
cane toad movement throughout Australia. A genomic study will also reveal
putatively adaptive regions of the genome that may be contributing to the cane
toad's invasion success. In combination with laboratory rearing experiments,
this work will provide genotypic and phenotypic tests of the role of adaptation
in a major geographic range expansion. Overall this work will provide a rare
empirical test of the leading ecological and evolutionary theories for species'
range limits, in addition to useful information to help control a notorious
worldwide invader.