* 1407620
* Taming Entangled Photons: Programmable Control of Quantum States of Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2017
* USD 381,637.00

Taming Entangled Photons: Programmable Control of Quantum States of Light

Nowhere is the strangeness of quantum mechanics more evident than in the
behavior of entangled particles; measuring the state of one particle can
influence that of its entangled partner, even if the pair are distantly
separated. Such weird properties belie our common-sense notions of how the world
works, and yet they can potentially be channeled for tremendous benefit in real-
world applications. One such possibility is quantum key distribution (QKD),
which relies on the laws of quantum mechanics to offer unconditional security in
the transmission of information between two remote parties. In a modern world
increasingly dependent on communication security, large-scale QKD represents a
major goal of current research. Motivated by this objective, we are exploring
new ways to manipulate and measure entangled photons based on optical pulse
shaping. In a standard pulse shaper, the different frequency components of an
input field are programmably manipulated to create a user-defined optical
waveform at the output. By significantly extending such pulse-shaping ideas for
controlling the fields involved in entangled photon experiments, we see
opportunity not only to investigate new physics, but also to expand on current
capabilities for imprinting and extracting information from individual light
quanta, offering new possibilities for secure high-speed communications and
hopefully contributing to a safer tomorrow.

Specifically, we will focus on ways to use pulse shaping of classical fields for
advances in (1) detection and (2) generation of entangled photons. Typically,
single-photon detection is achieved with photodiodes possessing timing
resolutions much longer than the duration of the photons being measured, meaning
that the fine features in the temporal degree of freedom are unobservable.
Accordingly, we are working to expand on a different detection scheme in which
each photon is mixed with an ultrashort femtosecond pulse; then if the photon
combines with the pulse through sum-frequency generation, it is possible to
determine its arrival time to within the duration of the short pulse itself,
permitting resolution on the femtosecond timescale and giving access to the vast
information potential of frequency-time entangled photons. Our plan is to
significantly expand on previous work in this area and implement an optical-
fiber-compatible system for femtosecond detection, experimenting with a variety
of classical fields. We will explore the possibilities for utilizing such
detection in photon state characterization, demonstration of nonlocal quantum
effects, and new QKD protocols. In the second major direction of this proposal,
we will consider shaping of classical fields used not for detection, but rather
generation of entangled photons. The spectro-temporal properties of the pump
fields which produce entangled photons through downconversion can have a
profound impact on the nature of the generated quantum state and "importantly
for us" can be actively updated through programmable pulse shaping. In
particular, we plan to consider optical frequency combs and their potential for
generating new forms of entangled states, merging comb technology for optical
communications with interesting quantum applications.