* 1407404
* RUI: Research on Glass at Coe College
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Ugur Akgun, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 620,000.00

This project, submitted in response to the Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) announcement, is jointly funded by the Condensed Matter
Physics and Ceramic Programs in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project has a
number of objectives. The first objective is to involve up to 40 undergraduate
students in publishable research in glass science over the duration of the
project. New oxide glasses are being prepared using novel techniques such as
fast cooling, laser heating and new chemical pathways. As well, they are
examining the intermediate range order of glass on the level of a handful of
atoms. Finally they are producing glasses that have new technical applications.
For example, one family of glasses is being developed to detect neutrons for
medical and national security purposes. The project has broad impact by training
undergraduate students in many aspects of glass research, ~75% will continue to
graduate school; running workshops to inform colleagues how to conduct high
level research at small colleges, and inviting high school students to join this
work and working with pre-college students of all grades in eastern Iowa on
science programs at Coe College and in local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: It is likely that the most
transformational part of this work concerns the determination of the
intermediate range order of oxide glasses of up to ten atoms or so. This
outstanding scientific problem concerns such phenomena as ionic conduction, the
mixed-alkali effect, and viscosity and relaxation effects. The experimental
means for this study include nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) with a focus on
boron using both of its isotopes separately as well as isotopic dilutions and
boron Double Angle Rotation NMR, neutron scattering, dual atomic force
microscopy/Raman spectroscopy, and time-of-flight mass spectroscopy. Physical
property determinations complement these measurements. Simultaneous to this work
is the development of novel glasses using rapid cooling, laser levitation, and
alternative chemical means. One application for this is the development of
semiconducting lithium borovanadate glasses for neutron detection. Broader
impacts include the thorough training of up to 40 undergraduate students in
research, including their daily use of many state-of-the art instruments, the
involvement of high school students and their teachers in research, outreach to
younger students, and leadership service within the glass science field. A new
and important component of this project is the mentoring and hosting of
workshops for colleagues at other colleges interested in doing high-level
research with their students.