* 1407712
* Online Learning in Big-Data Stream Mining
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Online Learning in Big Data Stream Mining

The world is increasingly information-driven. Vast amounts of data are being
produced by diverse sources and in diverse formats including sensor readings,
physiological measurements, documents, emails, transactions, tweets, and audio
or video files. Many businesses and government institutions are also embracing
automation and relying on a variety of sensors and infrastructure to collect,
store, and analyze data on a continuous basis. It is becoming critical to endow
assessment systems with the ability to process streaming information from
sensors in real-time in order to better manage physical systems, derive informed
decisions, tweak production processes, and optimize logistics choices. Data
stream mining refers to the broad class of techniques that can be used in sense
and respond systems that continuously receive data streams from multiple sources
and employ analytics aimed at detecting and predicting actionable information.
Such techniques are useful in many domains including medical and health
informatics, intelligent connected network systems for transportation, security,
and energy, as well as social, multimedia, and business intelligence. The aim of
this proposal is to develop methods and techniques for real-time stream mining
with the aim of extracting information from large data streams. The framework
accomplishes this objective by networking multiple learners to pose and answer
queries at different levels and in real time. A central aspect of the framework
is that it accommodates distributed data sources and distributed processing of
the data. Besides the aforementioned applications, the proposed research is
expected to have an impact on user interfaces, human computer interactions, and
machine-to-machine communication and services.

This research focuses on developing a framework for distributed knowledge
extraction from high-volume data streams using a network of adaptive
learners/classifiers that is deployed over a distributed computing
infrastructure. The proposed paradigm differs from existing mining and search
solutions, which are mainly query driven. Instead, the proposed framework is
data and concept driven and can catalyze a shift in the design and
implementation of networked stream mining applications by allowing continuous
learning and dynamic adaptation of networked learners in response to latency,
resource and data characteristics, and by allowing various learners to
proactively reason and shape their interactions with other learners based on
their capabilities and knowledge. In this regard, the approach to stream mining
developed in this proposal addresses several unique technical challenges: (a)
the need to develop decentralized approaches for stream mining where learners
make decisions based on local interactions with their neighbors. This step
involves formally defining local objectives and metrics and associated inter-
node message exchanges that enable the decomposition of the application into a
set of autonomously operating nodes, while ensuring global performance; (b) the
need to develop algorithms that are able to cope with asynchronous events
including different data rates at the nodes, link failures, and dynamic topology
configurations; (c) the need to develop distributed solutions that can cope
effectively with system overload, due to large data volumes and limited system
resources (including CPU, memory, and I/O bandwidth). There is usually a large
computational cost incurred by each learner and solutions need to be sensitive
to the rates at which individual learners can handle data; and (d) the need to
develop adaptive stream-mining systems to track concept drifts especially since
data characteristics evolve over time due to many factors including congestion
at shared processing nodes and communication delays between processing nodes.