* 1407443
* Organic dyes stabilized in nanopores and confined in polymeric photonic crystals for lasing and sensing devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Banglin Chen, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 349,863.00

Organic dyes stabilized in nanopores and confined in polymeric photonic crystals
for lasing and sensing devices

Nontechnical abstract: The objective of this project is to design and fabricate
a strong light source, known as a laser, using organic dyes, porous host
materials and photo-trapping devices. Several methods will be used to stabilize
the organic dyes into the nanometer sized holes (one nanometer is one billionth
of a meter) inside the host materials. The stabilized organic dyes are able to
emit light as a laser under the weak illumination of other light sources when
the light from the dyes is amplified inside a photon-trapping device known as a
photonic crystal. The principal investigators have demonstrated the feasibility
of such a novel approach in their preliminary studies though this kind of dye
lasers are very difficult to realize in the solid state. Multi-color laser
sources can be integrated in an optical-chip (similar to the electronic chip in
a computer) for communication and sensing devices. This research will also
provide educational opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students and motivate them to develop their future careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).

Technical abstract: The objective of this project is to fabricate and study the
lasing and sensing devices with organic dyes stabilized in nanopores of metal-
organic frameworks and confined in polymer photonic crystals. Multiple target
chromophores within the matrix of metal-organic frameworks will be explored as
the multi-color light sources. The intellectual merit is the development of low-
threshold lasing with high quantum efficiency, and high sensitive single-laser-
mode based sensing devices using organic dyes confined in nanopores. Preliminary
results show that a two-photon pumped micro-laser can be achieved by
encapsulating organic dyes in nanopores of metal-organic frameworks. By
confining the stabilized organic dyes in the photonic crystals, a mirror-less
photonic crystal cavity can be used to lower the pumping level of lasing devices
and increase the sensitivity of sensing devices. The research methods in this
program include optimizing dye photoluminescence strength by tuning the nanopore
sizes of metal-organic frameworks for an effective encapsulation of organic dyes
in nanopores, studying the interaction between spontaneous light emission from
stabilized organic dyes and photonic stop-band in the photonic crystals, and
investigating the threshold and quantum efficiency of the proposed dye lasing
device. By confining the organic dyes in photonic crystals as solid state
devices, these nanopore stabilized organic devices can be potentially integrated
in future optoelectronics. The broader impacts include exposing graduate and
undergraduate students to an interdisciplinary education, including nano-scale
chemistry, physics and engineering, solid state optoelectronics, photonic and
quantum mechanical simulations, and device fabrication and characterization. The
project will also integrate underrepresented groups in the planned research and
educational activities.