* 1407165
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The primary objective of this RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site:
Integrated Nanomanufacturing hosted by the Boston University Photonics Center
(BUPC) is to immerse teachers in a six-week summer program that focuses on
interdisciplinary research experiences to explore the design, fabrication, and
application of nanometer-scale components in optical, electronic, mechanical and
biomedical systems addressing important technological problems. Mentored
research projects will challenge participants to engage in engineering problem
solving, and the knowledge gained will help participants develop sustainable
curricula and activities in STEM education. RET teachers will return to their
classrooms with an improved and relevant skill set to foster their student's
interest in engineering disciplines and to succeed with the ambitious
educational goals of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). This proposed
RET Site is focused on underserved schools in the greater Boston area with the
goal of recruiting participants from a diverse group with 80% from resource-
limited schools with high percentages of underrepresented minority students. To
achieve this goal the RET Site will work directly with Massachusetts STEM
pipeline networks to target schools and individual teachers with STEM interest
but limited resources to implement these activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated nanomanufacturing research is an inherently
interdisciplinary intellectual area that is evolving rapidly at the intersecting
frontiers of microelectronics, optical science, materials engineering, and
biomedicine. Three thematic research areas will serve as the foundation for this
RET Site: nanophotonics, nanostructures, and nanomedicine. While engaged in
mentored discovery, engineering of new devices and fabrication at the nanoscale
level to explore optical systems, participants will develop critical skills,
awareness and confidence necessary to advance in academics and research in the
future. The summer experience will involves training sessions, hands-on
cleanroom activities, scientific research in partner laboratories, seminars on
classroom integration, and faculty pedagogy discussions. Participants will also
be introduced to the idea of Societal Engineers, a new core concept at Boston
University to develop engineers who can connect their training to integrate
content and applications reflecting how science and engineering is practiced in
the real world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acknowledgement: This project
is supported by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers at the
National Science Foundation.