* 1407736
* Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation:Senior Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bobby Wilson, Texas Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,885,046.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program, within
the Division of Human Resource Development (HRD), was established by
Congressional mandate in 1991 to significantly increase the quality and quantity
of students historically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) who successfully complete baccalaureate degrees in STEM
and who continue to graduate studies in these fields. The Houston alliance is a
comprehensive partnership that includes the country's largest school districts,
two community college systems, one doctoral-granting Historically Black College
and University (HBCU) and two Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs).

As a senior-level alliance, H-LSAMP will support new efforts in student
transition, student support mechanisms for non-traditional students, the
inclusion of social support mechanisms to facilitate STEM retention, and the
institutionalization of high-impact practices developed during earlier LSAMP
funding. Over the five-year project, Houston LSAMP Senior Alliance will: (1)
Graduate 4,000 minority students in STEM disciplines, 2) Provide all directly
supported students with the opportunity to participate in research activities,
3) Have at least sixty percent of directly supported students attend
professional or graduate school, 4) Retain at least eighty percent of minority
STEM undergraduates, including transfer students, in STEM majors. Upon
completion of the award period, the H-LSAMP project will have provided the
opportunity for all supported students to meaningfully participate in research
activities, including international research.

Evaluation activities will have three major components. 1) Interviews of
participants, staff, and faculty to identify in real time which intervention
activities need adjustment, i.e., formative feedback, as well as assess both the
measured and perceived impact of project-based activities; 2) Gathering,
analyzing, and reporting specific measures that operationalize each project goal
or objective; and 3) The use of multivariate models isolating and measuring how
the specific intervention strategies and support mechanisms relate to success.
Construction of these models will be guided by the literature on academic and
social integration, engagement, and achievement, and will draw upon appropriate
statistical techniques, e.g., factor analysis and structural equation modeling.
The results of these analyses will contribute to the literature on broadening
participation and achievement in STEM and serve as a guide for other
universities and alliances who share these goals.