* 1408981
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Automatic Locality Management for Dynamically Scheduled Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2020
* Matthew Fluet, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2020
* USD 236,744.00

Automatic Locality Management for Dynamically Scheduled
Parallelism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's multicore and manycore computers
provide increasing amounts of computational power in the form of parallel
processing coupled with a complex memory organization with many levels of
hierarchy and orders of magnitude difference in cost between accessing different
levels. When software exhibits spatial and temporal locality, meaning that it
reads and writes memory addresses that are close to one another in relatively
small time span, it is able to primarily access data in fast caches, rather than
in slow main memory, and deliver good sequential and parallel performance.
Unfortunately, with software written in high-level managed programming languages
it is difficult to ensure or to predict the amount of spatial and temporal
locality, due to the lack of low-level programmer control and the complexities
of and interactions between the specific hardware platform and the thread
scheduler and the memory manager. This project explores techniques for automatic
management of locality in high-level managed programming languages executing on
parallel computers with sophisticated memory hierarchies. Using the theoretical
models, efficient algorithms, and practical implementations being developed in
the project, programmers are able to reason about the expected locality of their
programs independent of the target hardware, while a runtime system, including
thread scheduler and memory manager, maps the program onto specific hardware to
achieve the established performance bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
this project addresses the problem of automatically managing locality via the
runtime system of a high-level garbage-collected parallel functional programming
language. A comprehensive approach that considers scheduling, memory allocation,
and memory reclamation together is used, allowing the thread scheduler to
influence the memory manager and vice versa. A key insight of this research
program is to view the allocated data of a program as a hierarchical collection
of task- and scheduler-mapped heaps. This view guides the theoretical cost model
that enables a programmer to reason about locality at a high-level, the
efficient algorithms that control when to create and to garbage collect a heap
with provable bounds, and the practical implementation that delivers automatic
locality management in a parallel functional programming language. The
intellectual merits are advances in understanding the interaction of thread
scheduling and memory management with locality on modern parallel hardware, the
development of high-level, machine-independent cost model, and a synthesis of
programming languages, algorithmic theory, and system design to address the
challenges of automatic locality management. The broader impacts are
improvements in software quality and programmer productivity, the creation of a
parallel functional programming language usable in both education and research,
and the integration of results into courses and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;