* 1408637
* Determination of High-Frequency Properties of Integrated Circuit Packages
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Arif Engin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 290,869.00

Determination of High-Frequency Properties of Integrated Circuit
Packages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's electronic systems, each computer chip
can consist of billions of transistors operating at high frequencies reaching
multiples of gigahertz. However, chips need to communicate with each other
through the chip packages and motherboard, which only provide a limited
bandwidth. Chip-to-chip communication occurs through tiny traces that behave as
transmission lines in chip packages and boards. Performance of an electronic
system is dictated primarily by these electrical interconnections. The goal of
this project is the high-frequency characterization of transmission lines and
packages. This will allow development of simulation models and improved designs,
which will eventually lead to faster computer systems. The project includes an
industrial partner, which will provide a unique experience for the involved
students in terms of internships and co-advising of theses. The education of
graduate students involved in this project will also be enhanced by an
international collaboration. Students from underrepresented groups will be
offered assistantships through this project. The PI will continue outreach to
high-school students to enable and encourage their participation in scientific
conferences. The outcome of this research will be disseminated broadly to the
engineering community in terms of a web-based application. Results of the
project will also be part of a new graduate course on signal and power
integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interconnects in chip packages cause signal
attenuation and crosstalk, which limit the speed of high-frequency analog and
high-speed digital systems. Performance of interconnects depends on the complex
permittivity of the substrate as well as the under-fill material. In addition,
surface roughness of conductors causes signal attenuation that may increase
unpredictably at high frequencies. Hence, determination of these high-frequency
properties is necessary for designing robust chip packages that can support
faster signals. For the under-fill materials, the PI will design a semi-viscous-
material holder in the form of a cavity resonator. The complex permittivity will
then be extracted at the resonance frequencies. For the substrates and
conductors, the PI will test a new methodology based on double-width stripline
measurements. This methodology can for the first time provide unique
characterization of substrate losses in the presence of surface-roughness
losses. The measurements will be done using vector network analyzers, micro
probes, and a probe station up to 67 GHz. Hence, this project will generate data
on high-frequency properties of all critical chip package materials. Finally,
simulation models from measured data will be generated for both conductors and
dielectrics using a new generalized Debye modeling approach. Collaboration with
an industrial partner will enable access to advanced package materials and
processes for this research.