* 1408089
* Dark Matter and Neutrino Physics with Cryogenic Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Enectali Figueroa-Feliciano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2015
* USD 112,500.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration
has pioneered the use of low temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the
rare scattering of WIMPs on nuclei and distinguish them from backgrounds. This
work will have a broad impact which extends beyond the dark matter search. The
technical developments will further advance phonon-mediated detectors, which
have already found many applications in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funds for three
activities:&lt;br/&gt;-- The SuperCDMS Soudan experiment is currently taking
data which will have world-leading sensitivity to dark matter for masses below 5
gigaelectronvolt (GeV). The experiment will continue taking data next year, and
the full set of different analyses of the data will take place over the next two
years. MIT has taken a leadership role in the low-threshold analysis, and will
continue to do so. &lt;br/&gt;-- Play a central role in the design, prototyping,
testing, and commissioning of the next-generation experiment. &lt;br/&gt;--
Develop and prototype new low-threshold, low-background detectors with enough
sensitivity to cover all the available dark matter parameter space for masses
between 1-10 GeV down to the irreducible background from solar
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute to the training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, continuing the
group's strong involvement in mentoring undergraduates from underrepresented
groups by participating in the MIT Summer Research Program.