* 1408490
* Multiplexing Techniques for Scalable Wireless Interconnects at sub-THz Frequencies: Circuits-EM-Communication Codesign Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kaushik Sengupta, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Multiplexing Techniques for Scalable Wireless Interconnects at THz
Frequencies&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-1408490&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kushik Sengupta, Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt; This proposal aims to investigate and develop spatially
multiplexed architectures for wireless interconnects at sub-THz frequencies as
scalable, energy-efficient solution towards one terabit per second (1 Tb/s). As
we enter the era of terra-scale computing, massive amounts of data crunching by
these processors will require inordinately large amount of bandwidth, not
currently served by either electrical or optical interconnect solutions. Current
methods of scaling of electrical interconnects to higher data rates are either
limited by the available bandwidth density (Gb/s/mm2), energy cost, the circuit
complexities in driving high-speed data through the long and lossy physical
traces, or by the maximum number of parallel physical traces possible to
accommodate in a constrained form factor. Wireless interconnects near THz
frequencies are promising , but wireless data rates of 10Gb/s and the high
energy/bit requirement, falls way short of meeting the bandwidth requirements
for future off-chip interconnects. In this proposal, we aim to investigate
techniques where the capacity of the channel can be increased many-fold using
communication theoretic spatial-domain multiplexing techniques. Under the same
total power constraint, such architectures have orders of magnitude more channel
capacity, thereby providing a scalable solution towards wireless Tb/s
interconnects. A key component in this proposal is to combine seamlessly, high-
frequency circuits and systems and antennas with communication-theoretic
techniques to increase capacity and data-rates by orders of magnitude, not
otherwise possible in a single directional partitioned approach.&lt;br/&gt;
Metal-based interconnect traces on printed circuit boards(PCB) serve as the most
common method of chip-chip interconnects. However, increasing need of
computational power to crunch more and more data in specialized server systems,
high-performance computing or even portable devices, requires that communication
data-rate from the processor to the peripherals be scaled proportionately. In
most cases, the number of input-output pins is limited by the form factor, which
puts a bottleneck on communication capacity among all the processors. In this
proposal, we investigate techniques to use very high-frequency electromagnetic
waves located in the Terahertz portion of the spectrum (between microwaves and
infra-red) to establish seamless wireless communication links among the
chipsets. Moving to such high frequencies enables us to exploit orders of
magnitude higher bandwidth needed for sustaining such high data rates.
Additionally, we investigate techniques to increase the communication links
capacity by another order through spatial multiplexing techniques in a short-
range communication setting. The success of this project is envisioned to bring
new forms of smart interconnect solutions for a host of various applications
from high-performance computing to internet data centers. The results of this
research effort are also expected to have major impact in advancing the field of
THz electronics benefitting diverse applications such as imaging and sensing. In
a broader vision, this will have major impacts in radically new technologies in
communication and computation, which not only makes us a more connected society,
but also fuel research in other areas of applied science. This research is also
expected to train both graduate and undergraduate students in multi-disciplinary
fields, which are vitally important for solving challenging research problems
for the future.