* 1408711
* EAPSI: Assessing the impact of atmospheric observations from Taiwanese aircraft reconnaissance on Typhoon forecasts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Finocchio, Finocchio               Peter          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Accurate tropical cyclone forecasts are essential for protecting increasingly
vulnerable coastal populations worldwide. However, the accuracy of tropical
cyclone forecasts relies on high-quality observations used to initialize weather
forecast models, and such observations are particularly sparse over the oceans
where these intense cyclones spend most of their lives. To alleviate this under-
sampling problem for the numerous typhoons threatening Taiwan each year, Dr.
Chun-Chieh Wu of National Taiwan University (NTU) established an aircraft
reconnaissance program called DOTSTAR. While DOTSTAR aircraft observations have
generally improved typhoon forecasts, it remains unclear which types of aircraft
observations produce the most significant improvements. In this study conducted
in collaboration with Dr. Wu, experimental forecasts incorporating aircraft
observations of temperature, humidity, or wind speed will be used to evaluate
the relative forecast impact of including each individual type of observation.
Better understanding how different aircraft observations affect typhoon
forecasts will help optimize future observing missions both in the Pacific and
Atlantic basins.

Aircraft observations of tropical cyclones are expensive, and it is therefore
beneficial to optimize such missions by better understanding which observations
improve forecasts the most. The proposed study will use DOTSTAR dropsonde
observations to investigate the relative impact of thermodynamic versus dynamic
in situ observations on typhoon structure and intensity forecasts. A series of
simulations will be performed using the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF)
model with a modern data assimilation system to independently assimilate
profiles of temperature, moisture, or winds from DOTSTAR dropsondes for a sample
of West Pacific typhoons. In addition, a control simulation without dropsonde
observations will be performed. Each simulation will be validated against
independent observations, global model reanalysis, and best track datasets to
evaluate the improvements resulting from assimilating each subset of dropsonde
observations. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Science Council of Taiwan.