* 1408838
* Theory and Application of Berry Phase Methods in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* David Vanderbilt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2019
* USD 560,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades, there has
been a growing appreciation that certain mathematical concepts from differential
geometry and topology are sometimes central to the understanding of the behavior
of electrons in crystalline solids. The electrons are described by quantum-
mechanical wavefunctions, and the manner in which these vary with momentum
encodes many kinds of information about the solid, especially its electrical and
magnetic responses and their coupling with each other. When the wavefunctions
become twisted in momentum space, this results in so-called "topological
insulator" states, which have been the focus of intense research interest in the
last decade. By definition, electric currents cannot flow in the interior of an
insulator, but a topological insulator has the unusual property that there are
guaranteed to be current-carrying channels at the surfaces. The present research
program is designed to further develop the formal theory of such effects, to
invent robust and efficient computational algorithms for computing the related
properties of solids, and to carry out a computational search for materials
displaying new or enhanced properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
lead to the development of algorithms that will ultimately be implemented in
open-source code packages and made available to the wider electronic-structure
community. It will also contribute to the development of novel materials that
are promising for commercial applications, especially ones involving the
coupling of electrical and magnetic responses. Training and mentorship of junior
researchers (graduate students and postdocs) will take place, contributing to
scientific workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is focused on the electronic
properties of topological insulators or other materials in which orbital
currents play an important role. The objectives are (i) to further develop the
formal theory of such systems, making use of the mathematical concepts of Berry
phase, Berry curvature, and Chern number from differential geometry; (ii) to
invent accurate and efficient computational methods for computing materials
properties related to these mathematical concepts; and (iii) to use
computational methods to identify promising new materials or structures in which
these properties can manifest themselves, potentially leading to technological
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much recent work has concentrated on
time-reversal invariant topological insulators such as Bi2Se3, the emphasis here
will be on quantum anomalous Hall or Chern insulators, axion insulators, and
Weyl semimetals, in which time-reversal symmetry is spontaneously broken. While
the possibility of the Chern-insulator state was pointed out already 25 years
ago, it has only recently been demonstrated experimentally, and that only at low
temperature. Strategies will be developed for theoretically identifying possible
two-dimensional Chern-insulator states accessible to experimental synthesis,
with gaps and Curie temperatures large enough to approach room-temperature
operation. A second and overlapping thrust will be on the theory and calculation
of materials properties that involve macroscopic orbital currents, including
bulk and surface anomalous Hall effects, orbital magnetization, and orbital
magnetoelectric couplings. As a cross-cutting theme, computational materials
search strategies will be used to identify promising candidate materials and
structures that may exhibit the desired topological or magnetoelectric
properties, especially including two-dimensional Chern-insulator states at
surfaces of normal magnetic insulators and their interfaces with time-reversal-
invariant topological insulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to
the development of algorithms that will ultimately be implemented in open-source
code packages and made available to the wider electronic-structure community. It
will also contribute to the development of novel materials that are promising
for commercial applications, especially ones involving the coupling of
electrical and magnetic responses. Training and mentorship of junior researchers
(graduate students and postdocs) will take place, contributing to scientific
workforce development.