* 1408323
* Controlling Nanocomposite Properties by Nanoparticle Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 466,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

There has been continuing interest in polymer nanocomposites, which are mixtures
of polymeric materials and nanometer-sized inorganic particles, primarily
because they offer the promise of significantly improved physical properties
relative to the corresponding pure polymer. While there have been many studies
on these topics to date, very few have gone from the scientific details relevant
to controlling the nanoparticle (NP) dispersions to optimizing the practically
relevant thermal and mechanical properties that emerge. Each of the three prongs
of this research project focuses on establishing this connection in a way that
has a direct impact on applications. (i) The proposed research on pressure
effects will delineate the role of processing in homogenizing polymer/NP
mixtures and the consequences of this changing dispersion state on properties.
(ii) In a second thread, this research will study the role of NP shape on
optimizing thermal and mechanical properties. (iii) Finally, the practical
consequences of the proposed research will be explored by replacing chemically
attached polymer molecules on the NPs by the physically attached ones. Are these
strategies equivalent, and, if not, in what tangible ways are they different?

These research efforts will be coupled to a suite of education and outreach
activities. Driven by the group's recent activities involving recruiting high
school and undergraduate students for summer research, the proposal is to
continue to recruit students from historically minority schools (such as Florida
A&M), as well as undergraduate and high school students (and teachers) from the
greater New York City environment. The PI's group has previously worked with
several women and minority high-school students who have subsequently gone on to
study science and engineering in college, and will continue this pipeline
approach toward science and engineering careers.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

There has been continuing interest in polymer nanocomposites, primarily because
these hybrids offer the promise of significant property improvements relative to
the pure polymer. While there have been many studies on this topic to date, very
few of them have gone all the way from controlling the nanoparticle (NP)
dispersion state to optimizing the thermomechanical properties that emerge. The
overall approach proposed, which combines experiments and theory, focuses
precisely on bridging this gap by (a) studying the fundamentals of the assembly
process and its consequences on properties, and (b) porting the evolving
understanding to make it more amenable to applications. The proposed research
has the following three prongs: (i) Critically studying the role of pressure in
homogenizing polymer/NP mixtures. Can high pressure be used to control NP
dispersion and what are its effects on properties? (ii) Similarly, the research
will explore the role of NP shape as a route to further optimizing
thermomechanical properties. (iii) Finally, the practical consequences of the
proposed research will be studied by replacing chemically-grafted chains on the
NPs by the physical adsorption of chains. Is this idea feasible and what are its
advantages and disadvantages in terms of property improvements?

These research activities are coupled to extensive education and outreach
activities. Driven by the group's recent activities involving high school and
undergraduate students for summer research, and with the group's well-developed
interactions with Florida A&M University (an HBCU), the proposal is to continue
to recruit underrepresented students (both women and minorities) at the high
school, undergraduate and graduate levels to be part of the group's research
efforts. The PI is also working with the Chemical Engineering department at the
City College of New York to bring together academics in the Greater New York
area (faculty and students), local industry and national laboratories in an
annual chemical engineering symposium. The goal is, not only to place graduating
students into local industry, but also to attract industrial participants into
higher degree and/or refresher programs at Columbia.