* 1408279
* Collaborative Research: Fast reinforcement learning using multiple models and state decompositions for apllications to Plug-in Hybrid Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Learning schemes in general, are known for their slow convergence rates. The
proposal suggests various modifications for improving the speed of learning. The
first is the use of multiple models which has proved very effective in other
areas of systems theory. A second modification is the use of decentralized or
partially decentralized multi-agent state decomposition approaches. Both of the
above will make learning schemes in general and reinforcement schemes in
particular fast converging and applicable to a wide class of real-world
problems. The proposed research will develop the foundations of fast
reinforcement learning using these two broad approaches, and will also apply
these methods to the optimal control of a fleet of Plug-in Hybrid Electric
Vehicles. The outcome of this research will have a societal impact for optimally
controlling a fleet of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles for energy efficiency.
The application of the proposed research will have extended application in other
areas of systems theory such as neurobiology. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in learning schemes for multidisciplinary applications.
Cross-fertilization of ideas will be facilitated through a bi-annual workshop on
adaptive and learning systems and by leveraging a multidisciplinary Institute
for Mathematical Modeling and Computational Science
(iMMCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on improving convergence
speed of learning schemes in multiple agents in order to overcome the
limitations of dimensionality, as well as in situations where infrequent
communication exists between agents. Innovation is in the use of multiple models
and state decomposition to speed up the learning and convergence. The technical
approach lies in using multiple identification models; reinforcement learning by
using decentralized or partially decentralized multi-agent state decomposition
approaches; and evaluating fast reinforcement learning in an application test-
bed for controlling a fleet of Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs). The
Research Team further plans to quantify the trade-off between learning speed and
quality of the "learned solutions".