* 1408409
* An Exchange Market Approach for Mobile Crowdsensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Small-sized portable mobile devices, including smartphones and tablet computers,
are becoming extremely prevailing. These pocket-sized gadgets have a set of
embedded sensors and can provide abundant sensing data about the environment and
human society, thus offering great opportunities to carry out crowdsensing. One
primary objective of this project is to develop a mobile crowdsensing framework
with fair pricing and task allocation. A key challenge is that different parties
involved in mobile crowdsensing, including mobile users, task owners, and the
platform, have conflicting interests: 1) mobile users aim to maximize the profit
for performing sensing tasks; 2) task owners strive to get their sensing tasks
performed with high quality of sensing, at a cost as small as possible; and 3)
the platform would desire social welfare maximization. Based on recent advances
in Exchange Economy theory, this project will tackle this challenge to strike a
right balance and enable them to work in concert. This project serves as an
excellent example for exploring innovative research on the interplay among
engineering, economics and operation research. It will spur a new line of
thinking for large-scale mobile sensing in applications including smart health
and smart city, benefiting the society at large. Another major task of this
project is to integrate research into educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appealing to Exchange Economy theory, this
project employs the notion of "Walrasian Equilibrium" as the overall metric, at
which there exists a price vector for mobile users and an allocation for task
owners, such that the allocation is Pareto optimal and the market gets cleared
(i.e., all sensing tasks are performed). Under the common theme of joint pricing
and task scheduling with constraints, this project is centered around devising
algorithms that can achieve a Walrasian Equilibrium, for both cases where
sensing tasks are either divisible or indivisible. Thrust I studies joint
pricing and task allocation for crowdsensing with divisible sensing tasks, via a
strategic bargaining approach. The existence of a Walrasian Equilibrium will be
investigated first, together with a centralized scheme used as a benchmark.
Then, based on multi-lateral bargaining theory, decentralized algorithms will be
devised where mobile users and task owners negotiate with each other to
determine the pricing and allocation, and the convergence of the bargaining game
output to a Walrasian Equilibrium will be investigated thoroughly. Thrust II
will be devoted to joint pricing and allocation for crowdsensing with
indivisible sensing tasks. One challenge in this more sophisticated setting is
that there may not exist a Walrasian Equilibrium. In light of this, the notion
of Combinatorial Walrasian Equilibrium (a relaxation of Walrasian Equilibrium)
will be applied to characterize an "optimal state." Since this relaxation may
give rise to some inefficiency issues, the Tatonnement based approach will be
taken to quantify the corresponding performance, in terms of the ratios to
approximate the optimal social welfare and individual revenue. Further,
decentralized solutions will be developed to achieve a Combinatorial Walrasian
Equilibrium.