* 1408635
* AF: Medium: Algorithmic Explorations of Networks, Markets, Evolution, and the Brain
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Christos Papadimitriou, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2018
* USD 870,607.00

Computer science is not just the scientific discipline behind the information
technology revolution; it is also an apt framework for understanding the world
around us. This project is about applying the point of view of algorithms -- and
their antithesis, complexity -- to understanding phenomena and challenges in a
variety of domains, including the Internet, markets, evolution, and the brain.
To understand the Internet and the networks and markets it entails and enables,
one must combine algorithms with ideas from economics and game theory. This
research will focus on online markets and particularly their dynamic (that is,
multi-stage) nature, on incentives for improving congestion in network routing
and air traffic, on algorithms for propagating influence in social networks, as
well as new kinds of algorithms that take their inputs from competitors (who may
choose to misrepresent their data). The PI will continue his research on how
computational insights can shed light on some key problems in evolution,
including certain rigorous connections between natural selection, machine
learning, and a problem in Boolean logic. Finally, the PI will work to reconcile
learning algorithms with new insights from
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes research on certain
crucial problems at the interface between computation and game
theory/economics/networks, while continuing past work employing computational
concepts to elucidate evolution and, more recently, neuroscience. The PI will
study the important problem of dynamic mechanism design in economics from the
point of view of computational complexity and approximate implementation. He
will also study mechanisms for managing congestion, with possible applications
to air traffic control. The project will explore the computational and graph-
theoretic properties of several novel and promising game-theoretic models of
network creation. It will study from the complexity standpoint Nash equilibria
with continuous strategies, and extensions of the Nash equilibrium concept
beyond utility theory. The project will also explore new and timely modes of
computation in which all inputs (ultimately, all computational components) are
provided by selfish rational agents. In evolution, the PI will explore the
connections between learning algorithms, games, and natural selection, and a
different connection between Boolean satisfiability and the emergence of
novelty. The PI also plans to develop a new genre of learning algorithms that
are more faithful to the new insights we are gaining into the brain. Finally,
from the standpoint of algorithms and complexity, the PI will look at several
computational problems ranging from network variants of the set cover problem to
linear programming and optimizing multivariate polynomials.