* 1408364
* Development of High Efficiency Deep Ultraviolet Light Emitting Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Theodore Moustakas, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 336,873.00

Title: Development of High Efficiency Deep Ultraviolet Light Emitting Diodes

The objective of this research is to develop high efficiency (20-30%) deep
ultraviolet light emitting diodes. The proposed research has the potential for a
strong impact on the environmental and medical sectors, due to specific
applications to water / air / food sterilization and for diagnostic and
therapeutic uses. Furthermore, the proposed research activities will promote
education through the training of students in a variety of disciplines, ranging
from growth of semiconductor thin films, device fabrication and
characterization, and emerging technologies. To increase the effectiveness and
scope of the program, the involvement of undergraduates and high-school interns
will be emphasized by taking advantage of several existing channels at Boston
University, many of which have a strong focus on the recruitment of
underrepresented minorities. The NSF support of this project is justified since
it is basic science and the technology it addresses has a large number of
societal and educational benefits.

The specific goal is to demonstrate high efficiency (20-30%) deep UV LEDs based
on AlGaN alloys grown on p-SiC substrates. This efficiency value is 3 times
higher than the best result currently reported in the literature. In order to
accomplish this goal long standing problems of low internal quantum efficiency
(IQE), low injection efficiency (IE), and low extraction efficiency (EE) will be
addressed. The AlGaN structures will be grown on p-SiC substrates, to which they
are better lattice matched than the commonly used sapphire substrates.
Improvements in IQE will be obtained by growing the active region of the device
under a growth mode, which leads to band structure potential fluctuations and
thus efficient radiative recombination. The expected IQE value will be 70% or
higher. The LED device will be an inverted structure on a degenerately doped
p-SiC substrate, which together with polarization assisted injection of holes is
expected to lead to IE 50% or higher. A conducting AlGaN-based p-type DBR will
be incorporated between the substrate and the active region to prevent
absorption in the p-SiC substrate. Furthermore, the inverted structure will
allow light extraction from the transparent n-AlGaN side of the device, which
can textured for maximum light extraction leading to EE of 70% or higher.