* 1408647
* Filtering by Aliasing: Sharp Programmable Integrated Filters using Simple Time-Varying Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Babak Daneshrad, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 415,849.00

THIS IS AN EXCELLENT PROPOSAL WHICH WILL MAKE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTIONS TO
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION RECEIVERS AND WILL ALLOW ENHANCED ACCESS TO THE RADIO
SPECTRUM. THIS IS BECOMING VERY CRITICAL SINCE SPECTRUM ACCESS IS BECOMING A
MAJOR SOCIETAL ISSUE. THIS RESEARCH, IF SUCCESSFUL, WILL ALLEVIATE SOME OF THESE
PROBLEMS AND WILL RESULT IN MAJOR SOCIETAL BENEFITS. IT ALSO CONTAINS A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR OUTREACH ACTIVITIES AND INTEGRATION OF RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project are at least two fold. First, the research activity
brings a breakthrough in the design of reconfigurable integrated filters that is
crucial to the re-search on software-defined and cognitive radios and the growth
of communication systems in particular and the electronics industry in general.
In particular, enabling cognitive radios can po-tentially support the increasing
demand for more private and public connectivity in the near fu-ture. Second, the
results and discoveries of the research activities will be useful in developing
academic material and training future circuits and systems designers in the
importance of multi-disciplinary thinking for solving current and future
communication systems problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to develop sharp,
programmable integrated fil-ters that will enable a wide range of applications
including software defined and cognitive radios. Such filters will reduce the
bandwidth and the dynamic range of the received communication signals rendering
them amenable to digitization and subsequent receiver processing. The proposed
approach is to employ simple but periodically time-varying circuit components to
significantly enhance effective filtering at sampling instances prior to
digitization. The intellectual merit of the research is that the use of
periodically time-varying components is a much more efficient and fundamentally
different approach to circuit design. Today, most filters are of the time-
invariant variety and particularly in the wireless receiver, they need high
quality acoustic filter components that are bulky, expensive, difficult to
integrate and most importantly, not programmable. The proposed approach will
obviate the need for such inflexible components. Specific goals of the proposed
research are validation using a prototype integrated circuit and the development
of necessary theoretical methods to analyze time-varying circuits. It is
expected that the latter will also enable wider acceptance of periodically time
varying circuits beyond filter design applications.