* 1408437
* A Novel MIMO Radar Approach Based on Sparse Sensing and Matrix Completion
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Athina Petropulu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

In both civilian and military applications, there is increasing interest in
networked radars which are inexpensive and easily deployable, while at the same
time enabling reliable surveillance of an area. Examples include radar systems
consisting of transmit and receive antennas placed on the nodes of a wireless
sensor network, on backpacks, or on cars. The transmit antennas transmit probing
waveforms. By jointly processing the signals from all receive antennas the
desired target parameters can be extracted. This processing can be done at a
fusion center, which collects the measurements of all receive antennas. Reliable
surveillance requires collection, communication and fusion of vast amounts of
data from various antennas, a task that is expensive and power consuming. This
project proposes a novel approach for substantially reducing the amount of data
that need to be communicated to a fusion center, while ensuring high target
detection and estimation performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) radars have received considerable recent attention as
they can achieve superior resolution. The proposed project will investigate a
novel networked MIMO radar system that relies on advanced signal processing
techniques, in particular, sparse sensing and matrix completion, in order to
achieve a tradeoff between the competing requirements of reliability and cost.
In particular, the goal is to achieve high resolution in the angle, Doppler and
range space, while limiting the amount of data measured and forwarded by each
receive antenna through the network. Unlike previously developed compressive
sensing based MIMO radars, the proposed approach will not require grid
discretization and thus will be more robust. The project will: (i) develop
theoretical results on target recoverability and performance guarantees for
matrix completion applied to MIMO radars. Insight from the analysis will be used
to design new radar configurations that have improved performance; (ii) develop
decentralized algorithms for implementing matrix completion, so that the
proposed radar system can be implemented in a distributed fashion without the
need for a fusion center; (iii) investigate the potential of the proposed scheme
for spectrum sharing between radars and communication systems; (iv) investigate
the possibility of further performance improvement by exploiting node mobility
and optimal node placement though motion control.