* 1408560
* RUI: Theoretical (Numerical) Investigations of Novel Quantum Phases and Transitions in Strongly Interacting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Donna Sheng, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This RUI award supports computational and theoretical research, and education to
investigate the unusual physical properties of electrons in materials that
interact strongly with each other. In these materials, quantum mechanics plays a
significant role and their magnetic properties are often determined by the
patterns formed by the orientations of the intrinsic magnetism of the electrons.
The research in this area is stimulated by growing experimental discoveries of
magnetic materials which have exhibited unusual properties different from known
forms of magnetism. The PI will use computer simulation and theory to study the
fundamental nature of novel forms of magnetism, some inspired by materials known
as frustrated magnets in which the interactions among the smallest fundamental
units of magnetic order cannot be satisfied because of their geometric
arrangement in the material. The aim is to predict the qualitative behavior of
these materials regarding the pattern of the fundamental units of magnetism and
measures of how quantum mechanics intertwines fundamental magnetic units that
may be widely separated from each other. The improved understanding and
quantitative prediction of the complex properties of these interacting systems
will provide information and guidance for the development of analytic theories
and experimental research on such systems. A better understanding of these
materials contributes to the knowledge base for future device technologies based
that relay on the fundamental principles of quantum mechanics for their
operation, including quantum computers. The research will be integrated with the
education of undergraduate and graduate students. The project will provide
students and postdoctoral fellows with training in solving challenging problems
and in carrying out research at the forefront of condensed matter physics. It
will also prepare and train minority and first generation students to be ready
for the challenges they will face when they go on to their graduate study for
the Ph.D. in physics or other science.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This RUI award supports theoretical research and education activities to
investigate the fundamental nature of emerging quantum spin liquids, spin Bose
metals, and non-Fermi liquids in frustrated magnetic materials and doped Mott
insulator systems. The recent discoveries of unusual experimental properties of
magnetic materials including Herbertsmithite kagome spin systems and triangular
organic compounds serve as the impetus for this research. These systems have
exhibited properties of possible spin liquids or non-Fermi liquids. The PI plans
to study quantum phase diagrams and the topological nature of the gapped spin
liquid in microscopic systems which may emerge in kagome and other lattice
systems with geometric frustration and competing interactions. A systematic
approach will be developed which can access different topological sectors,
obtain entanglement information and the modular matrix to fully characterize the
topological nature of the quantum spin liquid phase. The quantum phase diagram
of a weak Mott insulator will be determined to identify the possible gapless
spin liquid or non-Fermi liquid relevant for the organic compounds with
Heisenberg exchange and ring-exchange interactions. The PI will develop a
controlled and unbiased numerical approach to study gapless liquid phases in
microscopic spin and electron models in quasi one-dimensional systems and scale
to two-dimensions based on finite-size scaling analysis. The PI will also
systematically study the nature of quantum phase transitions between these
exotic quantum liquid states and other magnetically ordered or spatial symmetry
broken states to search for the signature of a deconfined quantum criticality.
In connection with experimental systems, the effect of additional realistic
perturbations in materials will be systematically studied. Central to their
computational approach, the PI and collaborators will continue developing a new
density matrix renormalization group method that will find extensive
applications for strongly interacting systems in both materials and ultra cold
atom systesms. The objectives of the research are to improve the theoretical
understanding of the fundamental nature of new emerging quantum phases in these
interacting systems, and to provide quantitative predictions and benchmark
results based on numerical modelling for future theoretical and experimental
studies. In concert with this effort the PI hopes to develop new approaches and
tools that will find extensive applications for strongly interacting systems in
both materials and ultra cold atom systems. By further developing the PI's
density matrix renormalization group algorithm, and incorporating matrix product
states and tensor network renormalization, the exciting physics in these
frustrated magnetic and doped Mott-insulator systems will be explored. The
research will be integrated with the education of undergraduate and graduate
students. The project will provide students and postdoctoral fellows with
training in solving challenging problems and in carrying out research at the
forefront of condensed matter physics. It will also prepare and train minority
and first generation students to be ready for the challenges they will face when
they go on to their graduate study for the Ph.D. in physics or other science.