* 1408320
* Optimal Distributed Estimation over Shared Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Nuno Miguel Martins, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 386,746.00

The proposal deals with innovative methods to analyze the performance and design
optimal distributed estimation systems that operate over shared networks. The
research plan adopts a configuration formed by multiple remote sensors, which
assess potentially dissimilar information and are not allowed to communicate
with each other, and one receiver that acts as fusion center. The role of the
fusion center is to estimate a parameter or process of interest based on
information that is transmitted to it through the network by the sensors. A
central feature of the formulation is the constraint that the network is shared
and can support only a finite number of simultaneous transmissions. In a multi-
user wireless setting, such a limitation may be the result of interference that
causes information loss whenever a receiver cannot discern simultaneous
transmissions occurring in the same channel. In general, the number of
simultaneous transmissions in a shared network, which can be wireless or
wireline, may also be constrained due to security, regulatory considerations or
power and bandwidth limitations. In general, it is not possible to estimate the
process of interest with no error because it could require simultaneous
transmissions by all sensors, which is not possible in the proposed formulation.
A class of problems to design the processing at the fusion center is considered.
Since there is no communication among the sensors, it can be shown that the
resulting paradigm is a non-convex team problem with a non-classical information
pattern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A class of collision channels to model the effect
of simultaneous transmissions is considered. In this approach, the problem, from
the point of view of each sensor, is recast as one of designing an optimal
remote estimation system across a new class of erasure links, and in the
presence of communication costs. A connection to optimal quantization theory
will be investigated to obtain effective numerical optimization algorithms. The
proposed approach also leads to a new class of optimal quantization problems for
which the cost is non-uniform across representation symbols. We explore how the
ideas above can be used to find the optimal solution to particular cases of the
problem. This includes the settings in which measurements are independent and
dependent across sensors, and the one-step and sequential cases. The two-sensor
framework that shows the optimality of asymmetric threshold policies at the
sensors with Gaussian measurements, and extensions to multiple sensors in the
presence of measurement noise will be investigated. In addition, efficient
software tools to implement the algorithms for design and performance analysis
will be developed. An important component of any networked monitoring or control
layer, estimation algorithms executed at the sensors and fusion centers must be
designed in unison to guarantee the performance of the overall system. The
methods will allow implementation of optimal policies, and analyze the tradeoffs
of performance for a range of applications for which the number of transmitting
sensors exceeds what the underlying network can utilize. Examples include sensor
networks in buildings, large renewable energy generation infrastructure and
power distribution networks.