* 1408933
* Biomaterials For Small Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Robert Schofield, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Oregon Eugene is to study the mechanical and
material adaptations that have evolved in small organisms to cope with the
scaling rule on the whole-tool, and at ultrastructural and molecular scales.
When a farmer's harvesting tools get dull, they can be sharpened or replaced.
However, these options are not available to many animals. They must rely on
tools that are doomed to become less efficient with each use. This is especially
problematic for small animals like spiders and insects that rely on the
sharpness of their tools to overcome the force limitations associated with their
size. It may be that the strange materials, containing up to 25% of zinc, iron,
copper, manganese, iodine and bromine that are found in the teeth, jaws, claws
and blades of many small animals have evolved to meet this challenge by reducing
wear and fracture. This project will study the properties of these materials,
with a detailed investigation of their composition. New understanding may be
learned from these materials that have evolved in small organisms to meet their
distinctive challenges associated with small-scale mechanical interactions.
Furthermore, similar materials may find application in sharp tools such as
medical devices (e.g. scalpels and miniature "robots"), atomic force microscopy
tips, or in other applications that require hard but impact resistant materials.
The project will provide great opportunities for research education because it
is so interdisciplinary, combining methods from material science, biology,
chemistry and physics. This research will be integrated with teaching and
training graduate and undergraduate students in this interdisciplinary
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Sharper tools enable smaller animals (and
small, force-limited machines) to cut and puncture the same materials as their
larger and stronger counterparts. A mosquito and a lion both puncture the same
skin, a sloth and a leaf cutter ant must both cut the same leaves. But as the
tool radius gets smaller, the energy required to fracture the tool gets smaller
and faster than the energy required to puncture the membrane with the tool,
making fracture increasingly likely. The proposers will study the mechanical and
material adaptations that have evolved in small organisms to cope with this
scaling rule on the whole-tool, ultrastructural, and molecular scales. The
proposed activity will: 1) test, for the first time, the mechanical properties
of several Heavy Element Biomaterials (HEBs) used in mechanical structure in
small animals; 2) test a novel scaling rule suggesting that smaller animals need
more fracture resistant tools; 3) begin to test the novel hypothesis that heavy
atoms can be used to lower molecular resonant frequencies and thereby damp the
high frequency vibrations from impact; 4) test the hypothesis that variations in
water binding are correlated with the balances of hardness and fracture
resistance in HEBs; 5) test predictions of the balance of mechanical properties
in particular HEBs, based on their locations in biological tools; and 6) test a
specific zinc binding hypothesis. The researchers of this award will use tools
that they have developed or will be developing for measuring mechanical
properties of small specimens, as well as advanced chemical techniques such as
Atom Probe Tomography. This project will provide research training in these
cutting edge technologies as well as gain expertise in interdisciplinary
research. Underrepresented and nontraditional students will actively recruited
and mentored, and will provide opportunities to participate in this research
through an internship program with a local community college. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive research training in a course developed from
the outcome of this project.