* 1408271
* Investigation of 3D Additive Manufacturing toward Arbitrary Electromagnetic Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Hao Xin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This proposal seeks to develop novel 3D printing (also called additive
manufacturing) technology for a broad range of microwave frequency applications
including wireless communication, remote sensing, high speed computing, etc.
Although it has been argued that 3D printing could be the future of
manufacturing, the potential and applicability of these methods for creating
functional electronics, especially those operate at RF / microwave frequency
which are critical components for many applications remain largely unexplored. A
number of limitations need to be resolved before advanced microwave components
and systems can be printed in a 3D fashion robustly. Among them, the lack of
printable materials with desired microwave properties and the challenges in
integrating high quality conducting constituents are some of the main issues.
This proposed research will explore several novel ideas to address these
outstanding issues of additive manufacturing for microwave applications. The
proposed work will contribute timely to the additive manufacturing field and
enable 3D printing of fully functional microwave components and systems. This
research will also have significant broader impacts to the advancement of
science, engineering and human society. The research results will contribute to
novel aspects of next generation of manufacturing technology and advance the
state-of-the-art of 3D printed microwave electronics. The expected outcome may
enable fully customizable, high value, multi-functional products for the
consumer, biomedical, aerospace and defense industries. A concurrent and
integrated research education plan including active participation of both
graduate and undergraduate student researchers will also be carried out.
Engineering curriculum will be enhanced not only at the two participating
universities but also for the bigger community through a new course and new
textbook on Additive Manufacturing Technology (to be offered online as well as
in classrooms), open research seminars, and undergraduate senior Capstone
projects. The proposed education program will provide a broader education scope
in the society by holding regular classroom / industrial seminars and attending
technical conferences. Moreover, outreach to underrepresented groups will be
emphasized specifically targeting women and minorities at both universities and
at local K-12 schools. It is expected that the proposed education component will
provide timely training of work force in advanced manufacturing which is of
great national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
research is to advance additive manufacturing technology to enable 3D printing
of microwave components and systems. Most of the materials used in 3D printing
technology currently are designed or selected with only mechanical property in
mind, thus limiting their applicability to microwave applications. While
conductive ink printing has been widely applied, the high temperature annealing
process required is often not compatible to the non-conducting part of the
objects to be manufactured. In this program, 3D printable materials with robust
electromagnetic properties will be investigated and developed based on a novel
polymer matrix compound technique to obtain improved EM properties such as
larger range of dielectric constant and magnetic response. 3D printing technique
for additive manufacturing of high quality (i.e., good RF conductivity)
conductors by ultrasonic or thermal embedding and laser welding metallic wires
and fine-pitch meshes within materials such as thermoplastics will be developed
and refined. Based upon these new techniques, practical microwave components
(i.e., transmission line with vertical interconnects, wire and patch antennas,
etc.) will be designed, printed and tested. In addition, novel 3D gradient index
(GRIN) metamaterial-based device (i.e., a flattened Luneburg lens imager) with
superior performance will be investigated.