* 1408892
* RAPID: Pile Downdrag Behavior Based on Blast Liquefaction Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2015
* USD 199,942.00

As a result of the extensive liquefaction damage in Christchurch, the New
Zealand Earthquake Commission (EQC) is sponsoring a multi-million research study
to determine the most cost-effective liquefaction mitigation strategies for
repair work and subsequent reconstruction. Based on this test program,
government approved approaches will be eligible for earthquake insurance
reimbursements. Blast induced liquefaction trials will be performed to evaluate
the ground improvement techniques under full-scale conditions. In collaboration
with EQC we will install instrumented test pile foundations and measure negative
skin friction and pile performance following liquefaction induced settlement.
These full-scale measurements of liquefaction induced ground settlement, pile
settlement and pile load distribution will provide fundamental understanding of
the pile downdrag phenomenon. The absence of field measurements has led to
contradictory design recommendations which may be either unsafe or uneconomical
depending on the actual pile behavior. Because deep foundations are a common
approach for supporting bridges and buildings in liquefiable sands, reliable
design approaches are critical to preventing future earthquake damage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquefaction of loose saturated sands results in
significant damage to civil infrastructure in nearly every earthquake event.
Direct and indirect economic losses resulting from liquefaction are substantial
costs to society. The tremendous damage to property and the indirect economic
loss resulting from the Christchurch New Zealand earthquake sequence
dramatically illustrate the broad social impacts of failure to properly design
for liquefaction hazards. Large sections of the city are still uninhabited years
after the earthquakes and the economy is struggling to recover. This
collaborative research study in New Zealand will provide fundamental
understanding of the performance of typical deep pile foundations for bridges
and high-rise structures when subjected to liquefaction. The results from these
tests will allow engineers to evaluate the accuracy of existing design
procedures and develop modifications to produce better agreement with measured
behavior. These results will help engineers to design safe, yet cost effective
foundation solutions. Results from this research will benefit both New Zealand
and US engineering communities and foster international collaborations.
Leveraging funding from both countries expands the scope of work beyond what
either country could accomplish independently. Considering the paucity of test
data relative to liquefaction induced loads on foundations, these test results
are likely to have a strong impact on design practice in seismically active
areas around the world.