* 1408295
* Collaborative Research: Designs and Theory of State-Constrained Nonlinear Feedback Controls for Delay and Partial Differential Equation Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Malisoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 220,000.00

Collaborative Research: Designs and Theory of State-Constrained Nonlinear
Feedback Controls for Delay and Partial Differential Equation
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control systems are used to model many important
engineering systems, such as electronics manufacturing processes involving
lasers, marine robots that can monitor water pollution, oil drilling and
refining, and rehabilitation mechanisms for patients with mobility disorders.
However, many of these engineering applications involve input delays, state
constraints, and uncertainties that can put them outside the scope of existing
controller designs and theory. State constraints occur when the control
objectives include avoiding undesirable situations such as collisions with
obstacles, while input delays often arise from sensor designs or transport
phenomena that make it difficult to measure the current state of the system.
Also, it is inherent in many engineering applications that the control
mechanisms must be autonomous. One important technique for ensuring autonomy is
by using feedback control, which means that the control values must be
determined from past values of the state of the system. This project will
develop cutting edge feedback control designs and theory that can help address
the preceding challenges, and will demonstrate the techniques in real time
experiments. One key technique will involve prediction, which provides a way to
use past observations from the control system to compute future states of the
dynamics and future control values, even when the system involves long input
delays or considerable uncertainty. As reflected in the backgrounds of the PIs,
the project combines insightful engineering with sophisticated mathematics, with
the goal of producing practically useful controls that have rigorous performance
guarantees under delays or state constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems
to be addressed are among the most challenging and significant ones in the
control engineering community. The project will strive for transformative
methods, and will pursue three theoretical strategies. The first will seek
generalized Lyapunov function constructions for partial differential equations,
which can include extensions of current approach for building strict Lyapunov
functions for ordinary differential equations to much more difficult hyperbolic
partial differential equation cases. The second strategy will involve
representing robust predictive controls as solutions of integral delay
equations, and a dual representation in terms of perturbed first-order
hyperbolic partial differential equations. Combined with the Lyapunov function
constructions, this can provide robust tracking for predictively controlled
nonlinear ordinary differential equations and robustness results for the
corresponding partial differential equations. The third strategy will use robust
forward invariance, which involves specifying the state constraints to
facilitate computing maximal allowable perturbation sets to ensure safe
operation under uncertainty. The project will be guided by cutting edge
engineering applications, to help ensure the practical usefulness of all of the
project results. The ordinary differential equation applications will involve
neuromuscular electrical stimulation, which is a rehabilitation method that can
help restore movement in humans with motor neuron disorders, and the control of
a class of autonomous marine robots that are used for bathymetric surveys or to
monitor water quality. The partial differential equation applications will
involve laser pulse shaping systems that are used in the manufacture of flat
panel displays or in photolithography, and a multi-phase flow system that can
help mitigate the adverse effects of slugging in oil production.