* 1408643
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: On the Power of Mathematical Programming in Combinatorial Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Prasad Raghavendra, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 366,404.00

Mathematical programming is a powerful tool for attacking combinatorial
problems. One transforms a discrete task into a related continuous one by
casting it as optimization over a convex body. Linear and semi-definite
programming (LP and SDP) form important special cases and are central tools in
the theory and practice of combinatorial optimization. These approaches have
achieved spectacular success in computing approximately optimal solutions for
problems where finding exact solutions is computationally intractable.

While there are very strong bounds known on the efficacy of particular families
of relaxations, it remains possible that adding a small number of variables or
constraints could lead to drastically improved solutions. We propose the
development of a theory to unconditionally capture the power of LPs and SDPs
without any complexity-theoretic assumptions. Our approach has the potential to
show something remarkable: For many well-known problems, the basic LP or SDP is
optimal among a very large class of algorithms. More concretely, we suggest a
method that could rigorously characterize the power of polynomial-size LPs and
SDPs for a variety of combinatorial optimization tasks. This involves deep
issues at the intersection of many areas of mathematics and computer science,
with the ultimate goal of significantly extending our understanding of efficient
computation.

Mathematical programming is of major importance to many fields---this is
especially true for computer science and operations research. These methods have
also seen dramatically increasing use in the analysis of "big data" from across
the scientific spectrum. From a different perspective, LPs and SDPs can be
thought of as rich proof systems, and characterizing their power is a basic
problem in the theory of proof complexity. Thus the outcomes of the proposed
research are of interest to a broad community of scientists, mathematicians, and
practitioners.