* 1408486
* Collaborative Research: An Intelligent Restoration System for a Self-healing Smart Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Wei Sun, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2015
* USD 225,999.00

The overall goal of this project is to achieve a self-healing smart grid by
creating an intelligent power restoration system. As such, the power system
restoration remains a great concern in the evolving smart grid. The lack of
online adaptive restoration tools leads to an incredibly long time for system
recovery after a major blackout, due to the stochastic nature and uncertainties
associated renewables such as wind and solar power resources. The proposed
intelligent power restoration system is to create a self-healing power grid by
overcoming the challenges that prevent electric power grid from system recovery.
The advances are in the development of an intelligent power restoration system
that will provide system operators with real-time adaptive restoration actions
by including the use of renewable energy in the restoration process and
assisting system planners to make long-term investment decisions on blackstart
resources including renewable resources. This project will have a significant
impact on national grid, sustainable energy and energy security. The potential
economic impact is expected to save the loss of several millions of dollars that
result from blackouts. The short and long term societal impact addresses
national needs, especially for highly interconnected power system, in terms of
sustainability, security, and reliability. Situational intelligence in power
system restoration minimizes impacts of blackouts and leads to rapid recovery
from natural disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes and malicious attacks.
The proposed research will promote teaching, training and learning about smart
grid to graduate and undergraduate students; provide hands-on experiences to
power engineers in automated power system restoration; and offer learning
platform to K-12 students to cultivate the interest in power and energy systems
with overarching goal of recruiting underrepresented minority, women and Native
Americans students.

This collaborative project proposes to apply emerging computational intelligence
techniques including scalable adaptive dynamic programming based on cellular
computational networks to design the power restoration system. The goals are;
(1) to develop an online adaptive restoration tool using advanced scalable
computational intelligence techniques; (2) investigate a novel scheme to use
renewable resources in system restoration; (3) explore a blackstart unit
investment strategy to improve the self-healing capability; and (4) implement
and demonstrate the feasibility of new system on real-time utility power
systems.