* 1408241
* Collaborative Research:  Development of a Digital Microfluidic Impactor for One Minute Measurements of Main Inorganic Aerosol Species
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Andrey Khlystov, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 212,521.00

In this project, a compact and lightweight small particle sensor will be
developed that can collect and analyze three important ions in atmospheric
chemistry: sulfate, nitrate and ammonium. The instrument is expected to have the
sensitivity and accuracy comparable to existing instruments, but provide high
time resolution and have low volume and weight making it ideal for applications
on light aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and research air balloons.
It will enable atmospheric composition measurements in areas of the atmosphere
where existing instrumentation cannot be used. This project builds on prior work
supported by NSF to build a proto-type for this device.

The novel method will employ the use of digital microfluidics, a method that
allows manipulation of micro- and nano-liter volumes of liquids as discrete
droplets. The specific objectives of this research proposal are as follows: (1)
Design a micro-chip that incorporates areas for particle collection and
extraction, reagent storage, and colorimetric detection of sulfate, nitrate and
ammonium; (2) Develop micro/nanoliter colorimetric assay formulations for
nitrate and ammonium detection that are compatible with the digital microfluidic
platform (the sulfate assay has been developed in previous work); (3) Fine-tune
droplet actuation conditions for efficient extraction of target compounds from a
variety of aerosol matrixes; and (4) Characterize particle collection efficiency
and potential interferences and artifacts during the sampling and analysis
steps, as well as test applicability of the chip for aircraft studies. The use
of this device will enable a more thorough and high time resolution
characterization of atmospheric composition.