* 1408796
* Harmonic detection of the Majorana fermion in narrow bandgap InAsSb
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Ian Appelbaum, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an
alternative measurement scheme using harmonic generation in a novel hybrid
capacitor device aimed to circumvent the fundamental limitations of conventional
methods to settle the (still open) question: Has the solid-state "Majorana
fermion¨ been seen? This novel state of matter, theoretically predicted to have
unusual behaviors, is induced by superconductivity and electron interactions in
certain semiconductor structures. Its discovery and manipulation in
appropriately-design circuits could lead to the creation of a new kind of
quantum computer which is essentially immune to
decoherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a measurement technique utilizing harmonic generation in a
novel hybrid capacitor device to measure global density of states of a low-
dimensional electronic material without perturbative ohmic contact. It is
motivated by a need to definitively identify zero-bias tunnel-transport
anomalies in spin-orbit-coupled one-dimensional superconductors as possible
signatures of a predicted topological electronic excitation localized to wire
endpoints called the "Majorana fermion¨.&lt;br/&gt;Briefly, the electrostatic
potential of an intermediate material floats between the capacitor electrodes,
and can exchange electrons with one (grounded) electrode via tunneling.
Capacitive coupling to the top electrode at voltage V(t) induces a voltage drop
between the floating material and the bottom grounded electrode, driving elastic
tunneling which is sensitive to the global density of states. If the capacitive
impedance at the driving frequency is comparable to the characteristic (voltage-
dependent) tunnel resistance, the nonlinear conductance spectrum components will
be encoded into the higher harmonic response of the
device.&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the research team intends to fabricate the
nanowires using high-quality InAsSb (from collaborators at nearby Adelphi Army
Research Laboratory), which has a lower bandgap than either of the binary
constituents InAs or InSb. The team will work toward confirming that it also has
a lower effective mass, higher g-factor, and larger spin-orbit interaction (as
predicted by k-dot-p theory. All of these parameters will substantially optimize
the Majorana formation and its topological protection to enhance the possibility
of detection using our harmonic generation measurement.