* 1408653
* The apoE-LDLR interaction, anxiety, and cognition in the aging brain
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Lance Johnson, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 208,208.00

This project explores the connections between brain metabolism, anxiety and
cognition in the elderly population. In the face of changing diets and a rapidly
growing elderly population, there is exceptional need for better understanding
of the mechanisms of brain metabolism and its effects on the brain. Although
this project is designed to address a basic research question, the results have
obvious implications for disorders of the brain due to altered metabolism. The
work done in this project takes a unique approach to examine an understudied
aspect of cognition, and has the potential to shift the focus of neuroscience
research in a new direction. In addition, educational benefits include the
participation of two undergraduate and two high school research interns through
collaboration with a local high school and the HHMI sponsored Scholars Program
through Lewis and Clark University. A high school student joins the laboratory
from the Saturday Academy. A team of two HHMI sponsored undergraduates and two
high school students work together on aspects of this project under the guidance
of the PI during the summer. Community education on issues such as the role of
cholesterol in brain function are fostered through the Healthy Aging Alliance, a
program in which researchers join the public for presentations of their work and
discussions on healthy aging. The PI also participates in Let's Get Healthy, an
outreach program focused on encouraging healthy habits in middle and elementary
school children in underserved communities. Research collaboration and outreach
in undertreated areas of rural Oregon are promoted by the Central Oregon
Research Coalition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this
project is to investigate the interaction between apolipoprotein E (apoE) and
the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) as a modulator of brain metabolism,
anxiety and cognition. The PI hypothesizes that compared to apoE2 and apoE3,
apoE4 acts as an "aging accelerator" via interaction with the LDLR, causing
alterations in brain metabolism that lead to cognitive and behavioral changes.
The PI-team tests this hypothesis by examining anxiety and cognitive function,
as well as determining brain "metabolic profiles?", in mice that express human
apoE isoforms and human LDLR. The intellectual merit of this project lies in its
integrative systems biology approach: the aims merge detailed behavioral and
cognitive analyses with unbiased metabolomic profiling. The plan is hypothesis
driven, and is based on evidence from both the cardiovascular and neuroscience
fields. The project is a creative combination of metabolomics and behavioral
neuroscience, and employs a unique animal model to study a crucial
proteinprotein interaction in the brain for the first time. The PI received
graduate training at the University of North Carolina from two pioneers in the
fields of lipoprotein biology and genetics. The Sponsoring Scientist has an
established track record in neuroscience and specializes in complex behavioral
analyses in animal models, in particular measurements of anxiety and learning
and memory in mice. The Sponsor also has ample resources for the proposed
project, including state of the art behavioral testing equipment, videotracking
and data analysis software, solid grant support, and a productive collaboration
with a specialist in metabolomic analyses.