* 1408019
* Collaborative Research:CCSS:Low-ComplexityWireless Sensor Architectures Based on Asynchronous Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Wei Tang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 12/31/2017
* USD 205,101.00

This collaborative research focuses on novel design principles for highly
miniaturized low-complexity low-power wireless sensors and their analysis.

In recent years integrated wireless sensors have emerged in a wide range of
applications including health care, surveillance, smart buildings, disaster
mitigation, and environment monitoring. However, new applications as implantable
bio-potential sensors or submersible sensors for measuring mechanical stress
require further miniaturization of existing state-of-the-art sensors hardware.
As an additional challenge, these applications often require a significantly
increased transmission data rate due to the need to perform multichannel
sensing. Consequently, these approaches require the design of very low-power
sensor hardware architectures, which can support reliable and secure
transmission over these high-speed data links. Rather than studying the
performance of traditional sensor architectures, signal processing techniques,
and forward error correction (FEC) strategies for these challenging
requirements, the goal of the proposed research is find and study novel low-
complexity asynchronous communication and error correction strategies that are
tailored to this emerging class of highly miniaturized low-power integrated
wireless sensors. The results of this study have the potential to remove the
power and throughput limitations given by traditional sensor hardware based on
synchronous signal processing, and thus to enable significant advances in many
sensing applications. In particular, the proposed research is able to provide a
significant transformative impact on many other applications employing low-power
modulation schemes, even outside the field of sensor systems. Another important
aspect of the project is the education plan that combines the cross-disciplinary
strengths of the PIs. This includes the integration of the research results into
existing curricula, student exchanges, conference tutorials, and open access to
all details of the proposed sensor architectures.

The proposed project will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in
integrated low-power low-complexity high-data-rate wireless sensor design by
employing ideas from circuit design, signal processing, coding, and
communication theory and practice in an interdisciplinary fashion. Specifically,
a systematic solution for integrated wireless sensors will be developed by
devising asynchronous delta modulation on the sensor interface in combination
with asynchronous ultra wideband (UWB) transmission on the wireless radio
interface in order to extensively decrease the power consumption of the sensor
hardware. Further, to ensure that the sensor operates with guaranteed
reliability over the noisy communication link, new non-binary FEC schemes with
low complexity encoding are analyzed, whose data symbols consist of both
asynchronous timing information and pulse signs. In particular, the project
contributions are 1) to study design and properties of a novel asynchronous
sensor signal interface based on a switched-capacitor amplitude sampling
circuit; 2) to investigate the open problem of efficient FEC solutions for
sensors based on asynchronous data modulation; and 3) to develop and analyze an
asynchronous radio interface based on frequency shift keying on-off keying
modulation for UWB data transmission.