* 1408165
* RUI: CCSS: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Enabled Scalable Mobile Panoramic Video Surveillance
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shaoen Wu, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 237,826.00

This project investigates a cyber-physical system (CPS) in which cooperative
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are used to enable scalable mobile panoramic
video surveillance. This system generates mobile real-time video panorama by
flying a fleet of cooperative UAVs. It is an interdisciplinary collaborative
effort that synthesizes the expertise of Computer Science and Aerospace
Engineering. This project demonstrates a convergence of sensing, control and
communication. The project will generate outcomes including distributed video
stitching algorithms, scalable distributed systems, and cooperative optimal
flight control algorithms. This project significantly improves the performance
such as delay and error in video panorama results. It advances the frontiers of
both video processing and control theory. This interdisciplinary effort will
promote and contribute to crosscutting collaborations between two research
communities: computer science and aerospace engineering. The project aims to
improve the education of underrepresented student populations by involving them
in the proposed research activities and enhancing course curriculum. Results of
this project have broad applications to areas such as remote sensing,
environmental sampling and monitoring, homeland security, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three research thrusts: 1) distributed
hierarchical video stitching to generate mobile video panorama across
cooperative UAVs with high scalability, 2) integrated optimal cooperative
control of UAV formation flying to support the distributed video stitching, and
3) integration, interfacing and communication to unite the distributed
hierarchical video stitching and the cooperative control of formation flying. A
prototype system will be developed for evaluation. It has four salient merits.
First, the distributed hierarchical architecture is scalable to mobile cameras
and fault-tolerant. Second, it exploits the temporal and spatial features of
video frames for efficient computation. Third, the integrated optimal
cooperative flight control addresses the multiple cooperative objectives in one
unified framework, and provides a computationally efficient, distributed and
control. Forth, the unification of distributed video stitching and cooperative
control of UAV facilitates the generation of mobile video panorama. In
particular, the distributed video stitching minimizes the stress of intensive
computation required in stitching. It maintains high synchronization among video
frames by pushing the stitching to the front close to the cameras. The proposed
hierarchical video stitching significantly contributes to distributed system
theory and algorithms. In addition, the stitching algorithms exploit the spatial
and temporal correlation among UAV videos, yielding a novel contribution to
computer graphics/vision. The proposed optimal cooperative control method will
significantly advance the cooperative control of multi-vehicle or multi-agent
systems. It integrates many challenging cooperative problems into one unified
optimization framework. This method enables a number of desired capabilities:
closed-form, distributed and local information based control law, synchronous
formation, cooperative tracking, and obstacle/collision avoidance. These
integrated features not only make precise and real-time cooperative surveillance
possible, but also move forward the cooperative control theory to a new horizon
for a wide range of cooperative missions.