* 1408495
* A Chip-scale Quantum Information Processor Using Atomic Ions and Photonic Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Isaac Chuang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract Title: A Chip-scale Quantum Information Processor Using Atomic Ions and
Photonic Circuits&lt;br/&gt;Driven by the intractability of classical simulation
of complex quantum systems, the execution of algorithms pertaining to encryption
and certain search problems, quantum state engineering has proven a fruitful
field in recent years. Atomic ions are a leading approach to development of
quantum information processors. Typically experiments have been limited to a few
ions because of the reliance on optical beams propagating in free space for
control and readout of the ions. Difficulties with the usual optics approach
pose formidable barriers to the useful application of the wealth of promising
basic ideas that have been developed in recent years. &lt;br/&gt;This work seeks
to devise nanophotonic devices and systems in which light is controlled on chip
in a fashion allowing thousands of independent optical beams, which can be
integrated with electrode structures that confine the ions above the chip. The
work would lead to optical control and readout of individual ions at
dramatically larger scales than possible with current technology; additionally,
integration as proposed would bring certain performance advantages, including
lower power requirements on the laser beams due to tighter focusing on
individual ions, and reduced noise due to stability of the beams' phase and
location with respect to ions. The approach would advance basic capabilities in
the field of integrated photonics, and bring closer the goals of arbitrary
quantum state manipulation in atomic systems large enough to allow exploration
of physics, as well as useful computations, beyond what can be done on current
classical computers. &lt;br/&gt;Realizing the systems proposed requires
developments in a variety of basic photonic devices, and approaches to systems
implementations. Ions of interest have transitions spanning the visible spectrum
(for 88Sr+, 422-1097 nm), and the impact of the approach is greatest if all
wavelengths are guided with low loss in the same dielectric layer. Grating
couplers will be developed that convert light propagating in single-mode
dielectric waveguides into focused beams propagating towards the ions. Electro-
optic devices using integrated non-linear materials as the active core material
for high-extinction (&gt;40 dB) modulation of beams used for qubit control and
readout will be designed and fabricated as well. In addition, we will pursue a
post-processing technique whereby devices such as these could be created in
chips made in standard CMOS foundries; this would open the possibility for
systems bringing together beam-forming optics, modulators and avalanche
photodetectors together with trap electrodes and control electronics for control
of trapped ion systems with unprecedented scale. A critical advantage of CMOS
foundry-made chips as a platform for science and engineering research is the
intrinsic reproducibility and ease of dissemination for the experimental
devices. For the first time, students of atomic physics and visible photonics
will be able to leverage the multi-billion dollar infrastructure of CMOS. By
drawing deeply on ideas both in integrated photonics and atomic physics, this
work additionally creates new opportunities for interdisciplinary education and
collaboration for the undergraduates, graduate students and researchers
involved; and in addition to the capabilities for trapped ion systems offered by
the work proposed here, we expect cross-fertilization between the two areas will
make fertile ground for unforeseen ideas.