* 1408047
* EAGER: Design, Fabrication, and Testing of All-Metal-Terminal Hot-Electron Transistors (AMTHETs) for Multi-THz Operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Yi Luo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

A novel transistor structure has been theoretically analyzed that has the
potential to amplify signals at frequencies up to and beyond 10 Tera-Hertz
(THz), which is more than an order of magnitude higher frequency than possible
with existing silicon transistors. The goal of the proposed research project is
to carry out experimental work to fabricate proof-of-concept prototype
transistors and to model and characterize the performance of these transistors
in order to verify the potential of the proposed novel transistor structure to
achieve current gain greater than unity at extremely high frequencies. The
proposed novel transistor has the potential to enable integrated circuit
oscillators, amplifiers and mixers at frequencies up to and above 3 THz. They
have the potential to enable THz spectrographic analysis of materials using
small (hand-held) room-temperature power-efficient units for security (hidden
weapon detection) and medical imaging (dental) applications. These ultra-fast
transistors also offer the potential to enable the construction of digital
circuits operating at clock frequencies that are an order of magnitude faster
than those achieved by fully scaled CMOS technologies. And, these ultra-fast
transistors could also enable an order of magnitude increase in the maximum
operating frequencies of data converters, optical networking components, high-
speed communications circuits and high-speed radar
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical calculations indicate that All-Metal-
Terminal Hot-Electron Transistors (AMTHETs) have the potential to achieve a
current gain of greater than 10 and to operate at frequencies up to or beyond 10
THz. The goal of the proposed research project is to verify and refine these
theoretical calculations and to determine if further research work on the AMTHET
is warranted. The proposed AMTHET is a metal-semiconductor-metal-semiconductor-
metal sandwich in which the mean-free-path of the dominant carrier in the
semiconductor layers is longer than the thickness of the semiconductor layers;
and, the mean free path of electrons in the middle metal layer is longer than
the thickness of the middle metal layer. This structure forms a bipolar junction
transistor (BJT) in which the emitter, base and collector are metal layers
separated from each other by EB and BC semiconductor layers. We propose to
fabricate proof-of-concept prototype AMTHETs using two silicon-on-insulator
(SOI) wafers bonded together to form the silicon-metal-silicon layer stack. This
will be followed by removal of the bulk of the SOI wafers and deposition of
metal to complete the AMTHET structure. Low-frequency and high-frequency
measurements of the performance of these prototype devices as the materials and
geometries are changed will be used to inform the modeling and analysis of
AMTHETs and to guide the design of future iterations. A physics-based device
model for the AMTHET, suitable for use in the design of future AMTHETs with
particular performance targets, will be developed and fit to the experimental
measurements. This work has the potential to advance understanding of bipolar
transistors in which a majority of the charge carriers transit directly from the
emitter to the collector without scattering.