* 1408401
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Commitment, Expansion, and Pricing in Uncertain Power Markets: Discrete Hierarchical Models and Scalable Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 160,000.00

Commitment, Expansion, and Pricing in Uncertain Power Markets: Discrete
Hierarchical Models and Scalable Algorithms

Our study is motivated by the impact of uncertainty, nonlinearity, and hierarchy
on critical long-term planning (such as transmission expansion) and operational
problems (such as unit commitment problems (UCPs) and transmission switching) in
power systems and markets. The optimal resolution of such problems is of
significant relevance. For instance, algorithms for UCPs have saved billions of
dollars annually while analogous schemes for transmission switching may have
similar potential. Yet, much of the available technology can only cope with
deterministic linear problems. But nonlinear generalizations are assuming
increasing relevance and emerge from incorporating reactive power and voltage
management through AC load flows, while uncertainty in problem data, such as
demand and availability, leads to a massive growth in problem complexity.
Equally challenging are the hierarchical problems, arising from optimizing the
expansion of transmission assets subject to subsequent energy market behavior,
recognizing long run regulatory, economic, and technology uncertainties. Both
the planning and operational problems lead to inordinately challenging
optimization problems and no general purpose algorithms exist for the scalable
resolution of such problems, motivating the proposed research. Through
relationships with independent system operators for two US markets, our research
will help inform stakeholder discussions concerning the design of markets for
electric energy and capacity. More efficient short-run and long-run markets
lower the cost and enhance the environmental sustainability of the power sector.
In particular, our collaboration with PJM Interconnection will examine
commitment, switching, and expansion problems under uncertainty, reliability
pricing models for ensuring generation adequacy, and the design of reliability
premiums in the context of integrating renewables. The proposal is equipped with
an educational plan that includes the organization of research workshops and
professional course development.

Our goals are twofold: (a) Stochastic optimization models: We consider
development of: (i) Operating models for stochastic unit commitment problems
emphasizing reactive power management, transmission switching, and
stochasticity; and (ii) Planning models for transmission expansion in uncertain
settings as well as the pricing of reliability, in particular the adequacy of
generation and transmission resources. (b) Scalable algorithms: These models
lead to mixed-binary stochastic optimization problems possibly complicated by
nonlinearity. Unfortunately, existing decomposition schemes are ill-equipped to
address such problems and we consider two broad directions. (i) A stochastic
barrier-cut scheme that utilizes a combination of interior point methods,
cutting plane techniques, and Schur-complement methods to develop scalable
interior-point methods for contending with mixed-binary stochastic nonlinear
programs; and (ii) Stochastic mixed-integer quadratic programs, including
potential use of semidefinite programming relaxations, both in terms of
developing cutting-plane schemes as well as approximate solutions. If
successful, this research will lead to scalable computational tools for
resolving a range of stochastic optimization problems, complicated by hierarchy,
discreteness, and nonlinearity.