* 1408790
* TWC: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative: Identifying and Mitigating Trust Violations in the Smartphone Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Yan Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 533,920.00

The adoption of smartphones has steadily increased in the past few years, and
smartphones have become the tool with which millions of users handle
confidential information, such as financial and health-related data. As a
result, these devices have become attractive targets for cybercriminals, who
attempt to violate the trust assumptions underlying the smartphone platform in
order to compromise the security and privacy of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research effort provides a novel framework to model the trust relationships
between users, the smartphone platform, and the surrounding ecosystem, including
smartphone apps and app markets. This model allows for the systematic
exploration of trust-violation weaknesses (i.e., situations in which trust is
misplaced and trust&lt;br/&gt;assumptions can be violated). In a complementary
fashion, the model also supports the design of security mechanisms that address
the identified weaknesses (i.e., techniques to prevent, or detect and mitigate
trust violations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research have the
potential of impacting the lives of millions of smartphone users, providing
protection against attacks that might harm their well-being. Though this project
focuses on the Android platform, its results are general and applicable to other
smartphone platforms. The analysis techniques that have been developed as part
of this research are made available to the public through a web portal that
allows users to submit smartphone applications and obtain reports on possible
trust weaknesses based on the static and dynamic analysis of the application and
its interaction with other applications, the network, and other components in
the Android platform.