* 1408986
* Investigation of the Regulation of Annular Gap Junction Processing, a Critical Modulator of Cell-Cell Communication
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Sandra Murray, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2020
* USD 809,445.00

Neighboring cells need to communicate with one another in order to function
properly, maintain proper organization of tissues, and make appropriate
responses to changes in their environments. One method of communication involves
the direct flow of information through membrane channels that are clustered on
the surface of adjacent cells. These clusters of channels are called gap
junction plaques and they are composed of proteins called connexin. The removal
of gap junction plaques, from the cell surface, is critical to maintaining cell-
to-cell communication and impacts numerous cellular functions, including
proliferation, cell migration and differentiation. This project will elucidate
the needed steps in gap junction plaque removal and determine the underlying
molecular mechanisms. Increased information on annular gap junction processing
and degradation could facilitate the development of new techniques to influence
and control cell behavior, including proliferation and hormonal response. The PI
will also continue to serve as a resource for the training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and visiting professors from minority institutions. She used
past NSF research funding to train forty-five undergraduates, eight graduate
students, three postdoctoral fellows, seven visiting professors from minority
institutions, five high school students, and ten medical students. Most of the
students participating in this research over the years have been African-
Americans, a severely under-represented group in science. She will also continue
her broader outreach through publications, seminars, lectures and workshops for
the scientific community and a unique outreach to the general public through art
displays and lectures at a local art museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate the mechanisms regulating annular gap junction processing. The
PI hypothesizes that protein kinases via phosphorylation of sites on the
C-terminal tail of the gap junction channel protein, connexin 43 (Cx43), play a
pivotal role in annular gap junction vesicle processing needed for degradation.
Such processing involves annular gap junction fissions as well as the formation
of autophagasomes and multivesicular endosomes. Adrenal cortical cell
populations will be used to elucidate the role of kinase-mediated Cx43
phosphorylation in annular gap junction processing and degradation. The approach
will be to manipulate three kinases [protein kinase C (PKC), Src, cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKA)] known to phosphorylate Cx43 and thought to be involved in
annular gap junction degradation. In Objective I, To Measure the Annular Gap
Junction Vesicle Degradative Process in Cell Populations in Which PKA, PKC, and
Src Activities Have Been Altered. Three complementary methodologies will be used
to selectively decrease or increase protein kinase activity: 1) chemical
treatments with a panel of agents; 2) knockdown (siRNA) protocols; and 3)
infection with replication-defective adenovirus vectors which result in
constitutively activated kinases. In Objective II To Measure Annular Gap
Junction Vesicle Degradative Process in Cells in Which the Cx43 Phosphorylation
Sites Have Been Altered. Connexin mutation and truncation techniques will be
used to modify the region of the intracellular "tail" of the Cx43 protein
thought to be critical for kinase binding and/or phosphorylation. Throughout
this study, annular gap junction processing (fission, formation of
autophagasomes and multivesicular endosomes and fusion with other organelles
(lysosomes, endosomes and plasma membranes [possible recycling of Cx43 to the
plasma membrane]) will be investigated with immunocytochemical, quantum dot
immuno-electron microscopy, western blot, and time lapse image analysis.
Phospho-specific antibodies against the targeted sites are available and will be
used to image the spacial and temporal distribution as well as protein amounts
of the differing Cx43phosphoforms.The laboratory will continue to serve as a
resource for the training of undergraduates, graduate students, and visiting
professors from minority institutions. Students will be given a specific project
and they will be encouraged to write and present their findings, both to the
scientific community and to the general public. The PI will continue to make an
impact on the scientific community through publications, seminars, lectures and
workshops presented both nationally and internationally. In addition, lectures
and installation art displays created, by the PI and displayed at a local art
museum, will enable the PI to teach the general public about dynamic cellular
events. It is hoped that information gained from this study and the training
provided will serve to advance science and thus contribute to public welfare.