* 1408601
* Statistical Delay-Bounded Quality-of-Service Guarantee for Time-Sensitive Multimedia Transmissions over Cooperative Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Xi Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 317,060.00

One of the most important services in the next-generation mobile wireless
networks is to transmit real-time multimedia data, including video and audio.
However, multimedia data need to be timely delivered within the required time
period called delay-bound, because any received multimedia data exceeding its
delay bound is considered useless and discarded. But, because of randomly time-
varying wireless channels and interferences, the deterministic delay-bound
requirements for high-volume multimedia wireless transmissions are practically
infeasible. Thus, the statistical delay-bounded quality of service (QoS)
guarantee theory is developed as an alternative solution to achieve wireless
multimedia transmissions where we guarantee the delay-bound with a small
violation probability. Availability of techniques capable of statistical delay-
bounded QoS guarantee over cooperative wireless networks with mitigated
interference would be a breakthrough in the next-generation wireless network
research. The objective of this research is to conduct the basic studies on how
to extend and implement the statistical delay-bounded QoS guarantee theory for
supporting multimedia traffics over interference mitigated cooperative wireless
networks. The engineering approach lies in the development of cross-layer
optimization and cooperative distributed multi-antenna based architecture and
algorithms to support the statistical delay-bounded QoS guarantee. The proposed
framework will form a basis for deriving the novel cooperative effective-
capacity and game theories for optimal power control over interference-mitigated
cooperative wireless networks. Also, the proposed research will be well
integrated with PI's educational plan in developing the new
graduate/undergraduate curricula/course-labs at Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the statistical delay-bounded QoS
guarantee theory has been shown to be a powerful technique and useful perform
metric for supporting the time-sensitive multimedia transmissions over mobile
wireless networks, how to efficiently apply and implement this
technique/performance-metric through employing various emerging advanced
wireless communications technologies has neither been well understood nor
thoroughly studied. To overcome the above challenge, this project proposes to
develop a set of cooperative-wireless networking based architectures,
algorithms, and schemes through cross-layer design to support diverse
statistical delay-bounded QoS and users' subjective measure of quality of
experience (QoE) requirements for mobile users, while mitigating the
interferences caused by coexisting links and mobile user cooperation. The
proposed framework will be mainly based on the cooperative distributed multiple-
input-multiple-output (MIMO) system to increase the coverage and capacity for
multimedia wireless networks. But, the cooperative distributed MIMO network
imposes new designing issues on the coordination, resource allocation, and
diverse mobile users' delay-bounded QoS/QoE guarantees. Furthermore, due to
multiple cooperative users, the transmit power is distributed over multiple
transmitters at different locations. Consequently, the interfering range caused
by cooperation is considerably enlarged, lowering the spatial frequency-reuse
efficiency and thus decreasing wireless network?s capacity. To solve the
aforementioned problems, the PI proposes the following research plans, goals,
and activities: 1) Develop statistical delay-QoS/delay-QoE aware cross-layer
architecture for optimal base-station selection in the cooperative distributed
MIMO system; 2) Develop statistical delay-QoS/delay-QoE driven cooperative-
effective-capacity and cooperative-game theories based framework for optimal
power control algorithms and interference management; 3) Design interference-
mitigated cooperative wireless network-coding schemes to enhance the statistical
delay-QoS/delay-QoE guarantees in multi-hop Ad Hoc wireless networks; 4) Extend
two-dimension to three-dimension delay-QoE characterization by taking into
account the delay-bound violation and buffer-overflow probabilities; 5) Develop
modeling and analysis techniques, and simulation-tools/testbeds to validate and
evaluate the proposed mobile networks' architectures, theories, algorithms, and
schemes.