* 1408811
* Dynamics of Associating Polymers: From Association to Segmental and Chain Relaxations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2019
* USD 673,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Associating polymers are a class of polymeric materials that are promising
candidates for a large number of applications ranging from energy-related fields
to biomedical technologies. This research focuses on fundamental understanding
of how the specially designed interactions control molecular motions and
macroscopic properties of associating polymers. A broad range of experimental
techniques will be employed to analyze molecular motions on different time and
length scales, and their dependence on chemical structure and
rigidity/flexibility of the individual polymer molecules. A description of
structure-properties relationship in this relatively new class of materials will
also be developed. This knowledge is important for rational design and synthesis
of novel "smart" materials with self-healing and stimuli-responsive properties
for many future technological applications. It will have an impact on various
fields of science and engineering, including materials science, physics,
chemistry and biophysics. A significant part of this project is the education of
specialists through development of graduate courses and active involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students in research. Attention will also be paid to
working with underrepresented groups and to outreach to K-12 students. This
research promotes collaborations with international colleagues and with the
Spallation Neutron Source and Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Associating polymers, formed by reversible non-covalent intermolecular
interactions, include a wide spectrum of fundamentally and technologically
important materials. Rational design, synthesis, and fabrication of novel
associating polymers require a deep fundamental understanding of how the local
reversible interactions and backbone flexibility affect the macroscopic
properties of associating polymers. Despite intense attention and effort in the
past, the chain and structural dynamics in associating polymers remain poorly
understood, especially in the case of the melt state. In this project, the chain
and structural dynamics in model associating polymers will be studied by a
combination of rheology, dielectric spectroscopy, light scattering, and neutron
scattering. New experimental methods and protocols will be developed by
borrowing existing concepts and techniques from the fields of conventional
polymers, hydrogen-bonded glass-forming liquids, and ionic solutions. In
addition, the current theoretical models for associating polymers will be
critically examined. This project aims to establish the phenomenological
foundation for understanding the dynamics of associating polymers.