* 1408897
* Decadal Variability of Interacting Climate Subsystems in the Northern Hemisphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sergey Kravtsov, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 06/30/2018
* USD 433,031.00

Improved understanding of Northern Hemisphere decadal climate variability is an
issue of tremendous societal importance. The goal of this project is to document
simulated decadal variability and to analyze the dynamics of decadal climate
shifts in global climate model simulations. Using a novel hybrid
dynamical/statistical modeling framework to study the dynamics of the decadal
climate shifts and relate them to climate processes operating on shorter,
intraseasonal-to-interannual time scales, this work will shed insights into how
various components of the climate system interact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers hypothesize that decadal climate shifts - defined as abrupt changes
in the climates long-term state and variability that tend to happen with decadal
frequency - arise as a result of collective behavior of climate subsystems due
to interplay between occurrences of synchronized states and variable coupling
strength within the climate network. This mechanism, which is consistent with
the theory of synchronized chaos, appears to be a very robust mechanism
operating in the climate system. It has been found in instrumental records, in
forced and unforced climate simulations, as well as in proxy records spanning
several centuries. The tendency for the climate subsystems to synchronize/couple
their intra-seasonal 'beats' appears to be enhanced in certain phases of the
slowly varying Meridional Overturning Circulation in the Atlantic (AMOC), which
is dominated by the decadal time scales. This work will thus provide
quantitative estimates of climate predictability in the Northern Hemisphere
associated with the coupled climate subsystems simulated by comprehensive
climate models.