* 1408517
* Collaborative Research: Silicon Carbide Devices for Optomechanics and Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Qiang Lin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2017
* USD 209,999.00

Title: Silicon Carbide Devices for Optomechanics and
Photonics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative project is to
understand and engineer a new platform for manipulating light and processing
information on chip, by using silicon carbide (SiC) micro-structures. In
particular, high quality micro-resonators are essential for functions such as
filtering, wave mixing, and signal generation. SiC is a semiconductor that
offers superior optical, mechanical, and thermal properties compared to
conventional materials. In this project, the PIs aim to develop SiC micro-
photonic components that offer novel functionalities inaccessible by current
approaches. Fundamental research findings and device innovations will be
disseminated to the research communities through published papers and will be
also incorporated into the courses offered by the PIs at both institutions. The
proposed research will also train graduate and undergraduate students in the
interdisciplinary areas of photonics, MEMS/NEMS, materials science, and quantum
optics. Through the outreach programs, this project will also help promote the
interests and participations of K-12 students, and broaden the participations
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed
research is to explore and develop an entirely new device platform for
micro-/nano-photonics, particularly for nano-optomechanics and integrated
nonlinear photonics, by employing high-quality SiC devices. Optical micro-/nano-
resonators are fundamental building blocks for many important areas in optical
science and technology, ranging from nonlinear optics, cavity quantum
electrodynamics, optomechanics, to biomedical sensing. The device performance
depends critically on the properties of the underlying materials from which the
devices are built. The proposed research is based on the superior linear
optical, nonlinear optical, mechanical, and thermal properties in SiC materials.
Through innovative device designs and advanced nanofabrication technology, the
PIs plan to establish SiC as a viable platform for nano-optomechanics and
nonlinear photonics. The PIs have highly complementary expertise in SiC material
processing and device physics and engineering. The two groups will form an
integrative team to carry out explorative research on developing a family of
multifunctional SiC micro-/nano-photonic devices with performance either
surpassing state-of-the-art or inaccessible with conventional approaches.
Preliminary results have already demonstrated the feasibility of achieving these
goals.