* 1408141
* Collaborative Research: An Intelligent Restoration System for a Self-healing Smart Grid (IRS-SG)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 176,000.00

How can we restore power more effectively after a major outage, such as a
hurricane, a cascade blackout or a more local outage? Can we use modern
computer-based methods to get better performance than what we have today, in a
system which is mainly informal and based on guesswork under conditions of great
stress and limited information? This new collaborative project will bring
together an expert on power restoration with a pioneer of new intelligent
computation methods for the power grid, in hopes of finding a more powerful and
modern way to restore power more effectively. The goals are; (1) to develop an
online adaptive restoration tool using advanced scalable computational
intelligence techniques; (2) investigate a novel scheme to use renewable
resources in system restoration; (3) explore a blackstart unit investment
strategy to improve the self-healing capability; and (4) real-time
implementation and demonstration of the new system on benchmark and utility
power systems. The grant will include travel to New Zealand, to discuss use of
the new system to help provide better response to events like earthquakes. It
will also include outreach to Native Americans in the Dakotas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of efficient restoration is very difficult
from a technical point of view. A small number of researchers, like the lead PI,
have developed a few tools of practical use in this problem, but it is still
largely an unsolved problem. The main justification for NSF involvement in this
area, and for significant hope of success, is the use of intelligent systems
methods far beyond what anyone has applied in the past to this problem, methods
pioneered in the intelligent systems part of the EPCN program at
NSF&lt;br/&gt;(described for example in the book Handbook of RLADP edited by
Frank Lewis and Derong Liu). Data from new sources such as synchrophasors will
be part of this work. The underlying algorithms are designed from the start to
run on massively parallel&lt;br/&gt;distributed systems, such as Cellular Neural
Network hardware, which allow much faster real-time computation than traditional
sequential computers and algorithms.