* 1408812
* HyperOVATION:  Continuous Global Auroral Imaging at High Cadence
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Larry Paxton, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 355,790.00

The coupling of the solar wind with Earth's magnetic field gives rise to a range
of disturbance effects in the space environment near Earth. Communications,
navigation and energy production and distribution can be significantly affected
by this space weather. The ability to forecast disturbances that may impact
these technologies hinges upon detailed knowledge and understanding of the
connected Sun-Earth system, including complicated coupling processes between the
magnetosphere and ionosphere. A particular aspect of the latter is the
deposition of energy in the upper atmosphere, especially at high latitudes in
the auroral zone. Energization of the upper atmosphere during geomagnetic storms
happens in several ways. One energy source is energetic particles precipitating
along magnetic field lines into the upper atmosphere and creating the wonderful
auroral displays that are a visual manifestation of space weather. The aim of
this project is the creation of a tool to provide detailed global information
about the auroral particle precipitation at a high cadence over the last three
decades. Unlike existing statistical precipitation models this new resource will
facilitate studies of the global dynamics as well as the development of local
features. Ultimately, the results of the project will lead to improved local
forecasting capabilities for auroral precipitation and associated space weather
effects. The project also pursues significant education and training goals. The
PI is an early career female scientist and the project will provide her with an
excellent opportunity to accomplish an important step on the path towards a
successful independent scientific research career. Summer internships for
undergraduate students will also be provided as part of the project. The
proposal focuses on the development of a powerful new tool (HyperOVATION) which
will combine DMSP precipitation observations with superMAG global magnetic field
maps to produce high cadence (1 min) maps of the auroral oval using next
generation software based on OVATION-SM. Unlike other precipitation models
(including OVATION and OVATION-SM) that produce climatologies of precipitation
within broad ranges of solar and geomagnetic parameters and thus have no local
detail, HyperOVATION will ingest local information as well as global information
and produce precipitation maps consistent with the detailed patterns derived
from magnetometers by SuperMAG. These global maps will be generated separately
for mono-energetic, diffuse, broadband and ion auroras. During the course of the
model development, this tool will be used to answer questions about the auroral
precipitation and its relationship to the local and global auroral currents.