* 1408025
* Enhanced Photon-Electron Conversion in Thin Film Solar Cells by Propagating Surface Plasmons
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 330,235.00

Several types of thin film solar cells have recently drawn a great amount of
attention, due to its huge potential in solar energy harvesting. However, the
energy conversion efficiency of the well-known solar cells is still far from the
theoretical expectation. The low efficiency is due to inefficient light
absorption by the semiconductor and limited carrier extraction from the
semiconductor to the external load. These two factors are closely related, which
makes the development of a solution more difficult. Development of the thin film
solar cells using the surface plasmons of the nanostructures will address this
difficult problem and contribute to furthering the goal of energy security of
the US. Given that the electricity produced from solar radiation is only about
1% of the total annual electricity consumed in the US, the success of this
research will contribute to increasing US's energy security by providing highly
efficient thin film solar cells. The integration of the anticipated research
accomplishments with existing and new classroom courses will also improve the
quality of engineering education on nanoscience and renewable energy at the
University of Pittsburgh. In addition, the multi-disciplinary nature of the
project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with the opportunity to
be exposed to new frontiers in design, fabrication and characterizations of
materials and devices, beyond the boundaries of their disciplines. Finally, this
project will be aimed at using research products such as thin film solar cells
to reach underrepresented groups, which will be coordinated with on-going
efforts of the University of Pittsburgh to expand the participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current problems associated with the thin film solar cells
clearly show a strong need for design of a new nanostructure that can enhance
the light absorption and carrier transport in the thin film semiconductor. One
very promising way is to exploit resonance phenomenon, such as surface plasmons.
However, popular plasmonic metal nanoparticles have several drawbacks to be
implemented to the thin film solar cells. In this project, a propagating surface
plasmon on 1-dimensional photonic crystal/metal thin film interface will be used
to circumvent the problems of the metal nanoparticles. The new nanostructure
will increase the light harvesting efficiency without increasing the thickness
of the semiconductor film (i.e. decreasing the carrier collection efficiency).
The objective of this project is to fabricate a new junction-type thin film
solar cell employing the photonic crystal based plasmonic nanostructure and to
explore the physical interactions among propagating surface plasmons, solar
light modulation, and carrier/exciton generation. Progress of the research will
create the fundamental understanding of the photon-exciton conversion under the
influence of the surface plasmons for the thin film solar cells. For this
purpose, the nanostructured photonic crystal will be designed to excite the
surface plasmons that interact with incoming solar light in a visible range. In
addition, basic understanding of light-matter interactions and radiative
properties of nanostructures will be pursued. The intellectual significance of
this project is that new directions for highly efficient hybrid solar cells will
be provided. Knowledge on surface-plasmon-assisted tuning of the light
absorption will facilitate a new class of photovoltaics which is not limited by
the tradeoff between light absorption and carrier transport.