* 1408310
* An Investigation into the Performance of Magnetically Geared Devices for Marine Hydrokinetic and Wind Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Jonathan Bird, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 06/30/2016
* USD 388,508.00

Wind and rotary based marine hydrokinetic energy conversion devices often rely
on a mechanical gearbox to increase their speed so as to match the requirements
of the electromagnetic generator. However, mechanical gearboxes are creating
reliability concerns and the maintenance of the gearbox can significantly add to
the levelized cost of energy. Alternative approaches such as using a direct-
drive generator become impractical at higher power levels due to their
inherently low torque-per-volume capability. This research will investigate the
theoretical and practical performance capabilities of using magnetically geared
generation devices. A magnetic gearbox offers a number of advantages over
traditional mechanical gearboxes in that a magnetic gearbox creates speed change
without any physical contact, it does not require gear lubrication and has an
inherent overload torque limiting capability. By coupling a magnetic gearbox to
a generator the reliability of the generator system can be significantly
improved and the volumetric size could potentially be comparable to its
mechanically geared equivalent. By improving reliability a magnetically geared
generator could reduce the levelized cost of wind and ocean power conversion.
This could increase the utilization of renewable energy resources and
consequently help reduce the emission of airborne pollutants associated with the
combustion of fossil fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this
research are to (1) develop modeling tools to understand the scaling and
cost/performance trade-offs of axial magnetic gears and radial magnetic gear
topologies. (2) Construct and test a stator driven continuously variable
magnetic gear and an axially driven direct-drive magnetically geared generator.
(3) Experimentally assess the efficiency of the proposed magnetic gear devices
over a wide speed and torque range. The practical performance trade-offs between
axial and radial flux-focusing magnetic gear designs when using ferrite and
rare-earth magnets will be determined in the context of cost. The power flow,
efficiency and power factor characteristics will be characterized with respect
to existing technology. This research will lead to a greater understanding of
the energy conversion process when using magnetic gears, continuously variable
magnetic gears and magnetically geared direct-drive electrical machines. The
techniques required to achieve very high mass and volumetric torque densities
when using flux focusing magnetic gear topologies will be carefully defined. The
power flow and control equations for the integration of a continuously variable
magnetic gear into the grid will be derived. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will assist with this research. Underrepresented students will be
actively involved in this research. Outreach activities and yearly summer
research experiences for local high-school students will take place. The
research results will be disseminated in leading journals, conferences, and
workshops in order to benefit the scientific and industrial community.