* 1408598
* RUI: Dilatometric Studies of Quantum Criticality in F-Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* George Schmiedeshoff, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ordinary phase transitions, such as
the freezing or boiling of water, involve heat energy. This team will study
quantum phase transitions that occur at absolute zero where there is no heat.
Zero-point energy, associated with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, plays
the role of heat in these transitions. A rising paradigm in physics, quantum
phase transitions may be the origin of high-temperature superconductivity and
have informed the theory of black holes. Quantum phase transitions can
dramatically affect the behavior of matter at surprisingly high temperatures and
lead to characteristic changes in volume as the temperature or magnetic field
changes. A high-precision technique, developed with National Science Foundation
support, will be used to search for these characteristic changes in volume in
order to identify and better understand the underlying quantum phase transition.
Novel states of matter that are expected to occur near quantum phase transitions
will be sought out and studied as well. Undergraduate students participate in
all aspects of this work, both on-campus and during trips to visit collaborators
at research universities, national laboratories, and a company that manufactures
automated temperature and magnetic field testing platforms for materials
characterization. Students visiting these institutions are exposed to a "big
science" environment complementing the "small science" environment at Occidental
College, a national liberal arts college in metropolitan Los Angeles where most
of the work will be carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theh team seeks a better understanding of the nature of
matter near quantum phase transitions, especially the delicate ordered phases
that can appear nearby. Our primary focus is on Yb- and U-based heavy fermion
compounds exhibiting magnetic-field induced quantum criticality and related
phenomena such as magnetic order, novel superconductivity, and "hidden order."
Physical behavior near a quantum phase transition is dominated by quantum
fluctuations associated with the zero-point energies of the adjacent states.
Remarkably, these quantum fluctuations can affect physical behavior at
temperatures well above absolute zero. Low temperature phase transitions and the
quantum phase transitions associated with them are a major focus of condensed
matter physics, a focus on which thermodynamic information is sparse. Such
information is needed for a better understanding of quantum many-body problems.
A rising paradigm in physics, quantum phase transitions are invoked in
explanations of high temperature superconductivity and black holes. The primary
experimental method is to measure thermal expansion and magnetostriction using
capacitive dilatometers (all but one developed with National Science Foundation
support). The team will search for characteristic changes in volume at low
temperatures in order to identify and better understand the underlying quantum
phase transition. This work is carried out in collaboration with scientists at
research universities, national laboratories, and a company that manufactures
automated temperature and magnetic field testing platforms for materials
characterization. Undergraduate students visiting these institutions will be
exposed to a "big science" environment complementing the "small science"
environment at Occidental College, a national liberal arts college in
metropolitan Los Angeles where most of the work will be carried out.