* 1408075
* Wide-field magnetic imager with nanoscale resolution
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Ronald Walsworth, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this project is the development of a high-sensitivity, wide-
field diamond-based magnetic field imaging instrument suitable for applications
in the physical and biological sciences. The approach is based on coherent
microwave and optical manipulation of Nitrogen-Vacancy color centers implanted
in a thin layer at the surface of a diamond chip. The Nitrogen-Vacancy center in
diamond has emerged as a promising tool for quantum information, sensing, and
metrology due to its long electronic spin coherence time at room temperature,
and an unusual energy level structure that allows convenient optical spin
polarization and readout. Recent work has demonstrated the potential of
ensembles of Nitrogen-Vacancy centers for sensitive detection and imaging of
stationary and time-varying magnetic fields, including those produced by
biological samples.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program
is the translation of techniques from fundamental quantum science into the
development of a solid-state, room temperature magnetic imager with a
combination of nanoscale spatial resolution, wide field-of-view, and excellent
magnetic field sensitivity that cannot be obtained with any other technology. In
addition, the unique physical properties of diamond (hardness, high thermal
conductivity, optical transparency), together with its chemical inertness and
excellent biocompatibility, make the diamond magnetic imager particularly well
suited for sensing and imaging applications in materials science and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program include: (i)
applying the diamond magnetic imager to a wide variety of physical and
biological problems, e.g., probing magnetic order and domain structure in low-
dimensional systems such as graphene, anti-ferromagnetic, and multiferroic
materials, as well as minimally-invasive imaging of functional activity and
magnetic structures in living cells such as magnetotactic bacteria; (ii)
providing interdisciplinary training to students in condensed matter physics,
nanoscience, optical imaging techniques, and quantum information science, as
well as in application areas such as surface science and bioimaging, with a
particular focus on inclusion of members of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering; and (iii) performing outreach by communicating to a wider
audience the exciting interdisciplinary nature of the proposed instrument
development and the research it will enable, through public lectures, websites,
magazine articles, and undergraduate course material.