* 1408989
* The origins and social consequences of moral realism
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Liane Young, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 211,166.00

This proposal unites approaches from developmental psychology, social
neuroscience, and philosophy to investigate the developmental origins and social
consequences of moral realism: the notion that morals, like facts, can be
objectively true and false. This position is contrasted with anti-realism:the
notion that morals, like preferences, are subjective. Although realism and anti-
realism have traditionally been investigated within philosophy, recent work in
psychology has provided some support for the hypothesis that laypeople are
realists. Other studies indicate that moral realism has both positive (e.g.,
increasing donations to charity) and negative (e.g., increasing interpersonal
discomfort with those who disagree with one's views) consequences. The proposed
work builds on this prior literature in psychology and philosophy. Studies 1-2
examine the extent to which preschoolers consider moral claims across diverse
contexts to be objectively true and test the hypothesis that moral realism
enhances, and anti-realism attenuates, intergroup bias. Using functional
neuroimaging, Studies 3A-3B investigate the social consequences of moral realism
among adults. These studies test the prediction that adults dehumanize those who
do not share their morally relevant beliefs and that moral realism enhances, and
anti-realism attenuates, this effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies address two key questions of theoretical
interest. First, what is the role of social experience in moral cognition? On
the one hand, if mature moral cognition in adults is the product of prolonged
social learning, children would be expected to reason differently from adults.
On the other hand, similarities between children and adults would indicate that
the additional years of social learning accumulated during adulthood are
unnecessary for particular forms of moral cognition. Second, how do children and
adults reason about different types of moral beliefs? Previous work has drawn
conclusions about "moral realism" based on investigations of unambiguous moral
beliefs (e.g., murder is wrong). However, many moral beliefs are more ambiguous
(e.g., is it better to tell an unflattering truth or a small lie?) Unlike
unambiguous moral beliefs, ambiguous moral beliefs can lead to disagreements
across individuals and cultures. In addition to addressing these questions, the
current studies elucidate the troubling consequences of moral realism?including
implicit bias, explicit bias, and dehumanization?and test the prediction that
moral anti-realism can attenuate these consequences. To achieve these goals, the
present studies integrate methodological approaches from developmental
psychology, social neuroscience, and philosophy, leading to unique insight
unobtainable from any field alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work benefits society both in its
contribution of specific research findings and in its use of research methods.
First, these studies will investigate the impact of meta-ethical beliefs on
intergroup bias, suggesting that adopting a moral realist stance enhances bias,
whereas adopting a moral anti-realist stance decreases bias. These results may
inform interventions aimed at reducing intergroup hostility by acting on
people's meta-ethical beliefs. Second, the developmental methods used in this
research will also benefit the public by providing children with the opportunity
to learn about and participate in research. Data will be collected at a
children's museum, providing ample opportunity for the researcher to discuss the
methods, hypotheses, and findings with interested families. Additionally,
interacting with male and female experimenters from diverse racial backgrounds
may encourage children from groups under-represented in the sciences to pursue
scientific interests.