* 1408510
* Building and Sustaining Research-Practice Partnerships for Equity in STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2013,06/30/2016
* William Penuel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 212,981.00

This project is building a community of STEM researchers, district and school
leaders, formal and informal educators, and community coalitions engaged in
building and sustaining research-practice partnerships to improve STEM
education. Research-practice partnerships are long-term collaborations between
practitioners and researchers that are organized to investigate problems of
practice and solutions for improving the outcomes of educational systems. In
STEM education, Math and Science Partnership projects funded by the National
Science Foundation are examples of design partnerships that bring together
subject matter experts in higher education, mathematics and science education
researchers, and school districts. Other examples can be found among
partnerships in which a network of formal and informal education organizations
are linked together and with researchers to organize more robust and equitable
learning ecologies for youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives for
this project are to: (1) Build knowledge and skill of a network of doctoral and
early career researchers who can form and maintain long-term partnerships with
districts, informal education organizations, and community coalitions focused on
STEM improvement; (2) Create a network of mature research-practice partnerships
focused on next generation mathematics and science learning and equity that
produces resources and knowledge to benefit new partnerships; and (3) Develop
knowledge about effective partnership strategies and about how best to support a
network of scholars focused on partnership work and a network of research-
practice partnerships. A basic premise for this work is that STEM improvement at
scale requires new opportunities and infrastructures for fostering ongoing
exchange between research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key products of
this endeavor are:&lt;br/&gt;- A set of web-accessible resources (including
research reports, practical tools and brief video clips) co-developed by
practitioners and researchers related to forming and maintaining partnerships,
developing and using implementation and outcome evidence to guide design in
partnerships, sustaining partnerships in the face of change, and strategies for
promoting equity, inclusion, and leveraging diversity in
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;- A set of guidelines, grounded in the experiences of
network participants, for the preparation of researchers to engage in
partnership work.&lt;br/&gt;- A white paper for publication that presents case
studies of partnership work, linked to the web-based resources, and that draws
on activities and accomplishments of the research-practice
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;- An evaluation report that pays particular attention to
longitudinal outcomes for doctoral students and early career researchers.