* 1408722
* High-entropy Alloys Strengthened by Coherent Precipitates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2023
* Eric Lass, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2023
* USD 595,764.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future energy must be sustainable,
with minimum pollutants and reduced carbon footprint, and more efficiently
generated. For efficient energy conversion, the operating temperature of a heat
engine should be as high as possible and materials used for the engine
components must be able to withstand the high operating temperature. Traditional
design of alloys is to select the major component based on a specific property
requirement, and further to use alloying additions to confer secondary
properties without sacrificing the primary property. High-entropy alloys are
multi-components materials containing at least five components in approximately
equiatomic proportions, in contrast to traditional alloys, which are primarily
based on one major component except with some minor alloying additions. Recent
experiments show that these alloys can be promising as high-temperature
materials. This discovery opens a new avenue for the development of high-
temperature alloys. &lt;br/&gt;The current project is expected to advance the
research and engineering education activities in the area of advanced materials
at the University of Tennessee. It also incorporates several programs to recruit
and enhance women and minority participation in science and engineering
projects. Programs include National Consortium for Graduate Education for the
Minorities and UT College of Engineering's Pipeline Engineering Diversity
Program, to mentor undergraduate students and foster their interests in the
research. In addition, the the principal investigator will participate in
outreach to local high schools to promote student awareness of science and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-entropy alloys are a new class of materials,
which contain typically over 5 components in approximately equiatomic
proportions, in contrast to traditional alloys, which are primarily based on one
major component alloyed with some additional minor elements. As a result of high
configuration entropy, these new alloys generally exhibit significant and
surprising degree of mutual solubility in a single face-centered cubic or body-
centered cubic phase. Also due to partitioning of several different atoms, these
alloys generally show sluggish diffusion, thus are promising materials for high-
temperature creep resistance. Some of these alloys were reported to be
hardenable upon aging and exhibited significant strengthening, similar to
conventional Al, steels, and Ni based alloys. Recent experiments from this group
demonstrated that large volume fraction of coherent nanoprecipitates with a
lattice mismatch strain as small as 0.58% were formed in some high-entropy
alloys, in a fashion similar to that observed in Ni superalloys (mismatch strain
~0.5%). &lt;br/&gt;Based upon these promising observations, this project aims at
developing an understanding of precipitating coherent nanoparticles in high-
entropy alloys and also the resulting improvement on deformation resistance, in
particular, at elevated temperatures, in this new class of materials. The
research includes tasks of a basic study of the precipitation kinetics, factors
determining the thermal stability of nanoprecipitates, and the underpinned
mechanisms of the physical/chemical interactions between dislocations and
nanoprecipitates. Specifically, the project will study and improve the thermal
stability of precipitates in high-entropy alloys through deliberate control of
the precipitate-matrix interface energy. High-resolution electron microscopy,
atom probe and high-energy x-ray will be employed to characterize the
composition, morphology and distribution of nanoprecipitates with special
attention on the structure and chemistry of the nanoprecipitate-matrix
interface. Factors determining the interface thermal stability will be
identified. Mechanical interactions between dislocations and nanoprecipitates
during deformation at both room and high temperatures will be examined and the
strengthening efficacy will be evaluated. The initial study of L12 precipitate-
strengthened face-centered cubic high-entropy alloys, such as the CoCrFeMnNi-
based, will be conducted and, eventually, extended to body-centered cubic alloy
systems. On the theory side, preliminary simulations will be conducted on
interface solute segregation and its effect on the interface energy in simple
binary or even tertiary systems. Calculations will be expanded to more complex
alloy systems only after practical tools are available. &lt;br/&gt;The
completion of this project will offer useful technical information to the
development of structural nanomaterials. The evaluation of precipitation-
hardened high-entropy alloys can also aid in the design and improved application
of high-temperature structural components or functional devices, for example,
diffusion barriers for microelectronic interconnects. Moreover, research on
high-entropy alloys will stimulate the scientific interest on the study and
understanding of multicomponent systems, in particular, near the center of the
phase diagram, which is virtually unexplored.