* 1408686
* Measurement and mechanisms of elastic deformation in amorphous solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Todd Hufnagel, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 12/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amorphous solids are materials in
which the atoms or molecules are not arranged in a regularly repeating pattern.
Ordinary window glass and many plastics are amorphous, but there are more exotic
examples such as metallic glasses. Our interest is in understanding how the
structure of amorphous materials change when they are deformed by being placed
under mechanical stress. In this program we use computer models to study how the
atoms and molecules in an amorphous material rearrange themselves when the
material is deformed. The results from the models are compared with experiments
in which we examine how x-rays and neutrons are scattered by the material as it
is deformed, providing information about the how the atomic and molecular
structure evolves. One goal is to develop these scattering techniques into
reliable routine tools for measuring the deformation which could then be used by
researchers interested in a wide range of applications, including studies of
residual stresses in glasses and the mechanical behavior of complex materials
such as bone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary educational objective of this
program is to develop rigorous, validated tools for assessing student learning
in a core undergraduate Structure of Materials course. These tools will be
disseminated for use by other instructors and provide a template for how to
develop similar assessment instruments for undergraduate materials science
courses, and engineering courses more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental and computational results
clearly demonstrate that nominally elastic (recoverable) deformation in
amorphous solids is considerably more complex that the simple bond-stretching
picture invoked in describing elastic deformation of crystalline solids. The
first objective of this program is to understand fundamental mechanisms of
elastic deformation in amorphous solids using metallic glasses and linear
amorphous homopolymers as model systems. This will be investigated using
molecular dynamics simulations, paying particular attention to inhomogeneous,
non-affine atomic and molecular rearrangements now believed to be responsible
for several unusual phenomena observed during nominally elastic loading. The
second objective is develop x-ray and neutron scattering into reliable tools for
quantitative, non-destructive measurement of elastic strains from non-
crystalline solids. This will give researchers a powerful new ability to explore
the mechanical behavior of a wide range of complex materials with amorphous
constituents. Potential applications include investigation of internal residual
stresses due to processing of oxide and polymer glasses and in situ studies of
load transfer in polymer matrix composites and hard biological materials such as
bone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary educational objective of this program is
to develop rigorous, validated tools for assessing student learning in a core
undergraduate Structure of Materials course. These tools will be disseminated
for use by other instructors and provide a template for how to develop similar
assessment instruments for undergraduate materials science courses, and
engineering courses more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;