* 1408901
* Investigation of High Strain-Rate Deformation and Failure of  FCC and BCC Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 01/31/2020
* USD 479,986.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanostructures such as nanowires and nanotubes are
envisioned to play a critical role in the next generation of advanced materials
for energy, electronic devices, and nano-electromechanical systems. This broad
technological applicability has elicited a demand for extensive characterization
of the fundamental properties of nanostructures, yet previous studies have
neglected to characterize these materials under high strain-rate conditions.
This project involves characterizing the mechanical properties of metallic
nanowires at high strain rates using transmission electron microscopy and
developing new theoretical models to understand the relationship between the
structure of the nanowires and their mechanical properties. This fundamental
research provides opportunities to develop new educational modules on the
subject of mechanical properties testing and stimulates new innovations in the
design and manufacture of high performing robust nanoscale devices. As well,
training of a graduate student and post-doctoral associate is an inherent part
of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of this
research project is to explore for the first time the mechanical response of
sub-150 nm-diameter metallic nanowires at high strain rates (up to 10^5 /s) to
elucidate the structure-property relationships of nanostructures at high strain
rates. To this end, nanowires are experimentally characterized by augmenting
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) mechanical characterization platforms with
capabilities for in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) testing. The
newly designed MEMS platforms with piezoelectric-based actuation and reduced
mass are designed to attain strain rates up to 10^5/s. This testing is coupled
to dynamic, high-speed TEM (DTEM) in order to obtain high speed imaging of the
deformation and failure processes. These state-of the-art experimental
techniques yield significant insights toward the understanding of high-strain
rate mechanical behavior of metallic nanowires, dislocation processes in
confined geometries, and validation of interatomic potentials for molecular
dynamics (MD)-based modeling of metals. This validation is extremely beneficial
to atomistic modeling, not only for mechanical characterization, but for a
breadth of scientific disciplines where MD simulations are used to gain insights
into chemical, electrical, and thermal material behavior.