* 1408628
* Collaborative Research: Terahertz PLL-Based Phased Array for Wide Band Radar/Sensing Systems in Silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Omeed Momeni, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 219,994.00

The mm-wave and terahertz (300 GHz - 3 THz) systems are known to have unique and
significant applications in health, security and industry. Remote sensing and
active/passive imaging are among these applications and are continually evolving
at a rapid pace toward mm-wave and terahertz (THz) frequencies in order to
achieve higher resolution. These systems are used for high-resolution radar, 3D
imaging, security screening, and detection of concealed weapons. Today, however,
terahertz (THz) systems are realized using expensive and bulky devices. This
project introduces a novel methodology to implement a compact and on-chip THz
system and to overcome many challenges facing these high frequency systems.
While the proposed circuits and systems have significant effect on integrating
and miniaturizing next generation THz systems, the impact of this project is
beyond the design and implementation of few novel circuit topologies. The
proposed methodologies are transformative and open new doors to designers.
Furthermore, with on-chip THz systems the unique THz applications will rapidly
flourish, resulting in new opportunities in the high-tech marketplace and
research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In radar applications the cross-
range and range resolutions improve as the bandwidth and the operation frequency
increase, respectively. However, wide-band generation and radiation of the RF
power at THz frequencies is challenging, especially because, these frequencies
are close to the cut-off frequencies of most advanced silicon technology
platforms. Stable and accurate radiated frequency is a necessity for most
sensing/radar applications such as frequency-modulated radars. Wide-band
frequency locking in a phase-locked loop (PLL) at THz frequencies becomes
extremely challenging mainly because of low output power of voltage controlled
oscillators (VCO) and low locking range of frequency dividers in silicon.
Moreover, phased arrays are needed to boost the radiated power and to localize
the antenna beam. Having lossy phase shifters in the Local Oscillator(LO) or
Radio-frequency(RF) signal paths in conventional phased array systems and the
complications of integrating a locked signal with a phased array system have
prevented designers to implement THz phased array systems on chip. Here,a novel
PLL-based phased array architecture is proposed, which uses control voltages in
the coupled PLL array to both calibrate and vary the phase of the radiated
signal and steer the array beam. This can be achieved without the use of
explicit phase shifters. At the heart of this architecture is a phase-locking
mechanism, which adopts a new approach in designing the Voltage-Controlled
Oscillator(VCO) and the following frequency divider that essentially helps
increase the output power and tuning range and lower the phase noise.