* 1408345
* CHS: Medium: Towards Transparency of Personalization on the Web
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2018
* USD 743,094.00

This project will develop new research methods to map and quantify the ways in
which online search engines, social networks and e-commerce sites use
sophisticated algorithms to tailor content to each individual user. This
"personalization" may often be of value for the user, but it also has the
potential to distort search results and manipulate the perceptions and behavior
of the user. Given the popularity of personalization across a variety of Web-
based services, this research has the potential for extremely broad impact.
Being able to quantify the extent to which Web-based services are personalized
will lead to greater transparency for users, and the development of tools to
identify personalized content will allow users to access information that may be
hard to access today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personalization is now a ubiquitous
feature on many Web-based services. In many cases, personalization provides
advantages for users, because personalization algorithms are likely to return
results that are relevant to the user. At the same time, the increasing levels
of personalization in Web search and other systems are leading to growing
concerns over the Filter Bubble effect, where users are only given results that
the personalization algorithm thinks they want, while other important
information remains inaccessible. From a computer science perspective,
personalization is simply a tool that is applied to information retrieval and
ranking problems. However, sociologists, philosophers, and political scientists
argue that personalization can result in inadvertent censorship and "echo
chambers." Similarly, economists warn that unscrupulous companies can leverage
personalization to steer users towards higher-priced products, or even implement
price discrimination, charging different users different prices for the same
item. As the pervasiveness of personalization on the Web grows, it is clear that
techniques must be developed to understand and quantify personalization across a
variety of Web services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has four primary
thrusts: (1) To develop methodologies to measure personalization of mobile
content. The increasing popularity of browsing the Web from mobile devices
presents new challenges, as these devices have access to sensitive content like
the user's geolocation and contacts. (2) To develop systems and techniques for
accurately measuring the prevalence of several personalization trends on a large
number of e-commerce sites. Recent anecdotal evidence has shown instances of
problematic sales tactics, including price steering and price discrimination.
(3) To develop techniques to identify and quantify personalized political
content. (4) To measure the extent to which financial and health information is
personalized based on location and socio-economic status. All four of these
thrusts will develop new research methodologies that may prove effective in
other areas of research as well.