* 1408182
* Signal Recovery with Unknown Clustered Sparsity and Quantization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Hongbin Li, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 05/31/2018
* USD 295,000.00

Real-word signals are often sparse in that they have compact representation by
using proper bases. Notable examples are digital images which can be compactly
represented and compressed via various compression techniques. Sparsity
exploitation has proven a powerful tool for the acquisition, transmission, and
storage of high-dimensional signals. Remarkably, it allows recovering the entire
signal from relatively few measurements. Many sparse signals such as images,
audio and video signals also exhibit some sparsity pattern (e.g., clustered or
block sparse coefficients) that admits more efficient signal recovery. However,
when the sparsity pattern is irregular or unknown, how to efficiently recover
the signal from a few measurements is still largely an uncharted territory. This
is the first research thrust pursued in this project. Meanwhile, for signal
acquisition, practical systems usually employ quantization which converts each
measurement into a few binary bits to facilitate processing and storage. The
effect of quantization, however, was neglected by most classical sparse signal
recovery methods. Only recently, sparse signal reconstruction/estimation which
explicitly accounts for the effect of quantization started to receive attention,
although most such works just considered heuristic quantizers. A second research
thrust of this project examines two problems related to quantization: (1)
development of efficient signal recovery algorithms with quantized measurements;
and (2) optimum quantizer design for sparse signal recovery, in particular for
the case of low-rate quantization which is required in many sensing systems that
have bandwidth/power constraints. This project also has a significant
educational component aimed to provide integrated research experience and
training for undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes several approaches to
address the above problems. First, on clustered sparse signal recovery, the PI
proposes a new Bayesian learning framework for sparse signal recovery with
unknown block sparsity structure. The proposed research builds on a novel
Bayesian hierarchical model involving coupled hyperparameters to promote block
sparsity without imposing rigid block structures. Based on the proposed models,
a range of Bayesian inference algorithms are to be developed, taking into
account of computational efficiency and robustness to noise. Second, on low-rate
quantizer design, the PI proposes an adaptive quantization approach to enhance
the reconstruction performance of sparse signal recovery algorithms taking
quantized measurements. The proposed approach involves sequentially quantizing
each measurement, using past quantized bits to predict the next sample to be
quantized, and finally thresholding at the predicted value. Third, on the
development of reconstruction algorithms using quantized measurements, the PI
proposes to employ a sigmoid function to impose a consistency constraint between
the reconstructed signal and the quantized measurements, which is shown to offer
the benefit of computational complexity reduction and significant reconstruction
accuracy improvement over existing methods.