* 1408427
* Controlling Defects in Transition Metal Oxide Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 455,210.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The stability and durability of an active component
material frequently governs the performance and reliability of electronic
devices. Moreover, the device performance is often influenced by the presence of
atomic-level structural defects or interfaces between dissimilar materials.
While these defects and interfaces are in many instances unavoidable, our
understanding of how to control and manipulate their effect on a material's
properties still remains unclear. Accordingly, fundamental research of the
atomic-scale impact of defects or interfaces on a material's macroscopic
behavior is essential to continuing the development of next generation high-
speed computer memory storage and energy-conversion devices. Ceramic materials
that contain transition metals, such as cobalt or titanium, and oxygen have
attracted increasing scientific attention due to their properties that can be
used in innovative memory storage applications (e.g., hard-drives) and in
reliable waste-heat recovery. In this research project, the PI combines atomic-
resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy and computational materials
modeling to establish control over defects in two specific ceramic oxide
materials that can be used in such devices. One unique aspect of this research
is that the effects of defects and interfaces on the functional properties of
these ceramic oxide materials are tested inside the microscope column at atomic
resolution using novel in situ experiments. This approach allows the PI to
establish control over the effects that defects have on the overall performance
and reliability of a novel device. The research activities involve education and
training of science and engineering undergraduate and graduate students,
including underrepresented minorities. In particular, the participation of
undergraduate students in active research projects is fostered through the PI's
Journal of Undergraduate Research at the University of Illinois at
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of this research
project is to use a comprehensive research approach consisting of atomic-
resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy, first principles density
functional theory (DFT) materials modeling and molecular beam epitaxy, as well
as pulsed laser thin film deposition to study two ceramic oxide thin film
systems. The PI has assembled an interdisciplinary team of experts to develop a
fundamental understanding of the role that defects and dopants play on the
transport and ferroic properties of transition metal oxide thin films. More
specifically, the effects of oxygen vacancies, dopants and interfaces on the
ferroelectric properties of perovskite transition metal oxide thin films grown
on GaAs and on the thermoelectric transport in incommensurately layered
transition metal oxide thin films are studied. By combining state-of-the-art in
situ electric-field biasing and sample heating experiments with atomic-
resolution imaging and spectroscopy, and first-principles materials modeling,
the defect chemistry in complex transition-metal oxide ceramics thin films is
studied. An important feature of this program is the integration of research and
education through the training of undergraduate and graduate students in state-
of-the-art in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy and theoretical
materials physics.