* 1408115
* Computational analysis of nonlinear electromagnetics in disordered photonic systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Physicists have known for centuries how to predict the behavior of light and
other types of electromagnetic radiation when it moves through a vacuum, using
Maxwell's Laws; however, when it propagates through disorderly media, like those
we use in developing new engineering devices, people have relied on very gross
approximations or back-of-the-envelope estimates to predict what will happen.
These PIs will develop new computer simulation systems to predict what happens
more accurately than has been possible in the past. Their new tools should be of
very widespread use, in photonics and electrooptics, in developing new devices
and technologies. They plan to disseminate the new software widely to enable
scientists worldwide to conduct research on this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on developing an integrated solver for self-consistent
Maxwell-Bloch equations that is accurate and computationally efficient. This
will entail the development of (1) a domain decomposition framework; (2) semi-
analytical methods for transient analysis of radiation/scattering; and (3) fast
potential evaluators that can be integrated with these solvers to enable large-
scale analysis of disordered systems. The framework will provide a complete
picture of the dynamics of light and optical excitations (excitons) in a variety
of disordered systems, starting with Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser
(VCSEL) structures with disorder. Another system to be investigated as a testbed
is the case of quantum dots embedded in a semiconductor with and without an
external cavity.