* 1408425
* GOALI: A low-voltage nonvolatile single transistor flash memory device based on ion transport in 2D electrolytes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Alan Seabaugh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2016
* USD 373,638.00

The development of electronic devices that operate at lower power could have a
huge impact on global energy consumption. One way to decrease the required power
is to scale the components to the smallest possible extent, which can be
achieved with materials that are a few atomic layers thick. One of the promising
two-dimensional (2D) materials is graphene which has a single layer of carbon
atoms. In this study, a device is proposed that relies on the movement of ions
that are positively or negatively charged to control electron transport in
graphene. A novel data storage memory device is proposed that utilizes the
strong interaction between ions and graphene. This GOALI proposal addresses the
practical challenge of developing low-power devices, and the fundamental study
of engineering ion transport at the limits of scaling. The close interaction
between the University of Notre Dame and Micron Technology Inc. will serve to
guide the effort for the demonstration of a novel low-voltage nonvolatile single
transistor flash memory device. Micron Technology Inc. will be involved in
mentoring and training the students and will host a student as a summer intern.
The graduate and undergraduate students will gain interdisciplinary skills in
materials science, chemistry and electrical engineering. The research effort
supports an educational component involving case studies in the classroom
teaching of graduate and undergraduate students.

Fundamental understanding of ion transport in two-dimensional (2D) ion
conductors is being explored to enable new concepts for ion doping in 2D crystal
transistors and memory. A novel low-voltage, nonvolatile, flash memory concept
is proposed based on the electrostatic ion doping of graphene. This device
motivates a new set of material requirements for devices and fundamental
transport studies. The essential ion transport configuration proposed for the
study is a pair of 2D crystal electrodes separated by a 2D solid electrolyte.
Lithium ions will shuttle between the 2D crystals by applying an electric field.
The transfer of Li+ from one side of the electrolyte to the other will be sensed
by the change in electronic conduction in one of the graphene electrodes. To
facilitate fast ion transport, the project will focus initially on crown ether
phthalocyanine (Pc) molecules, which will be deposited with monolayer precision.
Ion and electron transport will be explored in a graphene/crown ether
Pc/graphene memory cell at the limits of scaling the thickness. The choice of
materials will be driven by the memory application requirement to minimize
read/write speed and maximize retention with sub-volt operation. Micron
Technology will offer facilities for fabrication of 300nm wafers and
characterization of nanoionic devices.