* 1408539
* Ultra-high-sensitivity Resonant Photonic Sensors through Brillouin Scattering Induced Transparency
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Gaurav Bahl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2018
* USD 359,854.00

The goal of this project is to demonstrate micro-sensors for measurements of
temperature and pressure, with sensitivities that far exceed what is achievable
with existing technologies. This research can help to develop better sensor
technologies for a variety of applications including information storage,
communications, and medical diagnosis. This project provides many opportunities
for the interdisciplinary training of students at &amp;#8232;all academic
levels. The STEM impact of this work will be broadened through the development
and distribution of educational modules for high-school girls at an
&amp;#8232;engineering summer camp held at UIUC. Undergraduate research
assistants will be recruited to assist in the development of the prototype
sensors via summer research programs. The educational activities produced
through this grant will be widely distributed through existing outreach
mechanisms at UIUC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical microresonators are
frequently used for physical sensing, including measuring mass, displacement,
and extremely small forces. The typical sensing method relies upon monitoring
the shift of the optical resonance frequencies due to applied physical stimuli.
The sensitivity of these measurements is fundamentally limited by the optical
losses intrinsic to the material. In this proposal, Brillouin scattering will be
investigated in order to overcome these material limitations. The PI recently
demonstrated that a strong optical dispersion effect can be generated through
Brillouin scattering of a ?control? laser from a traveling acoustic wave within
a micro-resonator. This phenomenon results in the creation of a spectrally-
narrow transparency window in a neighboring optical mode. An extremely rapid
gradient in phase-response accompanies this transparency, and can be measured
with a weak ?probe? laser. This rapid gradient provides high sensitivity to
small fluctuations in optical and acoustic resonance frequencies due to physical
stimuli. The PI will develop analytical models to describe the effects of
physical stimuli on the optical dispersion characteristics. The models will be
experimentally tested on multiple resonator platforms, including silica
microspheres and shell microcapillary resonators. Additional experiments will be
performed to enhance the pressure sensitivity of deformable optical resonators,
and to use slow light for physical sensor applications.