* 1408748
* Phase V - OKLSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Carl Rutledge, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,745,778.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented (URM) in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State University (OSU), lead institution for the
Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (OK-LSAMP), will
double the recruitment and retention numbers of URM students in STEM fields over
the five years of the project. The activities will strengthen scholarly
participation in research and international experiences preparing students for
global success. Activities are dedicated to building the skills and collegial
relationships scholars will need to pursue successful careers in research,
teaching, government, and the private sector. As scholars progress through the
programs, including the associated Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) activities, they
will be provided opportunities to develop collaborative leadership skills by
working with peers and senior researchers, performing primary research for
presentations at national and international conferences and publishing research
papers with a multicultural perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM
activities will result in increased numbers of a wide range of minority groups
in the STEM workforce, not only in the United States but globally. The Alliance
will provide an important national model for promoting the success of all
minorities including Native Americans. Results from this research will be
disseminated widely to inform understanding of how to encourage and support
minority STEM education. Building on well-established relationships with local,
state, and tribal nation authorities, OK-LSAMP will expand its impact into all
diverse communities. OK-LSAMP institutional members include OSU, the University
of Oklahoma (OU), the University of Tulsa (TU); Langston University (LU), an
Historically Black College or University (HBCU); East Central University (ECU),
Northeastern State University (NSU), University of Central Oklahoma UCO),
Northwestern Oklahoma State University (NWOSU),Southeastern Oklahoma State
University (SEOSU), Southwestern Oklahoma State University (SWOSU), and Cameron
University (CU).