* 1408947
* Collaborative Research: Branching Markov Chains and Stochastic Analysis Associated with Problems in Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Edward Waymire, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 222,017.00

Introduced in the mid 19 century, the Navier-Stokes equations are used to
analyze fluid flows from laminar to turbulent regimes. Despite their importance
and usefulness in engineering and science, a complete theory establishing
properties of solutions of these equations continues to be elusive. With
applications to physical and biological sciences and aeronautical and naval
engineering, the mechanism for energy transfer and dissipation governing fluid
motions remain carefully concealed from the current methods to analyze these
equations.  The dramatic improvements in efficiency attained in aircraft, naval
and automotive design, serve as testimony of the economic and societal impact of
improved control of basic processes modeled by these equations.

In recent years problems in the study of differential equations in general, and
in particularly of the Navier-Stokes equations, have given rise to interesting
probabilistic structures. The current project aims to elucidate the relation
between properties of solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations with properties
of a class of branching Markov chains naturally associated to these equations.
As well-illustrated by considering self-similar solutions of the Navier-Stokes
equations, regularity properties as well as uniqueness of solutions corresponds
to properties of a specific branching Markov chain in which the branching nodes
have a law determined by the invariance of the Navier-Stokes equations under
spatial dilation (with a corresponding time scale change) and rotations. This
intrinsic branching structure motivates the formulation of an explosion problem
that it is of interest in its own right from the probability point of view. It
involves new considerations of the location of the left most particle of the
branching process. Furthermore, the branching structure establishes a striking
connection between nonlinear PDE's and branching processes that is the object of
study in this proposal. A further specific objective of this proposal is to
explore the consequences on the branching structure imposed by the
incompressible character of the velocity field. Specifically, the Fourier
transform of the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations can be represented as
an expected value of a multiplicative functional defined on the nodes of the
alluded branching Markov chain that reflects the incompressibility of the
velocity field. An objective of this proposal is to develop the implications for
energy depletion as a consequence of the algebraic structure defined by the
indicated multiplication operation. Likewise, regularity and large time behavior
of the solutions of the Navier-Stokes equation can also be gleaned from this
representation. The proposal also involves methods of graph theory, with the use
of semi-algebraic sets in the classification of nodes of random trees.
Ultimately, this proposal seeks to elucidate the role of incompressibility in
the multiplicative stochastic processes associated with equations of fluid flow.