* 1408681
* A Liquid Argon TPC In A Testbeam (LArIAT)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2014,03/31/2016
* Carl Bromberg, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 03/31/2016
* USD 45,500.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe.

One of the primary areas to search for answers to these and other open questions
about the universe, how it came to be and why it is the way it is, is to focus
on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we know and can learn
about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard Model. Neutrinos are
those elementary particles that interact with practically nothing else in the
universe. They have no electric charge and were once thought to be massless.
Like other elementary particles, they were believed to have an antimatter
counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted that there
were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were distinguishable
through the different interactions that they did undergo whenever there was an
interaction.

But recent measurements have totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now
know that neutrinos do have a mass and because they do, they can actually change
from one type to another. Detailed measurements of these changes, along with
other current neutrino experiments, form one of the most promising ways to probe
for new physics beyond the Standard Model. The achievements of particle physics
during the last few decades have been enabled by the progress that has been made
in the development and utilization of extremely sophisticated elementary
particle detector technology, some of which has resulted in applications that
have over time enjoyed spin offs into other areas of science. The primary goal
of most of this technology is to reduce the level of noise in the detector to
enable increasingly weaker signals to be observed.

There is currently a large interest in experimental particle physics in liquid
argon Time Projection Chambers (TPC) spurred in part by the proposed Long
Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) project at Fermi National Acclerator
Laboratory (FNAL) and in neutrino physics in general. This award supports the
group of C. Bromberg at Michigan State University to work on the construction of
a low noise readout system for the Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LArTPC)
to be used in the LArIAT (Liquid Argon In A Test-beam) experiment at FNAL. The
unique aspect of these electronics is that it uses cold preamplifiers, cooled by
submerging them in Liquid Argon (87 degrees above absolute zero), that reduces
electronic noise by 50% compared to room temperature electronics. FNAL is
providing the test neutrino beam and associated detectors. This project will
focus solely on the fabrication of the cold readout system.

LArTPC detector technology is scalable to the very large masses (perhaps
100kiloTons) needed by next generation neutrino experiments and is capable of
recording three-dimensional digital images of particle trajectories. For these
experiments systematic errors in the energy measurements are not well known.
This project will help understand these errors and a crucial component will be
the low-noise electronics.

The broader impact of this work involves training of an engineer in Liquid Argon
technology. The PI also contributes to the US Particle Accelerator School using
LAr TPCs as teaching tools.