* 1408107
* Fast Charging Batteries via Electrochemical Model-based Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Scott Moura, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 294,714.00

Title: Fast Charging Batteries via ElectroChemical Model-Based
Control&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In telecommunications, there were 5.2B active
mobile handsets and over 1.7B mobile phone sales worldwide for 2012. Mobile
phones are also a powerful tool for solving poverty and financial inequity in
third world countries. In electrified transportation, there were 53,000 were
plug-in electric vehicles sold in the U.S. for 2012. Despite growing sales,
range anxiety is considered the largest inhibitor of electrified transportation.
Significant reduction in charge times, e.g. comparable to filling a gas tank,
would eliminate this obstacle and consequently reduce emissions and oil
dependence. It is clear that fast charging increases the practicality of mobile
devices and electric vehicles. However, it can also decrease cycle life
depending on the charging method used. Traditionally, batteries are charged via
a constant current/constant voltage (CCCV) protocol. A typical mobile phone
requires 47 minutes to charge from 0-50%. However, it is well-known within the
academic and industrial communities that alternative protocols can reduce charge
times. Such alternatives, however, are almost always heuristic, without any
provably optimal properties or safe constraint satisfaction guarantees. This
research project pursues a drastically different and potentially transformative
approach. This research seeks to significantly reduce Li-ion battery charge
times by developing control theoretic foundations for electrochemical model-
based control. Mathematically, this is formulated as minimizing charge time
subject to constraints on estimated electro-chemical variables associated with
aging. This approach is termed Electro-chemical model-based Control (ECC). The
development of this control strategy will provide a major breakthrough in the
way batteries are operated, safely at their electrochemical limits. The PI is
currently establishing collaborations to impact both sectors with this research.
Collaborations with electrochemists in the BATT group at Lawrence Berkeley
National Lab are also being pursued. At UC Berkeley, the PI has created a new
course entitled Energy Systems and Control. This course studies energy systems
in transportation and energy infrastructures as motivation for systems and
control theory. Results from this research will directly influence course
material. Finally, the PI has historically recruited students of
underrepresented populations to facilitate higher educational access. The PI
plans to coordinate with the UC Berkeley Center for STEM Innovation, Leadership,
and Diversity to recruit undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this research seeks to achieve a
10 minute 0-20% charge time and 25 minute 0-50% charge time over 500
charge/discharge cycles. The project is organized into three integrated research
tasks. (i) First, it will analyze parameter sensitivity and develop a fast
charging-oriented reduced model for estimator design. (ii) Second, it will
derive provably stable state estimators and optimal fast charging algorithms.
These designs will advance PDE estimation and reference governor theory,
respectively, while translating these theories to battery systems. (iii)
Finally, it will quantify the performance of an ECC approach vis-Ã -vis
traditional CCCV protocols on a battery-in-the-loop experimental facility. This
project is among the first to focus on control-theoretic methods for optimizing
battery charge times via electro-chemical models. Mathematically, these models
are multi-state coupled nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs). Due to
the model complexity, several fundamental tools in systems and control theory
will be developed in the context of batteries. (i) The first is a systematic
procedure for assessing parameter sensitivity in multi-state PDE models. (ii)
The second is fast charging-relevant model reduction techniques for achieving
observability. (iii) The third is advancements to state estimation theory for
PDE-ODE models. (iv)The fourth is advancements to reference governor theory for
PDE-ODE models. (v) The last is an experimental quantification of ECC fast
charging performance versus traditional protocols.