* 1408506
* Mechanically-equivalent Response Amplifiers and Frequency Modulators for Energy-harvesting Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Rigoberto Burgueno, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 324,309.00

A major obstacle limiting the development of deployable sensing and actuation
solutions is the scarcity of power. Converted energy from the vibrations of a
host structure using devices (harvesters) based on piezoelectric materials has
been shown to be a possible solution. However, these energy harvesters are only
efficient at a narrow range of vibration frequencies and/or under high
deformation conditions. This considerably limits the levels of harvestable
power. While several approaches have been developed to broaden the frequencies
at which these vibration-based harvesters can operate, their input still needs
to be vibratory. The aim of the proposed research is to be able to harness the
energy from quasi-static (very low frequency) structural deformations through
novel micro-mechanical devices that use multiple instabilities (sudden
transitions in geometry while resisting a compressive load) in elastic elements
(strips, plates and shells). The sudden transitions (snap-through instabilities)
are recoverable (elastic) and generate high-rate motion that amplify and
increase the input frequency and deformation amplitude to scavengers that are
attached to the deforming elements. These devices then become mechanical analogs
to electrical components (that is, amplifiers and frequency modulators). The
research will develop methods to control (occurrence instance and number of
events) the snap-through instabilities by optimizing material and geometric
configurations on elastic elements, which will in turn allow maximizing the
energy transfer from piezoelectric energy harvesters. The investigation will
also demonstrate the integration of the developed energy harvesting devices into
structural elements, as well as power management and storage approaches to
maximize use of locally harvested energy. The introduced methods will allow
energy generation and conversion from the unexplored range of quasi-static
structural response. The project will allow multidisciplinary training of two
graduate students and will be integrated with educational and outreach
activities focused on promoting the multidisciplinary training of engineering
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis behind the proposed
research is that energy harvesting within the unexplored structural response
range of &lt;&lt; 1Hz can be achieved through devices that amplify the amplitude
and frequency of the input signal by means of instability transitions in the
post-buckling response of elastic elements. The high rate motion input to the
harvester depends on the postbuckling characteristics of the mechanical
transducers, which can be controlled through material tailoring, boundary
conditions, and system arrangements. Regulation of the post-buckling behavior
can lead to controlled acceleration input to the piezoelectric vibrators. The
research objective is to advance the knowledge and technology needed to create
the noted devices to enhance the power conversion capabilities of piezoelectric
materials for energy harvesting under quasi-static structural deformations. The
research tasks are: 1) theoretical and experimental studies on the postbuckling
response of isotropic and anisotropic columns and cylinders, 2) enhancement and
control of the high rate motion of the mechanical transducers by material
tailoring, boundary conditions and system assemblies, 3) optimization of the
piezoelectric harvesters materials and geometry to tailor the amplitude and
magnitude of the output voltage signal, and 4) system integration and evaluation
in prototype structural components and evaluation of power management and
storage technology. The research work will lead to new concepts and mechanisms
for materials and structures that utilize the energy that develops within them
(strain) form transient and low magnitude loads and convert it to electrical
power for local use or storage. The research will expand the useable range of
piezoelectric materials as power harvesters and will also open new possibilities
for their use in hybrid material systems s and structures for local powering of
sensing and actuating devices as well as displacement-power cogeneration
structures.