* 1408862
* Small-Molecule Vapor-Deposited Materials for Integrated Nonlinear Optics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Ivan Biaggio, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 372,486.00

Non-technical Description: Nonlinear optical materials enable the interaction
between multiple photons, allowing light signals to control other light signals.
Such capabilities are important for continuous developments in optical computing
and in optical telecommunication networks such as those that today transmit
everything from TV channels to the Internet. This research project aims at
studying and developing a new fundamental paradigm that consists in using small
organic molecules to build high-quality "plastic" nonlinear optical materials
that can then be used with current and future technologies to provide important
new all-optical data-processing capabilities at ultrafast speeds. The
interdisciplinary nature of the research and its vertically integrated approach
(from molecules to materials to devices) provide a varied training ground for
the education of undergraduate and graduate students, who learn to use modern
laser systems and to control (in wavelength and in time) short optical pulses,
while at the same time being exposed to chemistry on one side and engineering on
the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project aims at
advancing the understanding of fundamental nonlinear optical properties and how
they translate from molecules to the solid-state, and at creating flexible
organic nonlinear optical materials by vapor deposition of optimized molecules
into dense supramolecular assemblies with a high optical quality. The research
focuses on small molecules where donor-acceptor substitution leads to lower
excited state energies and higher third-order polarizabilities, and it exploits
the high molecular densities achieved in single-component assemblies to obtain
off-resonant third-order nonlinearities in the final bulk materials that are at
least three orders of magnitude larger than silica glass. The properties of the
molecules, the resulting evaporated materials, and their relationships are
studied with a range of nonlinear optical laser spectroscopy techniques and
thin-film characterization methods. Optimized molecular designs lead to
evaporated materials with a high, glass-like optical quality that can be
combined with existing integrated optics technologies, such as silicon
photonics, to add active components for applications such as all-optical
switching.