* 1408817
* Associating Structure and Rheology of Bacterial Polysaccharides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Solomon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 351,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to University of Michigan Ann Arbor is cofunded by the
Mechanics of Materials program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation (ENG). This research is to understand the fundamental
water-borne properties of polymers, and will impact the development of natural
and sustainable materials that use water as a solvent. The new knowledge about
aqueous polymer stability and flow will be useful in areas in which these
polymers are found or consumed. For example, aqueous polymers generally, and
bacterial polysaccharides in particular, are relevant to the proliferation and
control of bacterial biofilms in hospitals, in wastewater treatment plants, and
in industrial facilities. The stability, structure, and mechanics of bacterial
polysaccharides are also important for producing foods in which they are present
or added. The accompanying educational plan will advance the national interest
in STEM training by modeling the use of mentoring plans as a mechanism to
increase the probability of doctoral completion of all students. The project
researcher's engagement in a summer research experience program for
undergraduates will increase the participation of students from groups
underrepresented in science and engineering. The project's development of a new
module about polysaccharide food additives will engage middle school girls in
science and engineering, and thereby foster their interest in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Bacterial polysaccharides are
an important class of aqueous soluble polymer found in a range of natural
environments and industrial contexts. The chemical structure and properties of
bacterial polysaccharides are extremely diverse. Yet, the functional rheological
properties of these materials are broadly mediated by the interplay between the
bacterial polysaccharide's properties as a polymer and as an associating
species. At the same time, genetic engineering and chemical substitution make
bacterial polysaccharides useful polymers for fundamental study because of their
controllable charge, hydrogen bonding, and hydrophobicity. Thus, the connection
between the associative structure and rheology of all aqueous soluble polymers
can be better understood by fundamental study of bacterial polysaccharides. This
project will generate this new understanding through three research aims that
involve light scattering, microrheology, and constitutive modeling. This
research will be accompanied by an educational plan that involves graduate
student training and mentoring. The participation of the PI in a summer research
opportunities program and in outreach activities that engage middle school girls
in science and engineering is part of this award.