* 1408713
* Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Eduardo Fradkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 07/31/2018
* USD 465,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research aimed at understanding condensed matter systems involving many coupled
degrees of freedom whose behavior is governed by strong effects of quantum
mechanics, in particular strong interactions between electrons. Such
understanding could lead to the prediction of new states of matter with novel
properties as well as new materials with potentially useful applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular state of strongly interacting electrons
originally predicted by the PI and his collaborators emerges in the so-called
electronic liquid crystal phase, which is a quantum mechanical analogue of
molecules found in liquid crystal displays, sharing properties of both a solid
and a liquid. The PI will further investigate whether such phases can explain
the peculiar properties of materials known as high temperature superconductors.
At sufficiently low temperatures, electrons in superconductors enter a
cooperative quantum mechanical state that enables them to conduct electricity
without any resistance. High temperature superconductors are interesting because
they exhibit superconductivity at much higher temperatures than many other known
classes of superconductors. The PI's proposed state of matter may help explain
how this is possible and how materials that exhibit superconductivity at room
temperatures might be discovered. This could lead to virtually lossless
transmission of electric power and other energy-related applications. The other
focus of the research concerns the understanding of experiments seeking new
states of matter, in particular the so-called topological states, which are
predicted to have unusual properties that would enable computation based on the
laws of quantum mechanics. Such a computer could solve certain problems much
faster than any currently existing computer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
engages cutting edge problems in the physics of materials and provides excellent
opportunities to train the next generation of theoretical scientists. Research
and education will be further integrated through the development of advanced
curricular materials. It also opens new possibilities for future technologies
related to advanced solid-state materials for electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides support for research into the theory of condensed matter
systems involving many strongly coupled degrees of freedom whose behavior is
governed by strong effects of quantum mechanics. The electrons in such strongly
correlated systems organize spontaneously in electronic liquid crystal phases
and topological phases. An unavoidable feature of these phases is that they
naturally describe intertwined orders. The main projects focus on the theory of
intertwined orders in strongly correlated systems and on topological phases of
matter. Both lines of research require the development of new and transformative
theoretical insights and the use of methods and ideas of quantum field theory.
The particular topics that will be investigated include the relation between
electronic liquid crystal phases and high temperature superconductivity, quantum
coherence and interference phenomena in quantum Hall systems, quantum
entanglement and topological quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research engages cutting edge problems in the physics of materials and provides
excellent opportunities to train the next generation of theoretical scientists.
Research and education will be further integrated through the development of
advanced curricular materials. It also opens new possibilities for future
technologies related to advanced solid-state materials for electronic devices.