* 1408736
* RCN: Broader Impacts and Outreach Network for Institutional Collaboration (BIONIC)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Diane Rover, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2020
* USD 599,172.00

This project supports the Broader Impacts and Outreach Network for Institutional
Collaboration (BIONIC), a national Research Coordination Network of Broader
Impacts to support professionals who assist researchers to design, implement,
and evaluate the Broader Impacts activities for NSF proposals and awards. All
NSF proposals are evaluated not only on the Intellectual Merit of the proposed
research, but also on the Broader Impacts of the proposed work, such as societal
relevance, educational outreach, and community engagement. Many institutions
have begun employing Broader Impacts support professionals, but in most cases,
these individuals have not worked as a group to identify and share best
practices. As a consequence, there has been much duplication of effort. Through
coordination, BIONIC is expected to improve efficiency, reduce redundancy, and
have significant impact in several areas: 1) Researchers will benefit from an
increased understanding of the Broader Impacts merit review criterion and
increased access to collaborators who can help them design, implement, and
evaluate their Broader Impacts activities; 2) Institutions and research centers
will increase their capacity to support Broader Impacts via mentoring for
Broader Impacts professionals and consulting on how to build Broader Impacts
support infrastructure, with attention to inclusion of non-research-intensive
universities, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and Hispanic- and
Minority-Serving Institutions that may not have the resources to support an
institutional Broader Impacts office; and 3) NSF, itself, will benefit from a
systematic and consistent approach to Broader Impacts that will lead to better
fulfillment of the Broader Impacts criterion by researchers, better evaluation
of Broader Impacts activities by reviewers and program officers, and a system
for evaluating the effectiveness of Broader Impacts activities in the aggregate,
as mandated by Congress and the National Science Board. Through its many planned
activities, BIONIC will ultimately help advance the societal aims that the
Broader Impacts merit review criterion was meant to achieve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the project will be accomplished through
the four specific objectives: 1) Identify and curate promising models,
practices, and evaluation methods for the Broader Impacts community; 2) Expand
engagement in, and support the development of, high-quality Broader Impacts
activities by educating current and future faculty and researchers on effective
practices; 3) Develop the human resources necessary for sustained growth and
increased diversity of the Broader Impacts community; and 4) Promote cross-
institutional collaboration and dissemination for Broader Impacts programs,
practices, models, materials, and resources. BIONIC will facilitate
collaborative Broader Impacts work across institutions, help leverage previously
developed resources, support professional development, and train new colleagues
to enter into the Broader Impacts field. This project will improve the quality
and sustainability of Broader Impacts investments, as researchers continue to
create unique and effective activities that are curated and broadly
disseminated. BIONIC will create a network designed to assist NSF-funded
researchers at their institutions in achieving the goals of the Broader Impacts
Review Criterion. In so doing, BIONIC will promote Broader Impacts activities
locally, nationally, and internationally and help to advance the Broader Impacts
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Divisions of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and by the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences.