* 1408798
* CAREER:   Investigation and Redesign of Nonribosomal Peptide Synthetases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Sylvie Garneau-Tsodikova, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 593,537.00

Intellectual merit: The project involves an investigation and redesign of
biosynthetic pathways of known natural product biomolecules. The engineering of
such pathways is currently one of the most promising routes toward the
development and production of novel structurally diverse biologically active
molecules. Efficient combinatorial biosynthesis critically depends on
mechanistic information on enzymes involved in natural product formation.
Incompletely understood, intriguing, and even unique enzymes are found in the
gene cluster of the bisintercalator natural product thiocoraline. The project
uses in vitro reconstitution of the thiocoraline biosynthetic pathway,
predominantly through mutagenetic manipulation, mechanistic, and structural
characterization of individual enzymes, in working towards (i) gaining the
ability to manipulate the derivatization of the amino acid L-tryptophan for
future production of novel bisintercalators and thiopeptide antibiotics, (ii)
understanding the mechanism of stimulation of activity of adenylation domains
(integral components of nonribosomal peptide synthetase assembly-lines) by MbtH-
like proteins and the potential role of these enzymes in combinatorial
biosynthesis, (iii) gaining insight into the function of interrupted adenylation
domains, and (iv) developing novel adenylation domains with broad or altered
substrate specificity to extend the ability to manipulate nonribosomal peptide
synthetase assembly-lines for combinatorial synthesis. The research has the
potential to advance the understanding of the mechanism of unique enzymatic
transformations and is expected to contribute to the development of new tools
for engineering of natural biosynthetic pathways.

Broader impacts: Through the proposed activities of the project, students from
local high schools surrounding the University of Michigan, as well as
undergraduate and graduate students, will receive the hands-on experience of
modern research in the fields of biochemistry and structural biology. Through
the development of a freely accessible database on nonribosomal peptides,
polyketides, and their hybrids, undergraduate and PharmD students will be
introduced to research and will have the opportunity to raise their overall
scientific literacy. Finally, through a high school outreach program, high
school students will not only be introduced to modern and interdisciplinary
science, but also will be well informed on and provided with guidance for
planning a successful and rewarding scientific career. The goal is to establish
an integrated educational and research program to develop future scientists
interested in working at the interface of chemistry and biology and to spark and
foster the interest of students in science at different stages of their
education.