* 1408126
* GOALI:  Widely Tunable Gasb-Based Diode Lasers for Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Leon Shterengas, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 409,295.00

GOALI: Widely Tunable GaSb-based Diode Lasers for
Spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to address
the current industrial need for compact efficient mid-infrared laser sources for
spectroscopic applications. Diffraction limited GaSb-based diode lasers with
extra-broad gain spectra suitable for direct integration into external cavity
state-of-the-art spectroscopic systems developed by industrial collaborators at
DayLight Solutions will be designed and developed. The proposed device
applications include: gas leak monitoring in refineries and near the pipe lines,
methane control inside underground coal mines and others. The new devices can be
used for studies of chemical and radiation transfer processes in atmosphere,
control of greenhouse gasses, for studies of marine environments and planetary
research. There is significant commercial interest in tunable laser sources for
spectroscopic applications as envisioned by industrial partner. Novel lasers
will be utilized for development of the prototypes of the commercial products.
The testing of the fabricated devices will be performed with participation of
Stony Brook University students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
involve the design of a novel type of diode lasers with triple layer quantum
well active region with engineered subband structure. Devices emitting in
spectral region from 3.1 to 3.4 microns at room temperature will be sent to the
industrial collaborator to perform die-attach tests. The mounted devices will be
extensively characterized via optical measurements. Diode lasers with different
heterostructure designs for the active region based on triple layer quantum
wells having wide optical gain spectra will be fabricated and characterized.
Cascade pumping will be utilized to minimize threshold current to achieve room
temperature operation in the spectral region from 3 to 4 Âµm. The proposed
efforts will include the design and development of ultra-low-reflection optical
coatings optimized for antimonide-based heterostructures. The GaSb-based diode
laser technology will be available for spectroscopic applications in home
security and commercial sectors.