* 1408909
* Collaborative Research:  Developing a Constructive Logic-Based Theory of Value-Based Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Barry Boehm, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Systems engineering is the discipline responsible for assuring the overall
success of modern, often software-intensive, engineering projects. Success
ultimately hinges on the creation of value for all success-critical
stakeholders. Creating value requires understanding, specifying, managing,
validating, and evolving complex trade-offs across properties of systems, and
linking such properties to stakeholder value. Such properties include, for
instance, affordabilty, reliability, evolvability, safety, and confidentiality.
Today, however, major projects continue to go awry in large part due to a
failure to adequately specify and manage such properties and trade-offs. A core
problem is that many properties are defined and understood so imprecisely that
they cause miscommunication and confusion. A long history of attempts to use
natural and quasi-mathematical language to define such properties has not solved
this problem. This project aims to develop and evaluate the highly expressive
mathematical, logical, and computational language of constructive logic to
produce and validate precise models of system properties, trade-off spaces, and
linkages between such properties and stakeholder values. From such formal
language specifications, computer implementations of the models will be
automatically generated and provided as web services for application and testing
by systems engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal languages have the potential
to clarify and reveal conceptual errors in imprecise, ambiguous, incomplete, and
inconsistent natural language specifications. Type theoretical notations offer
high expressiveness based on higher-order logic, polymorphic types, and the
seamless integration of computational and propositional content, as well as the
ability to extract certified software from specifications. This project will
employ constructive logic to develop, test, and refine definitions and models of
system properties, trade-offs, and the mapping of trade-off spaces to
stakeholder preferences. This approach is novel in systems engineering, and
important gaps in knowledge remain. To fill them, the following research
problems will be addressed (1) determine how best to represent uncertainty in
type theoretic definitions of probabilistic system properties; (2) determine
appropriate mechanisms for structuring general property theories that can
reliably be specialized to specific projects; (3) develop and evaluate languages
and models of system properties, including evolvability properties, in
particular; (4) develop and evaluate formal frameworks linking system design,
property, and value spaces; (5) enable user communities to engage with such
theoretical constructs through web services. The project will develop and test
the hypothesis that theories based in constructive logic can help systems
engineers to reason better about system designs, properties, trade-offs, and
stakeholder value.