* 1408005
* Low Resonant Frequency Energy Scavenging Based on Bi-Stability Structure Dynamics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Berfield, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2018
* USD 332,757.00

Scavenging energy from structure vibrations is one highly promising method for
potentially replacing power sources used in many applications that have
traditionally used batteries. Many structures serve as natural vibration
sources, such as bridges swaying due to wind loads or pipelines vibrating due to
the oil flow within, which offer unique opportunities to generate energy. The
primary challenge for effective implementation is developing harvesting devices
that work optimally under the low frequency and somewhat random vibration
conditions typical of most ambient environments. This project will explore the
nonlinear response of buckled beam structures as a means to enhance power output
under these chaotic, low frequency conditions. Bi-stable systems, such as
buckled beams, naturally have two stable states and a nonlinear dynamic
response, which has been previously shown to be ideal for irregular loading
scenarios. This work seeks to improve energy harvesting efficiency under these
conditions by investigating the behavior dictating switching between the stable
buckled states for the unique proposed energy harvester design. Microscale
versions of this device targeted for wireless sensor power applications will be
probed through experiments and finite element analysis simulations. The research
performed will help introduce a new class of energy harvesting devices, and will
be supplemented with collaborations within the local community via the public
library summer reading program and a local high school research experience
outreach program. The research outcomes achieved through this work and core
insights will be widely disseminated through the traditional means of
publications, conferences, and workshops. Educational outreach plans will serve
underrepresented groups K-12 students and the general public through a community
engagement partnership the PI has created with the Louisville Free Public
Library. This arrangement will help teach key engineering concepts and promote
direct interaction between the PI and the larger community via several science-
based activities arranged in conjunction with the library's summer reading
program. In addition, the PI has solidified a relationship with a local high
school science department chair to engage students on engineering topics, and
recruit a diverse student group for summer research experiences working in the
energy harvesting area.

The objective of this research is to improve the real-world power scavenging
capabilities of MEMS-scale energy harvesters through a system optimally designed
for ambient vibration levels (<40 Hz) with chaotic impulse characteristics. This
challenge is approached through an investigation of the system dynamics of an
energy harvesting design featuring buckled beam stability state switching.
Finite element modeling of structure deformations and the associated power
production will be performed, with experimental testing of devices used for
validation of optimized performance parameters. The focus of this project is on
the nonlinear dynamic response of bi-stable buckled structures, which is
leveraged to optimize strain/power generation within integrated piezoelectric
over a broad spectrum of excitation frequencies. The proposed class of buckled
structure MEMS work in a fundamentally different way than other bi-stable MEMS
energy harvesters, creating large deformations by manipulating the constraint
conditions of the structure to induce switching. The approach of using switching
between buckling stability states allows for a system response that naturally is
adaptive to the vibration intensity. The design used herein is unique amongst
other bi-stable buckled structures, in that very low resonant frequency ranges
can be targeted. Multi-node design iterations based on the same operating
principle offers a potential new class of MEMS energy harvesting devices, while
electro-mechanical relationships developed to describe the power generation from
buckled beam stability switching will be of interest to the broader energy
harvesting field. Of particular interest to the energy harvesting community will
be the development of power generation models describing strains during
stability state switching.