* 1408052
* Greater Philadelphia Region Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP) Initiative (Senior -Level Alliance)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2020
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 12/31/2020
* USD 3,693,580.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Greater
Philadelphia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, under the
leadership of Drexel University, is a senior-level alliance consisting of the
following public and private institutions:

Four-Year Institutions

Drexel University Cheyney University Delaware State University Lincoln
University New Jersey Institute of Technology Temple University University of
Delaware University of Pennsylvania

Two-Year Institution

Community College of Philadelphia

The alliance represents a diverse alliance of public and private, two and four
year, research and non-research, and minority-serving institutions. . The
alliance has established a firm foundation for the objectives of the 2014-2019
project activities as a senior-level Alliance with specific attention to: 1)
further enhancing inter-institutional connectivity, 2) expanding the coordinated
movement of community college students to 4-year institutions, 3) increasing the
engagement of undergraduate students in national and international research
experiences, as well as graduate school matriculation to continually increase
retention and completion of STEM baccalaureate degrees and improve STEM student
competitiveness for graduate programs in STEM fields.

Broader impacts will include enhancing partnerships, research collaborations,
and articulation strategies between community colleges, minority-serving and
Ph.D. granting universities, within the alliance and beyond and enhancing the
integration of research and education. Internal assessment and external
evaluation of the project will attempt to measure program effectiveness by
answering questions such as: (1) how have retention rates and academic
performance data changed during the course of the project? (2) how has
connectivity with the community colleges changed during the project? (3) what
has been the impact of graduate school preparation on students? readiness to
engage in graduate studies? (4) in what ways has the project impacted inter-
institutional cooperation and collaboration?