* 1408173
* Dynamic behavioral and neural effects of cognitive control on language processing
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Jared Novick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 0.00

As people navigate their world, they sometimes face conflicting sources of
information due to new rules, cues, or plans of action. In memory, for instance,
the presence of familiar but irrelevant information can interfere with a
person's ability to recognize an object correctly. While processing language,
evidence from discrepant sources of input can result in misinterpretation. In
these situations, cognitive control allows people to adjust thoughts and actions
on-the-fly to mediate conflicting representations in both linguistic and
nonlinguistic contexts. Yet, little is known about whether engaging cognitive
control on one task influences or causes performance shifts on another. For
example, is the ability to revise incorrect interpretations during language
processing affected by prior experience of information-conflict, even in a
nonlinguistic context? This project is designed to understand the interplay
among multiple cognitive systems, whether the same cognitive control functions
operate systematically across conflict in different domains, and to characterize
the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms that underlie their interaction.
Specifically, this research investigates the causal relationship between
cognitive control and language processing. To understand meaning and intent,
people must be able to efficiently process spoken and written language input.
Developing and honing these abilities takes considerable practice, especially
when reading and listening to language also means dealing with conflicting
sources of information. Such information-conflict can hinder a person's ability
to make sense of complex material, which can lead to high rates of
interpretation error. The work validates, informs, and improves prior training
work through rigorous assessment of the underlying causal neurobiological
mechanisms. Additionally, the Fellow is fully committed to STEM education and
training in cognitive neuroscience. These experiments provide training
opportunities for the Fellow and members of her research team. Results are
disseminated to target audiences and submitted to academic conferences and
journals. Moreover, as a woman, the Fellow has been involved in STEM outreach to
underrepresented local groups. In this way, she hopes to increase interest in
STEM fields, encouraging diverse and underrepresented groups to engage in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes important
contributions to understanding the human computational system that supports the
real-time interpretation and re-interpretation of sentences. The experiments
adopt converging eye-tracking and neuroimaging techniques to address a central
issue in cognitive science: how language processing is affected by the
engagement status of the cognitive control system. These studies represent the
first methodical investigation into how nonlinguistic factors shape the time-
course of language comprehension in both brain and behavior. Because cognitive
control deficits affect patients' memory and language skills alike, elucidating
the dynamic interplay between these cognitive systems has major health
implications. The results from this research inform an understanding of shared
language, memory, and cognitive control functions in the human mind and brain,
which can be applied to public knowledge about how various cognitive systems
develop typically and atypically, and how they fail following injury to the
underlying neurobiological structures. As a result, the PI-team can draw
conclusions about the causal nature of certain language and memory processes,
which can be disseminated to and used in clinical, educational, and government
settings. The first study tests how dynamic cognitive control engagement
(turning it on or off depending on previous exposure to conflict in a
nonlinguistic task) affects real-time language processing, indexed by fine-
grained eye-movement patterns to objects in a scene as listeners carry out
spoken instructions. Study 2 takes a neurobiological approach to examine
cortical changes during language processing depending on whether cognitive
control has been triggered by preceding experience. Study 3 investigates the
extent to which ostensibly different memory and language tasks share a common
conflict-control mind state by testing whether machine-learning algorithms can
accurately classify brain-activation patterns broadly across domains. By pairing
eye-tracking and fMRI techniques, this work offers converging evidence for a
general-purpose cognitive control system whose deployment can shape how a person
interprets language and how specified brain systems respond to linguistic input
that is ripe for misanalysis.