* 1408344
* GOALI: Environmentally-Benign Lead-Free Piezoelectric Films  for Flexible High Strain Transducers and Actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Angus Kingon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,999.00

Environmentally-Benign Lead-Free Piezoelectric Films&lt;br/&gt;for Flexible High
Strain Transducers and Actuators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
Sensors and actuators play a critical role in modern life, where they are
seamlessly integrated into systems such as automobiles, homes, cameras, sonar,
printers, medical imaging and diagnostics, smart wearable devices, electronic
system controls, and so on. The dominant piezoelectric material system used for
most of these applications is the lead zirconate titanate (PZT) system, due to
the high electromechanical conversion efficiencies that can be achieved.
However, the toxicity of lead (Pb), however, has led to global efforts to
identify a replacement system. This project takes a novel approach to actuator
materials, design and fabrication, and provides a demonstration of high strain
lead-free actuators with robust device structures. It will provide fundamental
understanding of the lead-free transducer materials operating at high strains.
The project also demonstrates that greater functionality can be built into
flexible electronics for wearable devices and mobile applications. The project
will be a demanding research training vehicle, as it demands both research depth
and breadth, and covers multidisciplinary topics ranging from fundamental
properties of environmentally friendly ferroelectric and piezoelectric
materials, processing, device structure and integration, and design elements of
flexible electronic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Traditionally a small-signal piezoelectric coefficient (d33) value has been used
to compare different piezoelectric materials. However, for the actuator
applications the achievable strain Smax at the applied electric field Emax is
the key figure of merit and their ratio Smax/Emax (normalized strain, large-
signal d33, or d33*) is the quantity of interest. The difference between the two
is very important and has to be carefully addressed; in traditional "soft" PZT
small signal and large signal strain responses can differ by a factor of &gt;2
due to different contributions to the response. The basic understanding of the
piezoelectric behavior of the PZT materials is relatively well developed.
However, it is becoming increasingly clear that the non-lead based materials
display rather different behavior in terms of microscopic contributions to
polarization and strain, switching mechanisms, domain behavior, extrinsic
contributions, etc. In addition, the high-field high-strain properties of the
lead-free piezoelectric materials, critical for high strain actuators, are only
at very early stages of research, as most of the research has been focused on
small signal properties of the lead-free materials. The Xerox-Brown
collaborative project for high-field-high-strain properties and fundamental
investigation of their origin on these materials will provide critical support
and understanding for the collaboration that is focused on developing high
strain lead-free actuators. The collaboration will build upon Brown University
innovations in processing and devices and Xerox experience in high strain
piezoelectric actuators and modeling capability. This project lies in the use of
the emerging collective understanding of the behavior of environmentally-benign
non-lead based piezoelectric materials and applying this understanding to a new
process method that we are developing for multi-functional high strain actuators
using flexible metal foil substrates. In doing so, we will develop an improved
understanding of the property-control parameters of the piezoelectric actuators,
and an understanding of the mechanisms of high-field high-strain effects and the
possible performance-limiting degradation of high quality piezoelectric devices,
including but not limited to high strain sensors and actuators. The research
will provide guidance and a platform for the innovative processing of emerging
environmentally benign piezoelectric materials and devices with high
performance, and will deliver design concepts for a new class of flexible
piezoelectric sensors and actuators that could be integrated with other flexible
electronics.