* 1408202
* Microelectronically Stimulating and Actuating Nanofibers for Muscle Replacement and Regeneration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Joseph Freeman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 327,955.00

Currently there is no ideal restoration method for large volume skeletal muscle
loss. Previously investigated solutions include autologous muscle transplants
and the use of various cell sources (exogenous myogenic cells, satellite cells,
and myoblasts). While these techniques have had some success, they also have
drawbacks. Autologous transplantation, for example, leads to morbidity, loss of
function, decreased volume at the donor site, and limited effectiveness when
transplanted. These problems have made tissue engineering a more popular
approach for muscle regeneration. Skeletal muscle cells have been grown on
numerous materials including natural substrates, synthetic polymers, and
decellularized tissue. These options all develop new muscle, but they do not
provide functionality (contraction for movement) until the tissue is
regenerated. The system presented here is designed to contract upon implantation
to give the patient immediate function as new tissue develops. The proposed
project will investigate the potential of combining polymeric, actuating
nanofibers with implantable microelectronic stimulators to form contractile
scaffolds for skeletal muscle tissue engineering. The nanofibers are designed to
behave as ionic polymeric composites that will actuate when placed inside an
electric field. As ionic polymeric composites bend, the components of each
nanofiber will be arranged to convert bending along the nanofiber length into
contraction. Previous work has shown that muscle cell growth and tissue
development increase when the muscle cells are stimulated mechanically (through
strain) and electrically. The proposed system will take advantage of these
phenomena by using the scaffold contraction caused by the electrical stimulation
to stimulate the growth and development of muscle cells and new
muscle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electric field that causes the contraction will
be induced by an implantable multi-level programmable voltage regulator. The
microchip is designed to generate different voltage levels, giving the user the
freedom to control the degree of scaffold contraction. The power required for
the operation of the microchip will be provided through a wireless link. In
addition, the required voltage level can be adjusted remotely. The potential and
applicability of the system will be evaluated in vitro and in vivo by its
ability to functionally replace and regenerate muscle tissue. The proposed
system will be created through completion of the following objectives: Refining
nanowire composition-polymer concentration and nanoparticle concentration and
evaluating scaffold tissue regenerative capability in vitro; Developing a
highly-integrated subcutaneous microchip for the electrical stimulation of
nanofibers; Integrating the nanowire scaffold and the stimulation microchip; and
Investigating the in vivo capability of the scaffolds to promote tissue healing.
The scaffold will be investigated for contractility (strength, speed, degree of
contraction). The scaffold will also be investigated for biocompatibility and
regenerative ability with both skeletal muscle cells (for muscle regeneration)
and vascular cells (for potential vascularization). These tests will be
conducted both with and without electrical stimulation. A highly-integrated low
power controllable multi-level voltage regulator will be developed using low-
drop out topology. The chip will contain a carefully designed induction link
that will enable the implantable microsystem to be powered and controlled
wirelessly. The chip will be packaged to ensure its biocompatibility. The
scaffold and stimulatory microchip will be integrated by sintering (bonding by
heating) nanofibers to the wires and around the wires. The complete integrated
electric stimulator-actuating scaffold device will be evaluated in vivo in a
muscle pocket model. The creation of a wireless, electrically stimulated,
contractile scaffold for muscle regeneration will enable the application of
ionic polymeric composites for tissue engineering. The proposed system will also
enhance the microelectronics field by developing biocompatible low power
circuits that can operate reliably in biological media.