* 1408151
* Development of Chiral Charge Density Wave Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Goran Karapetrov, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
properties of chiral charge density wave systems and create new electronic
devices exploiting unique advantages of the chiral state of the collective
charge system. Understanding the nature of chiral charge density wave and
learning how to manipulate chiral charge domains will be transformative to the
condensed matter physics and it will open the doors to devices based on
collective electron excitations. The main advantage of using collective charge
systems for electronics is lower power dissipation at high device densities. The
fundamental studies will involve both macroscopic and atomic scale
investigations of the chiral charge density wave states in carefully engineered
two-dimensional materials. The program will provide students and young
researchers with necessary tools to carry out modern fundamental research in the
fields of materials science, condensed matter physics and electronic device
engineering. Since the designed research activities are highly
interdisciplinary, the students will be stimulated to take classes across
disciplines, such as nanoscience, electron and scanning probe microscopy and
nanofabrication. The plan is to broaden participation and appreciation of
students through (a) incorporating elements of the research in existing
nanoscience, nano-electronics and solid-state physics courses at both the
undergraduate and graduate level; (b) train students to use state of the art
fabrication and characterization tools and (c) expose the students to research
enterprise and collaborative research across different organizations. This work
should lead to training a PhD student and several undergraduate students.
Outreach to local area high schools through senior thesis work experience and
science research clubs as well as College's open houses are part of the
overreaching strategy to prepare high school students to pursue science and
engineering degrees.

Chirality breaks down the spatial inversion symmetry and results in unexpected
new electronic properties, in particular in systems with reduced dimensionality.
In many cases the electronic chirality is facilitated by the specific structure
of the system in which it emerges, either on atomic scale or on mesoscopic
scale. Recently, it was discovered that one of the well-studied macroscopically
correlated electronic state, the charge density wave, also exhibits chiral
properties. This proposal explores the opportunity to use the nanometer-size
domains of opposite chirality that are separated with domain walls as basic
elements for memory and logic units. The goal of the research is to gain a
fundamental understanding of the nature of the coupling of the chiral charge
density waves with external perturbations, such as light, quasi static electric
and magnetic fields with the aim of actively controlling and measuring the
chiral state of individual charge density wave domains. Successful manipulation
and read-out of the chiral state of individual several nanometer-size domains
would enable utilization of the chiral charge systems in information storage and
processing. To achieve this goal the investigators will synthesize single
crystals of chiral charge density wave materials, conduct local scanning probe
characterization as well as bulk characterization on both single crystal and
exfoliated few layer crystals of dichalcogenides. Scanning tunneling microscopy
on few-layer single crystals as well as coupling the light to the scanning
tunneling microscopy junction will play important role in identifying practical
regimes for chiral domain manipulation. The use of collective chiral states in
electronic devices could dramatically extend the current down-scaling limit of
complementary metal-oxide semiconductors that is set by the level of power
dissipation in incoherent electron based devices. The fundamental studies will
involve both macroscopic and atomic scale investigations of the chiral charge
density wave states in carefully engineered two-dimensional materials, thus
clearly exposing the complex mesoscopic physics that couples excitonic and
charge density wave correlations