* 1408855
* Chain Folding and Unfolding Strucutres of Semicrystalline Polymers Elucidated by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Toshikazu Miyoshi, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,294.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many commercial plastics are made of
"semicrystalline polymers", i.e. long-chain molecules that have the ability to
crystallize when processed industrially. They play important roles in our daily
lives due to excellent mechanical and thermal properties, lightness, and easy
low-cost fabrication. Thus, various semicrystalline polymers are used in a wide
variety of applications including packaging, textiles, automobile, airplane
parts, energy, biocompatible materials, and so on. To further improve properties
of semicrystalline polymers, understanding of their detailed structure in the
solid state is necessary, but, despite many efforts over the last half century,
the three-dimensional molecular structures of the polymer chains are still not
well understood. This project focuses on fundamental understanding of molecular-
level structures of semicrystalline polymers in samples crystallized and
processed in various ways, and may lead to predictions of improved properties
for commercially available polymeric materials. The PI will be using novel
specialized spectroscopic techniques to probe and understand the shapes of
individual polymer molecules in the solid-state samples. This project will also
include advanced scientific training of graduate and undergraduate students.
They will experience a wide range of polymer research covering polymer
synthesis, crystallization, deformation, advanced characterizations, and
simulations. The research results will be reported in scientific journals and
presented by the researcher and students at national scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer crystallization involves conformational
changes from random coils in the melt and solution states, to folded chains in
the bulk and in single crystals with a typical thickness of ca. 5-20 nm. The
crystallization of polymers driven by kinetics yields unique features in terms
of crystal habits, lamellae thickness, and crystallinity, among other features.
Various characterization tools have been developed to reveal hierarchical
crystalline structures. Nevertheless, the understanding of the molecular-level
conformations remains challenging due to limitations of experimental
resolutions. The PI will employ a novel approach of 13C-13C double quantum (DQ)
NMR combined with selective isotopic 13C labeling to elucidate re-entrance sites
of folded chains, successive folding numbers, and adjacent re-entry fractions of
semicrystalline polymers, including polyethylene, isotactic polypropylene,
isotactic poly(1-butene), and poly(lactic acid) in the bulk and in single
crystals as a function of undercooling from the melt. This work is aimed at
providing detailed molecular pictures of semicrystalline polymers during
crystallization as well as under deformation, in relation also to computer
simulation results, and will enhance our theoretical understanding of the
crystallization of polymeric materials.