* 1408416
* High Conductivity Tunnel Junctions for Next-Generation UV Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Siddharth Rajan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 388,787.00

Ultra violet light sources can greatly impact health and well-being by enabling
rapid water purification, biological sensing. However, the light sources
available today are too costly, bulky, and inefficient for widespread adoption.
Semiconductor based ultra-violet sources can in theory overcome these challenges
and enable compact and efficient ultra-violet sources, but they face some
fundamental challenges. Ultra-violet light sources are based on wide band gap
semiconductors, and these semiconductors have very poor conductivity of positive
charge carriers (holes). The poor conductivity of these holes has been a
challenge for the last several decades, leading to poor efficiency and low power
in solid state emitters. The proposed project will circumvent this problem
through the use of quantum mechanical tunneling that allows positively charged
carriers to be injected. The research proposed is expected to enable a new class
of compact, efficient, and bright ultra-violet light sources that would find
direct applications in water treatment plants, disease prevention, and many
other critical applications. The investigator will develop touch sensitive
applications (apps) for learning and teaching semiconductor device physics, with
an emphasis on intuitive and visual learning of concepts. In addition, the
investigator will continue outreach activities by engaging high school students
and undergraduates in research projects, as well as by promoting international
exchange and experiences. In the proposed work, a transformative new design is
proposed for ultra violet light emitting diodes where non-equilibrium tunneling
transport is used to inject holes into the active region of the light emitting
diode. Short wavelength ultra-violet emitters (<350 nm) have low efficiency due
to the unique challenges presented by wide band gap materials such as AlGaN.
Hole doping and transport remain one of the main challenges for AlGaN-based
ultra-violet emitters and account for a large portion of the losses. High
acceptor ionization energy leads to low hole concentration and high resistivity,
as well as imbalance between electron and hole injection, leading to electron
overflow. The challenges of making p-contact necessitate absorbing p-type GaN
contact layers that lead to further losses. Tunneling injection of holes removes
constraints due to thermal ionization, enhances hole injection, thereby
increasing the injection efficiency. Advanced modeling and growth techniques
will be used to design and demonstrate highly efficient tunneling for the first
time in ultra-wide band gap AlGaN materials. Tunnel junctions will be integrated
with ultra-violet emitters to show the efficacy of tunneling injection, and to
enable devices without any p-contacts. The proposed experimental work will be
supported by detailed theory and simulation to verify and predict device
operation, and will lead to detailed understanding of tunneling transport in the
III-nitride system. The ideas proposed on nanometer scale engineering of
tunneling transport and non-equilibrium carrier injection will lead to higher
efficiency and new design paradigms for III-nitride ultra-violet emitters, and
could also be relevant for bipolar devices based on several other wide band gap
semiconductors.