* 1408785
* Organization and Dynamics in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers and Model Membrane Architectures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,431,164.00

The photosynthetic reaction center is a remarkable machine that absorbs light
and transfers electrons across a biological membrane. Membranes are very thin
insulators so this process is similar to charging a capacitor. Once charged, the
capacitor discharges by driving the biosynthesis of stable energetic molecules
or fuels. All life on earth depends on this process. This research program will
continue to support the development of a generation of young scientists with
diverse backgrounds, primarily graduate students, who go on to productive
careers at the interface of the physical sciences and biology, biotechnology,
and energy-related science. In addition to scientific publications, the results
of this work are presented in many invited talks that reach out to diverse
communities from the high-school level to government agencies looking to future
directions in nanoscience, biotechnology and energy-related science.
Photosynthesis is a topic of deep interest to a wide community of scientists and
engineers as well as to the general public. This work provides the basis for the
development of new courses both for college freshman and graduating seniors
stressing the importance of critical reading using current frontiers and
controversies in biophysics firmly grounded in the physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to better understand
the mechanisms by which photosynthetic reaction centers harvest and store solar
energy, and to develop model membrane assemblies that mimic natural biological
membranes and their interactions. This research will focus on understanding how
the organized environment in proteins modulates the spectroscopic and redox
properties of bound prosthetic groups like chlorophylls and quinones and on the
mechanism of the initial light-driven reactions. A significant part of this work
involves the development of new experimental and theoretical methods that will
have a broad impact in other areas of science and technology. Stimulated by
studies of this important integral membrane protein, novel membrane assemblies
will be developed to create defined architectures for the organization of any
membrane protein. Membrane proteins serve as gatekeepers for the otherwise
impervious membranes that surround cells and internal organelles. They are also
the primary contact between cells. These proteins are difficult to work with and
characterize in their native environment, and this research will create new ways
to study their function by designing architectures that are compatible with
sophisticated optical and electrical detection methods. Thus, the two objectives
are deeply connected as different aspects of membrane biophysics.