* 1408795
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Nutritional Goals and Nutrient Prioritization across Variant Habitats in an Omnivorous Primate
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2016
* USD 7,718.00

Environmental context is a core aspect in the shaping of diet and dietary
behavior in animals, including humans, but the linkages between habitat
variation and prioritization of particular macronutrients in diet is not well
understood. This lack of knowledge regarding how habitat shapes macronutrient
management behavior is characteristic of modern dietary behavior, as well as
from an evolutionary perspective. In humans, evidence has been found for protein
prioritization, whereby individuals allow fluctuation of other nutrients around
a fixed protein level. Termed 'protein leverage,' this pattern of nutrient
balancing has been implicated as a causal factor in the modern obesity epidemic,
whereby humans will over-consume energy to meet their protein needs. This aspect
of human dietary behavior is hypothesized to have arisen from human evolutionary
history in the context of a savanna environment, one in which available foods
are proportionally high in protein, but limited in fats and carbohydrates. In
order to fully understand how habitat and seasonality may have influenced diet
priorities in human ancestry which persist in the modern context, this
dissertation project will utilize a primate model, wild baboons, which, like
humans, are known for their omnivorous diet and their ecological and dietary
flexibility. By comparing these primates across varying habitats and seasonal
fluctuations in available food items with variant macronutrient composition, the
research will assess how diet may be shaped by environmental context, including
how habitat may have shaped human dietary priorities over evolutionary
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of how differences in habitat
shape diet and nutritional priorities will be based on comparative data on the
nutritional priorities of female Papio anubis in two different habitats, a
forest in Uganda and a savanna environment in Kenya. The research will be
conducted by a female doctoral student, Caley Johnson, under the supervision of
Dr. Jessica Rothman, City University of New York. Individual nutritional intake
data will be assessed in the context of seasonal shifts in the availability and
abundance of food, and will employ the Geometric Framework of Nutrition (GF).
The GF is a multidimensional analytical approach which has application to
research investigating nutritional ecology, including determination of dietary
prioritization of nutrients and balancing of macronutrients across species and
within species occupying variant habitats. The fieldwork will encompass 12
months of data collection in Kibale National Park, Uganda, and 6 months in
Laikipia, Kenya, across wet and dry seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
elucidating the environmental conditions that shape diet and nutrient priorities
in omnivorous primates such as humans, this project also will broaden its impact
in various directions. The data will find additional value added in pairing with
stable isotope data collected for the same areas; this will improve
interpretation of stable isotope paleodietary analysis of East African fossil
hominins and papionins (early human and baboon ancestors). The enhancement of
understanding of baboon ecology in forested environments will generate a unique
synthesis of nutrition, ecology, and primate behavior that will promote insights
into intraspecific variation in behavior and ecology. As the research is
international in scope, there will be fostering of scientific collaborations of
US universities and students with African universities and institutions,
promoting education and enhancing research capacity.