* 1408211
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Systematic Multiscale Modeling using the Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (KIM)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2018
* USD 997,401.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports OPENKIM which
supports the community of researchers using computer simulations of atoms based
on Newton's Laws to attack materials science, chemistry, engineering, and
physics problems enabling the discovery of new materials, the design of new
devices, the understanding of biochemical processes and much more. Atomistic
simulations play a key role in realistic scientific, engineering, and industrial
applications. These simulations increasingly use fitted interatomic models
(IMs), mathematical prescriptions that describe the forces acting on atoms when
they interact, to predict the properties of materials, the way they respond to
external stresses, and to design innovative nanostructures, tiny structures of
atoms some 100,000 times smaller than a human hair. In the past the potential of
atomistic simulations of this kind has been limited by several factors: (1) the
lack of a standardized application programing interface has made it difficult to
transfer IMs from one simulation program to another; (2) the lack of a curated
electronic repository for storing and exchanging computer implementations of IMs
has made it difficult to reproduce published results; (3) the lack of tools for
comparing the accuracy of IMs made it difficult to use IMs with confidence in
new applications. These limitations have been addressed by the creation of the
Open Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (OpenKIM), a collaborative online
materials project to rationalize, standardize, and characterize IMs. This award
supports OpenKIM as it goes forward in important ways that will facilitate
scientific and engineering progress in fields from growing electronic circuits
to airplane manufacture. It will make sharp evaluations and comparisons between
rival IMs and simulation methods, allowing computational researchers to rapidly
explore alternative published IMs or develop and validate new ones for their
use. It will also facilitate replication of results in scientific simulations.
This project will extend OpenKIM in order to draw the computational chemistry
and molecular biology communities into this materials endeavor, facilitating
communication between two communities with common goals and interests but
hitherto divided by language, units, and computational conventions. Students and
post-docs in the group have the opportunity of collaborating with an
international, interdisciplinary group of well-known scientists and engineers on
a cross-section of challenging scientific problems, such as the role of defects
in determining properties of materials and the effect of unsatisfied chemical
bonds in electronic device operation. By lowering the barriers to entry into
computational materials science, OpenKIM is facilitating the entry of
underrepresented groups and those from developing nations into this
technologically and scientifically central
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports OpenKIM, a collaborative online
materials project to rationalize, standardize, and characterize interatomic
models (IMs) used to represent energies and forces between atoms in materials
simulations. This project is aimed to support, extend, and leverage OpenKIM to
do science. The Principal Investigators will blend the wisdom and experience of
the materials community with advanced methods from machine learning, data
mining, and information geometry to radically simplify and make more rigorous
the field of atomistic simulations of materials. OpenKIM represents an unusual
opportunity to answer fundamental scientific questions. With full and open
access, the PIs anticipate many researchers will use the rich OpenKIM Repository
to address scientific and methodological questions of the field. The PIs will
support these activities by incorporating new IMs, reference data, and tests, by
extending the KIM standard to support long-range electrostatic fields, Monte
Carlo, and biomolecular bonded force fields, and by continuing to provide
documentation, talks, workshops, and tutorials on KIM. To further the KIM
mission, the PIs will address two broad and fascinating issues of critical
importance to successful sequential multiscale modeling: (1) What key features
does an IM need to reproduce in order to accurately model phenomenon X at a
continuum scale? The project will provide tools to answer this question, by (a)
developing functional forms for anisotropic materials properties to encapsulate
the behavior of known defects and interfaces which are properties already
identified as vital for continuum simulation of microstructure evolution, and
(b) using manifold-learning methods gleaned from information geometry theory,
which applies the techniques of differential geometry to the field of
probability theory, to find empirical heuristics or rules that provide insight
into the higher scale behavior of a class of IMs, and insight on the real world.
(2) How reliable will a given IM be for a given application X? The PIs will
address this component of uncertainty quantification, also called IM
transferability, by (a) using machine-learning techniques to identify key
interatomic configurations which strongly correlate with important continuum
scale materials properties and using statistical methods to estimate IM
uncertainties for these configurations, and (b) using the large uncertainties in
IM fitted parameters to provide Bayesian information geometry estimates for the
systematic errors in IM predictions.