* 1408652
* The dynamics of updating and transmitting individual and collective memories
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Jordan Suchow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 172,425.00

Memory and culture form the foundation of human knowledge. The accumulation of
knowledge across generations drives scientific progress, technological
advancement, and the maintenance of societies through shared social norms.
Understanding the fundamental cognitive processes that shape memory and cultural
transmission has traditionally fallen within the purview of psychologists and
anthropologists. However, advances in fields beyond the social sciences,
including statistics, machine learning, evolutionary dynamics, and network
science offer a rich set of computational techniques for describing information
transfer in individuals and groups that can be fruitfully applied to understand
memory maintenance and cultural transmission. The proposed project, if
successul, will create a software platform for running experiments on personal
and cultural memory online, thereby enabling others to conduct their own
experiments using these paradigms. Additionally, the public looks toward memory
research with the hope that it will one day provide techniques to help them
remember more. Better understanding the processes that affect maintenance of
personal and collective memories will reveal the conditions under which memories
and cultural innovations are best maintained and possible techniques for
improving them. Any progress towards this goal would provide a major benefit to
society. Planned dissemination of the results of the proposed project are aimed
at increasing public understanding of science through visualization of cultural
memory dynamics. The Fellow has a history of public engagement and activities
supporting inclusion and broadening participation, and continues to be engaged
in these activities.

The goal of the proposed project is to construct computational models that
capture the cognitive dynamics of memory and culture, with the ultimate goal of
understanding (and eventually controlling and improving) the processes that
shape them. The proposed project uses behavioral experiments, simulations, and
analytic calculations to determine the cognitive dynamics of personal and
cultural memory in three settings. Objective 1 considers the dynamics of
updating in short-term memory. Objective 2 considers the dynamics of updating
culturally-transmitted knowledge when individuals have varying amounts of
information about the social context in which they are placed. Objective 3
considers the dynamics of learning in cultural memory, exploring whether
individuals can adjust their own behavior to better sustain memories in a group.
Each objective makes connections between cognitive processes and formal tools
from machine learning, evolutionary dynamics, and network science.