* 1408456
* A new method for fabricating low-cost, high-performance waveguides, lasers and modulators in photonic integrated circuits for optical communication networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Douglas Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 383,000.00

Title: A new method for fabricating low-cost, high-performance waveguides,
lasers and modulators in photonic integrated circuits for optical communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of multiple lightwave devices
such as lasers and optical modulators into a complex, highly functional
configuration on a single chip, known as a photonic integrated circuit (PIC),
can dramatically reduce the cost of high-speed optical networking systems
supporting the internet and telecommunications, akin to advances in electronics
and computing offered by silicon integrated circuits. However, current
integration technologies require expensive crystal regrowth processes, face
fundamental speed limitations due to the physical properties of the materials
now in use, and use electron beam lithography methods (not scalable to mass
manufacturing) in order to achieve the small waveguide dimensions needed for
optimal performance. This project supports research on a new low-cost waveguide
fabrication method that addresses each of these current shortfalls which
promises to significantly enhance the integration level and performance of
modulators and lasers for the advanced photonic integrated circuits of the
future. Such PICs will enable lower cost optical communications systems and
increase the deployment of broadband internet to underserved population
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research are to develop a
unique, new selective waveguide core oxidation process for the AlInGaAs/InP
material system used for telecommunication-wavelength photonic devices. A novel
oxygen-enhanced wet thermal oxidation process will be optimized for this new
material system and the benefits of the resulting low-refractive-index, low
dielectric-constant, insulating, interface-passivating, and roughness-smoothing
buried oxide layer fully exploited for the fabrication of high-speed electro-
absorption modulator (EAM) and laser devices. The process allows the overall
waveguide core width to be reduced to single-mode dimensions without the need
for e-beam lithography. The low dielectric constant offers reduced parasitic
capacitance and strong optical confinement without incurring increased contact
resistance, thus reducing the overall RC time constant to achieve high
modulation speed devices. The oxide promises to simultaneously dramatically
reduce interface roughness and waveguide scattering loss and remediate dry-etch
ion damage. The resulting high-index-contrast waveguide structure enables InP-
based 1.3 and 1.55 micron telecomm wavelength devices with stable optical
spatial mode confinement that can be aggressively curved with low bend loss for
optical signal routing and on-chip lasers suitable for densely-packed photonic
integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods to be used include
optimization of oxidation system gas flow dynamics to enhance process control
and oxide uniformity; characterization and optimization of oxide insulating
properties, refractive index, and thermal conductivity; time-resolved
photoluminescence to characterize oxide-semiconductor interface quality;
precision angle polishing and focused ion beam milling for inspection of buried-
oxide interface roughness; and swept-laser Fabry-Perot transmission resonance
waveguide loss measurements. Three targeted oxide-confined AlInGaAs/InP device
applications will be explored in collaboration with the Tyndall National
Institute in Cork, Ireland: high-speed traveling-wave electro-absorption
modulators; high-speed directly-modulated lasers; and compact, curved-resonator
on-chip integrated lasers exploiting the low-bend loss properties of the
proposed unique oxide-confined waveguiding structure.