* 1408172
* Spin Orbitronics: Interfacial Design of Spintronic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Geoffrey Beach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The remarkable advances in computing and communications technologies in recent
decades have been based on conventional electronics whose fundamental limits are
rapidly being approached. In order to meet the demands for future low-power,
high-performance memory and logic devices, new physical mechanisms and advanced
materials that exploit them are urgently required. A promising approach is to
harness the electron spin degree of freedom in a paradigm widely known as
spintronics. The key to realizing spintronics technologies is the capability to
efficiently manipulate the electron spin in nanoscale devices. This research
program seeks a fundamental understanding of exciting new phenomena that emerge
at interfaces between magnetic and nonmagnetic materials, which offer powerful
new mechanisms to manipulate electron spins. The fundamental research will have
broad technological impact by enabling new classes of spintronic devices for
ultralow-power, high-performance computation and mass data storage,
significantly impacting mobile computing and global energy efficiency. The
program will train undergraduate and graduate students in advanced
nanotechnologies, and provide enrichment through international collaborations.
Research, education, and outreach are highly integrated by teaming graduate
students with undergraduates, local high school teachers and underrepresented
students. Educational media including instructional laboratory modules and
course materials will be developed and disseminated broadly using the MITx/EdX
online educational platform.

This research program will provide a fundamental understanding of unconventional
current-induced torques and chiral spin textures that arise in ultrathin
ferromagnetic heterostructures with broken inversion symmetry and strong spin-
orbit coupling. The program aims to (1) quantitatively and systematically
characterize spin-orbit torques in ferromagnet/heavy metal bilayers to identify
their dependence on interface materials and structure, (2) provide a mechanistic
understanding of magnetization switching and magnetic domain wall motion in the
presence of strong spin-orbit coupling, and (3) establish the materials design
principles necessary to optimize these phenomena for spintronic devices.
Experiments focus on transition metals and alloys that order well above room
temperature, interfaced with nonmagnetic heavy metals and oxide dielectrics that
are amenable to integration with conventional semiconductor fabrication
processes. The intellectual merits of these fundamental studies include
important new insights into surface and interface magnetism, the quantum-
mechanical effects of broken symmetries in nanoscale systems, and coupling
between the charge and spin degrees of freedom. The fundamental studies will
lead to revolutionary new spin-based memory and logic device capabilities,
offering enhanced performance and durability with ultralow power consumption
requirements.