* 1408646
* Cryogenic Detectors for Next-Generation Physics Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Betty Young, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2017
* USD 98,817.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration
has pioneered the use of low temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the
rare scattering of WIMPs on nuclei and distinguish them from backgrounds. This
work will have a broad impact which extends beyond the dark matter search. The
technical developments will further advance phonon-mediated detectors, which
have already found many applications in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDMS is currently operating at the Soudan
underground laboratory in Minnesota with 10 kg of novel iZIP detectors that have
already demonstrated a background rejection factor sufficient for zero
background operation with several hundred kg targets. This high background
rejection and control of contamination that the SuperCDMS technology offers
provide significant advantages compared to other technologies, providing
excellent sensitivity to low mass dark matter, competitive sensitivity to high-
mass WIMPS, and multiple-target complementarity in a single experiment. The SCU
team will continue to play a central role in the testing and characterization
efforts at Stanford, including bringing online, maintaining, upgrading and/or
operating three Stanford fridges. The PI will devote approximately 25% of her
time on long-term R&amp;D that could impact a future experiment, for example in
the area of code-division-multiplexing for SQUID-based
readouts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support research and training
opportunities for students at several levels to work on an experiment that will
address one of the most fundamental problems of modern science, the nature of
dark matter. SCU undergraduates will complete laboratory-based work for CDMS
primarily in the areas of detector fabrication, testing and optimization.