* 1408228
* Reconfigurable and Low-loss Millimeter-Wave Antennas using MEMS Paraffin Micro-actuators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,651.00

Reconfigurability is an essential feature in future agile millimeter wave
(30-300 GHz) systems used in sensing, imaging, wireless, and satellite
communications. Antennas and radio frequency (RF) circuits are an integral part
of such systems as they can provide changes in polarization, bandwidth, beam
steering, gain, radiation pattern or characteristic impedance control, among
others. In the past, key devices for achieving reconfiguration have been RF MEMS
switches. However, these devices suffer from high actuation voltage, lack of
integration flexibility, reliability, and high cost. In this proposal we
introduce a new class of novel materials and devices to achieve reconfiguration
without those shortcomings. Specifically, we consider paraffin phase-change
materials (PPCMs) as a promising candidate. Owed to the natural
reconfigurability and low-loss architecture of our proposed PPCM devices, we
expect them to have wide utility in sensing, imaging, and wireless/satellite
communication systems. Educational impacts include hands-on experiences to train
students in material characterization, multi-physics finite element simulation,
device fabrication, and RF testing through summer camps and a variety of
outreach activities to attract undergrads and underrepresented students in
engineering. Impact on society (community) include: (1) reliable high bandwidth
handhelds and communication systems for large data rate transfers, and (2) a new
class of reliable switchable devices that rely on low-cost, low voltage/power
and low temperature manufacturing for ease of integration in future wireless and
communication devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paraffin is a novel low loss
dielectric that undergoes reversible volumetric mechanical phase change. This is
in contrast to electrical phase change (permittivity and conductivity) of other
phase-change materials. We propose reconfigurable millimeter wave antennas and
RF circuits that employ paraffin film to develop a new class of paraffin-based
phase change materials having two complimentary functions: (1) low-loss
operation, and (2) highly localized thermo-mechanical micro actuation. PPCMs
should allow the long standing goal of developing low-loss millimeter wave and
RF circuits and antennas on a single chip. In the past, low temperature co-fired
ceramics have been used but require sintering at extremely high temperatures,
making them incompatible with semiconductor processing. Furthermore, they are
not reconfigurable. By contrast, paraffin is known to undergo a 15% volumetric
change at relatively low temperatures. Also, PPCMs exhibit a dielectric loss as
low as 0.0002. As part of this effort, for the first time, we propose to
demonstrate the feasibility of paraffin-based PCMs for passive and
reconfigurable millimeter wave antennas and RF tuning circuits. The proposed
PPCMs have the following key features: (1) extremely low dielectric loss, (2)
exploit phase-change properties to function as thermo-mechanical actuators
across a large bandwidth , (3) can be integrated monolithically on the same
substrate to enable continuous reconfiguration. These PPCM devices not only
avoid reliability issues of conventional devices, but also provide for very low-
loss and continuous reconfiguration. As part of this research, we will study the
material and electrical properties of PPCM, develop devices and examine their
integration into millimeter wave antenna arrays and impedance matching circuits.