* 1408318
* ECCS: TOWARDS FREE-FLOATING DISTRIBUTED NEURAL INTERFACES
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Proposal Title:

Towards Free-Floating Distributed Neural Interfaces

Proposal Goal: The Proposal objectives are to design a wireless framework that
can simultaneously record large scale neuronal ensembles over the entire brain
area. The wireless framework will be based on an array of free-floating
distributed implants and an external power transmitter and interrogator array of
overlapping hexagonal planar spiral coils (hex-PSC). The proposed approach is
different from the traditional paradigm in that a vast number of tiny implants
(1 mm in diameter and 0.1 mm thick) in the form of pushpins will be distributed
over the target brain surface, each recording single unit activities (SUA) from
one to four thin microwires (35 um tetrodes including Teflon coating), while
being directly powered and interrogated from a wearable head-cap.

Nontechnical Abstract: In the United States, approximately 262,000 people suffer
from spinal cord injuries and more than 800,000 strokes happen every year.
People with severe neurological disorders become completely paralyzed and
dependent on caregivers. Because the commands from their brain fail to reach the
target limbs in the natural communication pathways (nerves). It would change the
lives of these individuals if an engineered system would be safe, secure, and
capable enough to recognize their intentions form brain electrical signals, and
translate them to communication with others or control their paralyzed limbs or
artificial prostheses, such as robotic arms. Brain structure is extremely
complex and the mechanisms of understanding, memory, actions, and emotions as
well as many brain disorders remain mysterious because they emerge from
interactions among large populations of neurons in widespread networks across
the brain. Therefore, to better understand the brain, neuroscientists need
advanced tools capable of recording the activity of individual neurons over many
different areas of the brain, as emphasized in the recent BRAIN initiative.

Traditional methods to record brain electrical signals have relied on a single
centralized high density electrode array despite the aforementioned requirements
of wide area and distributed network coverage. Another problem in prior work is
the tissue damage due to large implant size and wiring, resulting in degradation
of the signal quality over time. This can be remedied if the implant is small
and free-floating on the brain surface. We propose to develop a distributed
system of small wireless neural interfaces for recording of multi-channel
signals over a large brain area. The distributed implants will be small enough
to be floating on the brain surface without being wired to any other large
centralized structure. We will find ways to deliver power to these small
implants and communicate with them. We will also test them on human brain models
and anesthetized animals.

Technical Abstract: The proposed work is an attempt to design a wireless
framework that can simultaneously record large scale neuronal ensembles over the
entire brain area. It will be based on an array of free-floating distributed
implants and an external transmitter/interrogator array of overlapping coils.
There is increasing realization that neural function in the brain arises from a
large distributed network. Thus, neural recording and modulation of the future
will require the ability to simultaneously interface with multiple neural sites
distributed over a large area. The current neural interfaces clearly fall short
of achieving this goal because of their limited area coverage. The proposed
approach is different from the traditional paradigm in that a vast number of
tiny implants in the form of pushpins will be distributed over the target brain
surface, each recording single unit activities from thin microwires, while being
directly powered and interrogated from a wearable head-cap.

By reducing foreign body reaction, the small free-floating implants are expected
to minimize tissue damage and enable chronic wireless recording. We will
investigate the tissue response, such as inflammation and cell death in rats to
assess the longevity, reliability, and fidelity of the proposed free-floating
implants. We will develop novel packaging structures with hermetic sealing,
which require new process flows for sub-mm sized, wirelessly-powered, free-
floating devices. Unlike previous wireless power transfer systems, which have
been optimized for powering a single implant, the optimization paradigm in the
proposed work will consider the entire brain area. We will optimize powering of
multiple implants with arbitrary orientations and alignments. This will be
achieved by a novel 120¢ª offset external array of planar coils with an entirely
new drive mechanism, which offers unprecedented flexibility in wireless power
delivery.