* 1408139
* Nanoantenna Optomechanics: Forces, Devices, and Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2014,04/30/2016
* Ertugrul Cubukcu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2016
* USD 366,619.00

The planned research is to investigate various novel photonic devices based on
the radiation pressure created by localized electric fields for development of
high sensitivity optical sensors.The approach involves an integrated
investigation of thermal-optical-mechanical forces for the development of
reconfigurable devices. The analytic and experimental details are adequately
addressed and may lead to useful devices as well as new optical science. The
proposed effort has strong educational components including collaborative
research interactions for underrepresented minorities, high school students and
undergrad students. The PI intends to integrate the planned research with
student education of nanotechnology and photonics to students at all levels.

The proposed research is based on integration of metallic nanoparticles that act
as optical nano-antennae with micro-electro-mechanical systems for unique device
functionality for sensing applications. The approach is to employ the plasmonic
resonances in these nano-antennae arising from the oscillations of the
conduction electrons in metals for making micromechanical resonators optically
responsive at the desired wavelength range independent of the optical
transparency of constituent mechanical resonator materials. This platform will
enable the study of interaction between light and mechanical resonators through
optically induced forces as well as the investigation of mechanically tunable
optoelectronic devices. If successful, the proposed research could have a
transformative impact on unique opto-electro-mechanical sensors with
sensitivities far exceeding present-day technologies.