* 1408575
* A Comprehensive Approach to Interference Cancellation and Spurious Reduction in Broadband Wireless Transceivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ranjit Gharpurey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal Title:A Comprehensive Approach to Interference Cancellation and
Spurious Reduction in Broadband Wireless Transceivers.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed effort will make significant contributions to wireless communication
systems and will enhance access to the radio spectrum which has been identified
as a national priority. If successful it will be transformative and will have
major societal, commercial and economic benefits.The architectures and
techniques researched here will find wide use in current and future radio
technologies that enable broadband wireless access. Additionally, this research
will impact multiple applications beyond communications, including safety,
sensing, and medical devices. The investigators will collaborate closely amongst
themselves, and with current industrial partners. Results of the research will
be broadly disseminated through publications. Graduate students will be provided
a cross-disciplinary learning experience that spans communication systems,
architecture definition, integrated circuit design and measurement techniques. A
strong educational program is a key aspect to ensuring the long-term
dissemination of the proposed research results. As such, the principal
investigators intend to integrate much of the aforementioned research into their
regular course work. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students will
be engaged in this and related effort in the research teams.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broadband wireless systems offer a viable approach for enabling
ubiquitous high-speed communications. This effort will focus on key hardware
challenges in the design of transceivers for such systems. Multiple questions
will be addressed including: (a) the ability of the transmitter and the receiver
to span a desired frequency range, with minimal hardware overhead and
complexity, (b) the ability of the receiver to tolerate and operate
satisfactorily in the presence of interference and (c) the ability of the
transmitter to minimize its out-of-band spectral emissions, so as to minimize
co-existence issues. This proposal seeks to address these considerations by
developing a comprehensive approach for interference mitigation in broadband,
rapidly tunable, integrated, wireless transceivers. The designs will be
engineered to meet future high data-rate needs by enabling devices that allow
for flexible, and reconfigurable use of spectrum.