* 1408723
* Interstellar Dust: Optics and Models
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Bruce Draine, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2020
* USD 454,820.00

The intellectual merit of this research project is broad. Dust reduces the light
from galaxies, sends out its own light, and plays an important role in the
thermo-, chemo-, and fluid-dynamics of the matter between the star systems in a
galaxy, and in the formation of planets and stars. An improved understanding of
the physical properties of interstellar dust grains will have implications for
studies of diverse astrophysical phenomena, from formation of stars and planets
to the material near active galactic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our knowledge
of interstellar dust derives primarily from remote observations of absorption,
scattering, and emission of electromagnetic radiation by dust grains. The
scattering and absorption properties of dust grains are needed to interpret
observations, and to test dust models. In addition, scattering and absorption of
light exerts forces and torques on dust grains, with important dynamical
consequences. Dr. Bruce Draine and his research team will carry out a number of
investigations concerning the optical properties of interstellar dust, and
development of improved tools for calculating the optical properties of small
particles with irregular geometries. These tools will be used to find new state-
of-the-art models (composition, shape, and size distribution) for interstellar
dust that are consistent with observational
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial objective is to create a "library"
of calculated cross sections for scattering and absorption over a broad range of
wavelengths, for selected grain sizes, shapes, and compositions. Grain
geometries will include spheroids, fluffy grains built up from random
coagulation of spheres, and grains that are irregular but compact. State-of-the-
art codes will be employed. The discrete dipole approximation (DDA) will be used
for irregular grain geometries. Accurate calculations of absorption and
differential scattering cross sections at X-ray energies will be carried out
using a new code applying anomalous diffraction theory to general geometries.
This code will be documented and made publicly-available (open source) on the
WWW. Dr. Draine will continue to develop and support the open-source code DDSCAT
for calculations using the DDA. The cross-section library will be made available
on the WWW. For each grain, the team will calculate the temperature distribution
function for various heating radiation fields; the library of temperature
distribution functions will also be made available on the WWW. These will be
valuable community resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calculated cross-sections
and temperature distribution functions will be used to construct the best-to-
date interstellar dust models with size distributions adjusted to reproduce
observations of wavelength-dependent extinction, wavelength-dependent
polarization of starlight, polarized infrared emission, and X-ray scattering.
Models will be built with different grain shapes, including compact grains and
fluffy grains. Interstellar grains may include magnetic material. The team will
continue study of the intensity and polarization of the magnetic dipole
radiation emitted by such grains. This magnetic dipole radiation may be
important at mm and cm wavelengths, contributing a new polarized component to
the "galactic foreground", affecting studies of the polarization of the cosmic
microwave background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has broad interdisciplinary
impact. Improved methods for calculating scattering and absorption by
nanostructures have wide applicability, beyond astrophysics. The optics of small
particles is important in many scientific fields, including atmospheric science,
oceanography, planetary science, combustion science, marine biology, and
nanoparticle studies. DDSCAT has already been applied by users in all of these
areas. The DDSCAT package will continue to be supported by Dr. Draine and made
publicly available via the WWW. The research program includes a graduate student
component, and undergraduate participation is planned. The proposed research
will thereby contribute to training future scientists.