* 1408351
* Reducing Cost and Improving Energy Efficiency in Portable Sensor Electronics for Healthcare, Communication, and Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John McNeill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,185.00

Analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) are required whenever a signal from the
physical world must be translated into a form that can be understood by a
microprocessor or computer. Example applications include implanted biomedical
devices for assistive technology, autonomously powered sensors for untethered
health care monitoring, accelerometers and other sensors used in smartphones,
and chemical sensors used in automotive and security applications. In most of
these systems, available energy is severely constrained by battery power or
scavenged energy limits. An additional difficulty for high precision ADCs is the
requirement for calibration, which increases both manufacturing and operating
costs. The goal of this work is to leverage advancement in digital integrated
circuit manufacturing technology to provide a class of energy-efficient self-
calibrating ADCs applicable across a wide range of rapidly growing technology
areas. The proposed energy efficient approach would reduce ADC power consumption
by at least a factor of 10, enabling new system architectures and capabilities,
as well as extended battery life in existing systems. Self calibration allows
reduction in manufacturing and operating expense, critical to providing the cost
improvement end users expect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed work,
prototype integrated circuits will be designed, fabricated, and tested in a
nanoscale (28nanometers) integrated circuit process. (The design and
verification process will be carried out using state-of-the-art design software
and test equipment available in the investigator's research lab. This in itself
is a valuable workforce education experience, as the student researcher will be
carrying out a design process very similar to that used in industry.) Scaling of
integrated circuit technology to nanometer dimensions has enabled dramatic
improvement in digital power efficiency, with lower power supply voltage and
decreased power consumption for logic functions. However, most traditionally
prevalent ADC architectures are not well suited to the lower supply voltage
environment, and investigation is ongoing for other architectures. The
improvement in time resolution enabled by increased digital speeds naturally
drives design toward time-domain architectures, which have shown promise but
have not yet been able to provide both high accuracy and high energy efficiency.
The proposed activity combines the principal investigator's previous work on
precise time-based circuitry with digitally calibrated ADC techniques. The
resulting research will enable a class of ultra-low-power, efficient ADC
architectures suitable for a wide range of emerging applications requiring low
cost, high accuracy, and energy efficiency.