* 1408904
* Excitons with time-dependent density-functional theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Carsten Ullrich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to develop new approaches for computing and
visualizing optical properties of inorganic and organic materials. An accurate
and computationally efficient approach to simulate the optical properties of
these materials will provide important assistance for understanding and
designing novel solar cell and optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific part of this project will pursue two objectives. The first goal will
be to develop methodologies that yield accurate predictions related to the
absorption of light by bulk insulators, semiconductors and novel organic
materials. The second goal will be to develop a computational tool, which will
allow a visualization of the charged particle dynamics following light
absorption in complex organic molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this award consists of the training and mentoring of undergraduate
and graduate students in theoretical and computational condensed-matter
research, the curricular developments in undergraduate condensed-matter physics
and materials science, and the preparation of future faculty in the Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines via engagement in the
Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to develop time-
dependent density-functional theory based approaches for computing and
visualizing excitonic properties in inorganic and organic materials. Time-
dependent density-functional theory offers computationally efficient approaches
for calculating the optical properties of complex systems from first principles.
However, extended systems pose many challenges, in particular, local and
gradient-corrected exchange-correlation functionals cannot describe excitonic
effects. Excitons require exchange-correlation functionals with a long spatial
range, and so far only a few of these have been available for solids. The
primary research goal will be to develop and test new functionals which capture
excitonic binding in insulators and semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
interrelated research objectives will be pursued. The first objective is to use
linear-response time-dependent density-functional theory to calculate singlet
and triplet exciton binding energies in bulk semiconductors and insulators. A
variety of exchange-correlation functionals will be implemented and tested; the
influence of the ground-state band structure will be studied; and nonadiabatic
functionals will be developed. Calculations will be carried out for a variety of
inorganic and organic bulk crystalline materials and low-dimensional
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second research objective is to investigate
real-time exciton dynamics in organic molecules. A new computational tool to
visualize exciton dynamics, the time-dependent particle-hole map, will be
developed and interfaced with existing computer codes. The particle-hole map
will be mainly applied to study photoexcited organic donor-acceptor molecules
and charge-transfer systems that are of interest for application in
photovoltaics. In addition, exciton radiative lifetimes, intersystem crossing
rates, and nonradiative lifetimes will be computed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this award consists of the training and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students in theoretical and computational condensed-
matter research, the curricular developments in undergraduate condensed-matter
physics and materials science, and the preparation of future faculty in the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines via engagement in
the Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning network.