* 1408287
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Collective Opinion Fraud Detection: Identifying and Integrating Cues from Language, Behavior, and Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Yejin Choi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Given user reviews on Web sites such as Yelp, Amazon, and TripAdvisor, which
ones should one trust? Online reviews have become an important resource for
public opinion sharing. They influence our decisions over an extremely wide
spectrum of daily and professional activities: e.g., where to eat, where to
stay, which products to purchase, which doctors to see, which books to read,
which universities to attend, and so on. However, the credibility and
trustworthiness of online reviews are at stake. It is well known that a large
body of reviews is fabricated -- either by owners, competitors, or entities paid
by those -- to create false perception on the actual quality of the products and
services. What is more, opinion fraud is prevalent; while credit card fraud is
as rare as 0.2% or less, it is estimated that 20-30% of the reviews on well-
known service sites could be fake. This poses a serious risk to businesses and
the public, from investing on a low-quality product to consulting an incompetent
doctor for diagnosis and treatment. Like other kinds of fraud, opinion fraud is
a serious legal offense. In fact, it is currently being recognized as a serious
issue in law enforcement by policymakers. Thus solving this problem is of great
importance to businesses and the general public alike. Accurately spotting
opinion fraud will enable site owners to provide trustworthy content, maintain
the integrity of their service, and protect the online citizens from unfair (or
potentially harmful) products and services. Businesses will also benefit from
reviews with reliable feedback. Honest businesses will be indirectly rewarded,
as it will no longer be easy for unscrupulous businesses to benefit from fake
reviews. The research outcomes will thus contribute significantly to the healthy
growth of the Internet commerce. Educational activities include incorporating
research findings in graduate level courses, educating public on fraudulent
behavior and misinformation, and providing publicly available educational
materials including lectures and manuscripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
critical issues of opinion fraud in online communities, how can one identify
fake reviews and attribute responsible culprits behind them? By conjoining
expertise of the PIs over various modalities of deception footprints ranging
over language, user behavior, and relational information, this project presents
a research program that will result in much needed solutions to this emergent,
prevalent, and socially impactful problem. The ultimate goal is to create a
unified detection framework via synergistic integration of multiple information
sources; from linguistics, user behavior, and network effects, to obtain the
best of all worlds. The main idea is to formulate the problem as a relational
inference task on composite heterogeneous networks, providing a principled,
extensible approach that can blend and reinforce all the above cues towards
effective and robust detection of fraud. From a scientific point of view, the
research brings together three disciplines: natural language analysis,
behavioral modeling, and graph mining. The outcome is a suite of novel,
principled, and scalable techniques and models that will enhance our
understanding of the creation and dissemination of opinion fraud and
misinformation in general at a large scale. The PIs will collaborate with
industry partners such as Yelp, Google, and Amazon, directly solicit online fake
reviews, and conduct well-designed user studies for testing and validation of
their techniques. The project web site
(http://www.cs.stonybrook.edu/~leman/PROJECTS/OPINION_FRAUD/) provides
additional information and will include open-source software and datasets.