* 1408876
* The Impact of European Contact on Native American Evolutionary History
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2016
* Deborah Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 211,666.00

The objective of this Fellowship project is to investigate the impact of
European contact (EC) on Native American genomic diversity by analyzing genome-
wide diversity patterns in contemporary and ancient Native Americans from the
southern US. Many genetic studies have investigated the origins and early
history of Native Americans, but comparatively little attention has been given
to recent evolutionary history and the impact that selection, migration, and
genetic drift have had on Native American genomic diversity over the last five
centuries. However, since European Contact, Native Americans have experienced
repeated epidemics, demographic collapse, and genetic exchange (admixture) with
non-native peoples. It is critical that we test whether and how each of these
events reshaped the genetic structure of indigenous populations if we are to
accurately reconstruct Native American evolutionary history and account for
population genetic structure in other studies. In addition, this project
provides research and training opportunities for a female Hispanic postdoctoral
researcher to develop the technical and process skills necessary for her to
succeed in science and in academia. The project also provides research
experience and mentoring for students from underrepresented groups, including
some from participating Native American communities. Additionally, this project
formulates a community-based participatory research model for future genetic
studies, and it integrates education and research through extensive outreach to
indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While some research suggests that
admixture and the population collapse after EC influenced Native American
genetic diversity, no study has fully assessed the genetic changes that occurred
after EC. Existing datasets are insufficient for this purpose because few
studies have examined genome-wide variation and relatively few pre-EC samples
have been analyzed. Because of these limitations, we know remarkably little
about the genetic makeup of Native American populations or about the genetic
impact of European Contact. This project overcomes these deficiencies and has
two major research goals: (1) assess the genomic diversity in pre-EC and
contemporary (post-EC) Native North Americans, and (2) evaluate the genetic
impact of EC by measuring the effects of post-EC demographic collapse,
selection, and admixture. This project uses newly developed microarray and next-
generation sequencing technologies and implement a novel comparative approach.
The PI-team analyzes 629,443 genome-wide SNPs to evaluate diversity patterns in
a post-EC population. They also analyze ~370,000 of the same SNPs in ancient DNA
samples from pre-EC burial populations in the same geographic region to track
changes in the Native American gene pool over time. This study focuses on
contemporary and ancient populations from the southern US, where EC first
occurred in North America. This project is designed to produce a dataset that is
unprecedented in combining genome-wide coverage with population samples spanning
a wide temporal range. With this dataset, it will become possible to measure the
effects of drift, selection, and admixture following EC, providing the first
comprehensive test of the hypothesis that EC reshaped the genetic structure of
Native American populations. This project has the potential to transform our
understanding of Native American genetic diversity and evolutionary history in
the southern US, and improve our ability to account for current population
genetic structure in disease association studies. It can also inform our
understanding of how sociocultural change influences the human genome.