* 1408169
* EAGER: Integrating the Analysis of Decision-Making in Meetings with the Analysis of Network Interactions in the Study of Environmental Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2014,06/30/2014
* Christina Wasson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 24,886.00

Environmental governance is increasingly shifting from a top-down approach, in
which bureaucrats and scientists make decisions, to a 'participatory' approach,
in which representatives of diverse stakeholder groups make decisions
collaboratively. However, implementing the goal of giving all stakeholder groups
a voice has proved challenging. Much work remains to develop an adequate
conceptual model of what egalitarian decision-making would actually look like
and how it might be implemented. Most studies have focused their analysis either
on the stakeholder meetings where decisions are negotiated, or on the broader
interactions among networks of stakeholders that influence those meeting
decisions. On their own, each of these approaches has serious limitations. The
goal of the proposed pilot study is to develop a new methodological approach
that integrates the analysis of meetings and network interactions. The proposed
study is high risk due to the complexity and novelty of the planned methodology,
which brings multiple, interdisciplinary perspectives to bear on a multilevel
analysis. If successful, the proposed study will have high payoff in its
enhanced ability to adequately theorize participatory decision-making by giving
equal consideration to both the meeting context where actual decisions are made,
and the broader set of network interactions that shape meeting participants'
understandings of the issues and relationships with each other.

The proposed pilot study will launch a research trajectory with the potential to
benefit society by conceptualizing and disseminating more effective practices of
'participatory' environmental governance, thereby reducing the number of
intractable conflicts among stakeholders that result in further damage to the
environment. Findings could also benefit other fields that espouse
'participatory' decision-making, such as international development and
community-based health. Improvements in decision-making practices could benefit
the many Americans whose lives are affected by environmental and other
challenges that are being addressed by local task forces, committees, and
councils.