* 1408949
* Understanding How Irradiation Affects Electrochemical Charge Storage in Nanostructured Metal Oxide Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Darryl Butt, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Economic growth and population expansion have led to
a rapid increase in energy consumption, intensifying the need for electrical
energy storage (e.g., battery) technologies. Lithium-ion batteries are battery
technologies having promise in more applications, e.g. in providing high energy
and high power in electric vehicles or electrical grids. Recent studies have
observed that lithium-ion battery electrode materials (such as TiO2) contain
intentional structural defects exhibit enhanced electrochemical charge storage
capacity. This project uses irradiation to introduce defects into TiO2
nanostructured electrodes, because irradiation is known to produce an excess of
defects in a material. Confirmation of the hypothesis of enhancing battery
functionality using irradiation could promote the use of intentional structural
defects to profoundly transform battery research, fabrication, and applications.
This project may also lead to improved battery functionality through in-service,
in situ irradiation in applications subject to high radiation fields, such as
satellites and high-altitude aircraft; advanced sensors for security, defense,
and power production; remote warfare; nuclear energy and propulsion; and
healthcare. Integrated research and education activities will have impacts on
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of this project is
to determine how and by what mechanisms irradiation affects the electrochemical
charge storage of nanostructured TiO2 electrodes. The project addresses the
foundational science of the behavior of rechargeable battery systems under
irradiation. There is currently limited knowledge of the fundamental mechanisms
of irradiation effects on charge storage properties of metal oxide electrodes.
This research is filling a knowledge gap in intercalation kinetics and
structural evolution of metal oxide electrodes under irradiation. Studies
suggest structural defects in metal oxides can enhance the material's
electrochemical charge storage capacity. Since irradiation is known to produce
an excess of point defects in a material, it is hypothesized that irradiation
can similarly enhance the charge capacity of metal oxide electrodes. In this
project, crystalline TiO2 nanotubes are proton irradiated, then undergo
electrochemical cycling with Li. Recent advances in characterization techniques
enable the observation of defects and nanostructure following electrochemical
cycling. This project integrates experiment and modeling to obtain a fundamental
understanding of irradiation effects on charge transport and structural
evolution of metal oxide electrodes. Graduate student researchers are gaining
technical experience with cutting-edge research equipment and techniques and
working in collaboration with national laboratories. Undergraduate student
researchers from the Boise State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program are also involved. Topics from this project are being used
for curriculum development and outreach programs to middle and high schools.