* 1408672
* CHS: Medium: The Use of Robots as Intermediaries to Gather Sensitive Information from Children
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Deborah Eakin, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,207,819.00

A recent report entitled "Child Maltreatment 2011" issued by the U.S. Department
of Health &amp; Human Services Administration for Children and Families
estimated that more than 3.7 million children were the subjects of at least one
report of maltreatment, and that over 681,000 children were found to be unique
victims of child maltreatment in the United States. This multidisciplinary
research will compare the effectiveness of robot vs. human interviewers for
gathering sensitive information from children, using situations in which this
would commonly occur: cases of child eyewitness memory and child reports of
bullying. The PI argues that the use of a robot as an intermediary during these
so-called forensic interviews could reduce or eliminate unintentional cues
observed in human interviewers that result in inaccurate reports by children. To
validate her hypothesis the PI and her team will develop a systems architecture,
an interactive user interface and an interactive robotic toolkit for
interviewers, and perform a series of six studies involving children ages 8-11.
The interdisciplinary research team is comprised of experts in human-computer
interaction, human-robot interaction, robotics, psychology, sociology, and
social work, and the project will make contributions to each of these domains.
The team further includes a member of the legal profession as a consultant, who
will iteratively evaluate the potential for extending the research findings to
real-world legal proceedings and investigations. Preliminary research conducted
by the PI has attracted attention from the law enforcement and legal
communities, so if successful this project has the potential to transform
information gathering for investigative purposes. The PI and her colleagues have
been actively involved in community outreach in local middle schools and Boys
and Girls Clubs with respect to the use of robots for eliciting information
related to bullying, and this outreach will be extended to elementary school
children involved in the current research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
goals for this project will be accomplished through the development of an
integrated robotic toolkit based on a novel Interactive Social Engagement
Architecture (ISEA) and a unique interactive user interface. ISEA provides a
framework for the autonomous generation of robot behaviors for self-preservation
and to convey social intelligence. The toolkit will be designed to integrate
behavior-based robotics, human behavior models, cognitive architectures, and
user input to increase social engagement between a human and system (robot,
avatar, etc.). The interactive user interface will provide interviewers with the
ability to use the robot as an intermediary for gathering sensitive information.
ISEA has three primary parallel paths for processing robot behaviors: (1) verbal
behaviors based on expert user input from the interactive user interface; (2)
autonomous self-preservation behaviors if the robot is threatened that consist
of both verbal and non-verbal responses; and (3) non-verbal autonomous behaviors
generated from sensor data coming from the environment, the current internal
state of the robot, user input, and prior knowledge from the knowledge
base/long-term memory. As part of the research, six human studies will be
conducted that use typical situations in which gathering sensitive information
from children might occur. Three of these experiments will examine whether child
eyewitness memory is more accurate when a robot rather than a human presents
misleading information during an interview, while the other three will examine
whether children who have been victimized by bullying will be more likely to
disclose that victimization to a robot as opposed to a human interviewer. Some
of these experiments will examine the role of gender both for humanoid robots
and adult interviewers, using established forensic interview protocols, while
others will examine whether interviewers high in social intelligence elicit more
accurate child eyewitness memory and reports of bullying than those low in
social intelligence (where social intelligence is defined by the use of gestural
and facial non-verbal behaviors).