* 1408127
* Topological Chaos for Atomic Characterization and Control
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Kevin Mitchell, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 180,000.00

Recent decades have seen dramatic improvement in the ability to prepare,
manipulate, and control quantum systems with ever increasing fidelity on smaller
and smaller time scale and with finer and finer spatial resolution. This has
opened new scientific and technological frontiers, for example, in quantum
information processing, manipulation of quantum gases, and the control of
Rydberg (highly excited) atoms. Though such systems are inherently quantum
mechanical, much intuition about the behavior of such systems is based on the
underlying classical models for such systems. Classically chaotic models present
particular difficulties, due to the extreme complexity and number of classical
trajectories. This research seeks to utilize newly developed theoretical (e.g.
topological) tools to classify chaotic trajectories in atomic systems and to use
these trajectories to compute transport properties (e.g. decay rates) and energy
levels of such systems. Such topological tools will also be applied to problems
in the control of Rydberg atoms. Through graduate and undergraduate research
experiences, this work will also help train the next generation of scientists
and help to nurture the newly established campus of the University of California
at Merced. UC Merced was opened in 2005 and has already made a significant
impact on the economy and education in California's Great Central Valley, the
agricultural heart of the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad theme of this
proposal is the analysis and control of atomic systems through a deep structural
understanding of chaotic trajectories. This is manifest in the following
specific objectives. (i) Building on the prior development and computer
implementation of homotopic lobe dynamics---a topological technique for
classifying large-amplitude chaotic motion---decay rates and other atomic
transport properties will be computed from a detailed analysis of a relatively
small number of a system's periodic orbits. (ii) These classical periodic orbit
computations will be augmented with quantum phase information to generate
semiclassical estimates of individual chaotic energy levels. (iii) Building on
the successful use of phase space turnstiles to control the ionization of
quasi-1D Rydberg states, the turnstile technique will be applied to the more
challenging control problem of circular Bohr-like Rydberg
wavepackets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The well-established power of periodic orbit
techniques has not been widely applied to "real world" problems due in large
part to the difficulty of characterizing and computing the relevant orbits,
especially in complex systems with a mixture of chaos and regularity.
Successfully computing classical transport rates for mixed systems would thus
dramatically expand the applicability of periodic orbit techniques. Furthermore,
using these techniques to estimate individual quantum eigenvalues would address
a long-standing question in quantum chaos: is it possible to semiclassically
compute quantum spectra for general chaotic systems? Finally, applying phase-
space turnstiles to 3D Bohr-like wavepackets would provide a new laboratory
mechanism to rapidly control and engineer such states, e.g. increase or decrease
the principle quantum number. It would also improve the general understanding of
chaotic transport in higher dimensional systems.