* 1408300
* The Transistor-Injected Quantum Cascade Laser, An Improved Coherent Mid-IR Source
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mariano Troccoli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

High-power photon sources at mid-infrared wavelengths have commercial potential
in areas having large societal impact. The proposed work will create a new
device that can be used in ultra-sensitive systems for environmental (greenhouse
gas detection, ground water and wastewater monitoring), industrial (chemical
process sensing and automotive emission sensors), and homeland security
(explosive detection) applications. The device could also be used as an enabling
component in new systems being developed for biological imaging and in areas
such as cancer cell detection. In all of these applications, the higher output
powers expected with the "transistor-injected quantum-cascade laser" should
allow systems with greater sensitivity than systems where mid-infrared photons
are generated with conventional options. The anticipated ability to modulate at
high speed (> 20 GHz) also opens the possibility of producing free-space optical
links in non-absorbing atmospheric windows. Such links could be used either in
place of or to augment microwave-frequency point-to-point communication
channels. This work will also provide other societal benefits. Basic knowledge
gained will be incorporated into courses at the University of Illinois on
compound semiconductor devices, and will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
literature and at conferences. The funding provided will allow undergraduate and
graduate research projects to proceed. The PI is also committed to advancing
STEM education, and has provided seminars to high school students and teachers
during various REU/RET programs at Illinois. The PI is also committed to the
education of women and underrepresented groups, and a portion of the project
funds will be used to support a female graduate student.

It is the objective of this research program to design, fabricate, and test a
novel device architecture for the generation of coherent radiation at mid-
infrared and longer wavelengths. The transistor-injected quantum cascade laser
is proposed as a 3-terminal device that allows independent control of the field
across a quantum cascade region located in the reverse-biased junction of a
heterojunction bipolar transistor and the amplitude of the injected current,
controlled using the forward biased emitter-base junction. Independent control
of cascade structure field stabilizes parameters such as state energy and
lifetime that fundamentally impact laser operation. This approach provides
several advantages over the 2-terminal quantum cascade laser, which is the
incumbent solution for the generation of mid-IR coherent radiation. First, free
carrier absorption is lower in the proposed device because both the cascade
region and surrounding portions of the p-base and n-collector are within the
depletion region of the base-collector junction. Because free-carrier absorption
is a key contributor to internal loss at long wavelength, threshold current
densities are projected to be lower and both slope efficiency and wall-plug
efficiency higher. Additionally, because the field in the cascade region can be
fixed at a value that provides optimal resonant coupling between the energy
levels in adjacent wells and stable energy state lifetimes, the gain as a
function injected current is expected to be more stable and have better
linearity. Higher drive currents will not cause gain reduction due to field-
related misalignment of quantum states and modification of state lifetimes.
Finally, because a small base current is used to control the operation of the
device, modulation in the multi-gigahertz frequency range is expected to be
possible. Successful demonstration of this device has the potential to create
new areas of research in both mid-infrared wavelength through terahertz
frequency devices and in the applications for those devices.