* 1408763
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fast and accurate optimization in planar graphs and beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Jeff Erickson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

A planar graph is a network drawn on the plane so that no edges cross. Planar
and near-planar graphs have been fertile ground for algorithms research since
the mid-1950s, both because they naturally model many classes of networks that
arise in practice, and because they admit simpler and faster algorithms than
more general graphs. Algorithms for such graphs find numerous applications in
geographic information systems, computer graphics, solid modeling, computer
vision, VLSI design, information visualization, finite-element mesh generation,
computational geometry, and other areas. New techniques introduced in the last
ten years have led to an explosion of new optimization algorithms for planar
graphs and their generalizations, as well as the emergence of a small but
growing research community that draws on and contributes to this pool of
techniques; however, we are coming up against limitations of these techniques.

The goal of this project is to develop efficient algorithms for several
fundamental optimization problems in planar graphs and related graph families.
Working on problems just outside the range of existing tools will lead the PIs
toward developing the next batch of techniques that will maintain momentum in
the field. Specific targets include faster and simpler exact algorithms for
variants of shortest paths, maximum flows, minimum cuts, and minimum-cost flows,
as well as new polynomial-time approximation schemes for several network design,
clustering, and facility location problems for which no such schemes are
currently known. The PIs will also implement and experimentally evaluate some
algorithms that appear particularly promising, and make the resulting software
publicly available, to support the efforts of students, researchers, and
professionals in many different areas of computing.