* 1408846
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: From Answering Questions to  Questioning Answers (and Questions)---Perturbation Analysis of  Database Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2019
* USD 904,329.00

In the age of data ubiquity, decision making is increasingly driven by data.
Oftentimes, database queries are used to identify issues, debate trategies, make
choices, and explain decisions. How these database queries are formulated can
significantly influence the decision making process. A poor choice of query
parameters---be it intentionally or accidentally---may give a biased view of the
underlying data, and lead to decisions that are wrong, misguided, or "brittle"
when reality deviates from assumptions. Database research has in the past
focused on how to answer queries, but has not devoted much attention to how
queries impact decision making, or how to formulate "good" queries from the
outset. This project aims to fill this void. The key insight is perturbation
analysis of database queries---i.e., studying how perturbations of the query
form and parameters affect the query result. For example, slight query
perturbations leading to very different results help identify potential pitfalls
in decision making. In general, perturbation analysis reveals how queries affect
the robustness and objectivity of decisions, and helps decision makers identify
"good" queries that will influence their decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project plans to carry out a systematic study of perturbation analysis of
database queries. On the modeling front, the project proposes query response
surface (QRS) over the parametric space as a framework for perturbation
analysis. Intuitive notions of query "goodness" (for the purpose of supporting
decisions), such as fairness and robustness, can be formulated as statistical,
geometric, and topological properties of the QRS. The framework also allows
practical problems to be formulated in terms of the QRS. For example, a brittle
decision can be illustrated by identifying its pitfalls, which can be cast as an
optimization problem of searching the QRS for slight perturbations with large
result deviations; the problem of finding "good" queries that will influence a
decision can be cast as that of finding points with desired properties in the
relevant region of the QRS. On the algorithmic front, fundamental research
problems arise in coping with the complexity of QRS and the vast space of
perturbations. While there has been much study on perturbations of data,
considering perturbations of queries poses novel challenges and compounds
existing ones. The project will develop both efficient representations of QRS
and fast algorithms for exploring and analyzing the QRS, using scalable
techniques for indexing, optimization, and incremental evaluation that rely on
sampling, approximation, and geometric insights. On the systems and applications
front, this project plans to deliver the core features of perturbation analysis
as a web service with a public API, and address the design and scalability
challenges. The project will produce a general-purpose website for applying
perturbation analysis of database queries, as well as websites customized for
several domains of public interest. The websites will include a facet-driven
interface and features that help collaboration and dissemination. In today's
data-driven society, there is increasing demand for the proposed research in
many application domains such as public policy, urban planning, business
intelligence, and health care This project will significantly expand the
functionality of database systems, making them easier to use (and harder to
misuse) for a new generation of data-driven decision makers, especially those
outside the traditional "data-heavy" disciplines such as computer science and
statistics. This project will develop courses, seminars, and workshops targeting
this much broader population of data-driven decision makers, to help train them
in data and quantitative analysis, and in interpreting results
critically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at: http://db.cs.duke.edu/projects/pq