* 1408604
* Collaborative Research: Practical Signal Design for Interference Management in Wireless Communication Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Youjian Liu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 198,000.00

Interference management is the bottleneck of meeting the explosive wireless data
communication demand. The primary method of increasing cellular or Wi-Fi network
capacity is to increase base station/access-point density, which leads to more
interference from undesired transmitters due to less scatterers at shorter
distance. The proposed research attacks the interference problem through joint
transmit signal design among users such that it strikes an optimal balance
between maximizing a data link's own rate and reducing interference to other
links. The objective is to achieve maximal data rates. To make the research more
relevant to real-world systems, the team takes an interdisciplinary approach of
joint algorithm and hardware design with the consideration of practical
constraints. Consequently, the research results are expected to significantly
improve the capacity of next generation wireless communication systems. The
project also provides a unique opportunity to train both graduate and
undergraduate students at the intersection of signal processing and embedded
system fields.

The proposed research attempts to solve the optimization problem of maximizing
weighted sum-rate for interference channels by research on theory, distributed
optimization algorithms, and efficient hardware design. The transformative
nature of this research lies in that it adopts an interdisciplinary approach of
joint algorithm and hardware design, takes advantage of recent optimal signal
structure result, as well as considers many practical constraints. The PI's
group recently discovered that the optimal signals have a polite water-filling
structure, which is analogous to the celebrated interference alignment for
infinite SNR where every user can enjoy half of the resource. The polite water-
filling works for all SNR range and by exploiting it, the most efficient
algorithms have been designed under the ideal assumptions of full channel
knowledge and centralized optimization. Under practical constraints, the design
and analysis become much more challenging. The PIs will take a holistic approach
of theory, design, simulation, and experiments with practical consideration of
distributed optimization, distributed channel estimation, partial channel
knowledge, quantization noise, hardware processing latency, and power
consumption. The outcome of the project includes practical algorithms,
performance analysis, and efficient hardware architectures that can serve as a
blueprint for interference management in future wireless communication systems.