* 1408302
* Semiconductor Nanolasers Based on Integration with Silver
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 361,698.00

Title: Semiconductor Nanolasers Based on Integration with Silver
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past 55 years has witnessed unprecedented progress in
humanity's ability to compute, enabling applications that were previously
unimaginable. This has been achieved with the advent of the electronic
integrated circuit, where electrical elements are built together on a single
chip. Increasing computing power is accomplished through size "scaling", namely
shrinking the size of each computing element to accommodate more elements on a
single chip, enabling more complex functions to be performed in a given time.
Humanity's ability to exchange information is undergoing a similar paradigm
shift, due to the recent commercialization of the photonic integrated circuit,
an analog of the electronic integrated circuit that encodes information on
light, rather than electricity. The light carrying this information can then be
transmitted over great distances using fiber optics. In these photonic
integrated circuits, numerous components that produce and process light are
integrated together in much the same way as their electronic integrated circuit
counterparts; however, the fundamental minimum size of components is limited by
the rather large length scale of light. As a result, many fewer components may
be combined on a single chip because the size of each optical component is
necessarily much larger than their electrical counterparts, limiting the
capabilities of photonic integrated circuits. The approach here to surmount this
challenge is to employ crystalline metals to confine light within components to
much smaller dimensions than the wavelength of light. This would enable much
smaller optical components and, hence, significantly more powerful photonic
integrated circuits. The focus here will be on building extremely small lasers,
which are the components that generate light in photonic integrated circuits.
This work will provide cutting-edge research opportunities for two Ph.D.
students, increase research opportunities for undergraduates from historically
underrepresented groups, and help engage countless pre-K-12 students with the
exciting world of nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon current
projections, subwavelength optical components will be required in the next ~10
years to continue the Moore's Law of InP-based photonic circuits progress.
Current efforts that could address this challenge are focused mainly on
heterogeneous integration of crystalline semiconductors with
amorphous/polycrystalline metals, limiting their performance and/or the
prospects for application to photonic integrated circuits. An orthogonal
approach to this critical challenge is to employ monolithic integration of III-V
active media with epitaxial silver to greatly reduce the optical losses that
plague the broad field of metal-based nanophotonic devices. Recent progress in
the growth of epitaxial silver has revealed that optical losses can be greatly
reduced and plasmon propagation lengths significantly enhanced, enabling a
solution to this fundamental limitation. While this effort concentrates on
addressing the need for efficient subwavelength nanolaser sources, the approach
is broadly applicable to the other active and passive devices required in
photonic integrated circuits. This multifaceted investigation will couple the
growth and device fabrication of epitaxial III-V/silver heterostructures to (1)
realize high-performance, electrically-injected nanolasers that operate at room
temperature and (2) illuminate and quantify novel methods to integrate silver
and III-V active structures that dramatically enhance light-matter interactions
at the nanoscale.