* 1408265
* Enabling Millimeter Scale Deeply Implanted Glucose Sensors through Ultrasonic Power Transfer and a Novel Glucose Sensing Mechanism
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Darrin Young, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 08/31/2018
* USD 375,063.00

Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling Millimeter Scale Deeply Implanted
Glucose Sensors through Ultrasonic Power Transfer and a Novel Glucose Sensing
Mechanism &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Goal:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project is to enable a new
mode for power transfer to and communication with a deeply implanted
intraluminal glucose monitor. The current state of the art in integrated circuit
and MEMS sensing technologies enables cubic mm size implementations of complex
systems for implanted sensors. However, such implementations are never actually
realized because the necessary power and communications systems are too large.
At very small sizes and large implant&lt;br/&gt;depths acoustic energy transfer
through human tissue is fundamentally more efficient than either near field
electromagnetic (EM) or far field (RF). The long term goal of this research is
to create an ultrasonic power and communications platform that will enable
unobtrusive long term monitoring of health status through implanted sensing and
therapeutic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The
past few decades have seen a dramatic increase in the prevalence of diabetes
mellitus and obesity. The chief complications of these chronic diseases are
cardiac disease, kidney failure leading to dialysis, retinopathy leading to
blindness, and neuropathy and vascular insufficiency leading to amputations.
These exert a huge toll, both in financial terms and in human suffering. Our
research directly addresses this problem by developing new technologies that
will enable long term implantable glucose monitors without the need for
transcutaneous wires. This project addresses two fundamental problems with the
current state of the art in implantable glucose sensors: lack of a suitable
power supply or power transmission mechanism, and the short lifetime and
frequent need for re-calibration of glucose oxidase based sensors. As part of
this project, the PIs will create an ultrasonic power transmission platform that
will allow the glucose sensor (or any highly miniaturized implantable bio-
sensor) to be directly powered by ultrasonic energy. At very small sizes and
large implant depths acoustic energy transfer through human tissue is
fundamentally more efficient than either near field electromagnetic (EM) or far
field (RF), the two most common methods of powering implanted sensors. This
project will investigate micro-scale acoustic transducer designs and
architectures that enable higher power density transmission than either EM or RF
transmission through human tissue. To address the second fundamental problem
with the state of the art, the PIs will explore a new glucose sensing method
using hydrogels with embedded magnetic particles. This method overcomes several
limitations that plague current enzymatic continuous glucose sensors and also
allows the electronics to be robustly encapsulated as the electronic sensing
element does not have to be in direct contact with the hydrogel. Together these
advancements promise to enable a vastly improved method of sensing blood glucose
and delivering power to any highly miniaturized implantable bio-
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses two major challenges that limit
the potential of implanted biosensors in general, and glucose monitors in
particular. The first is transferring energy at sufficient densities to enable
extreme miniaturization. While still more efficient than RF or EM energy
transfer, at very small scales, standard ultrasonic transducers rapidly start to
lose efficiency due to the interplay between the optimal device thickness,
acoustic wavelength, and the frequency dependence of acoustic absorption in
tissue. Our guiding hypothesis is that alternative piezoelectric structures will
be more efficient at these small sizes. Our work will couple acoustic
transmission models, transducer design, and experimental work to empirically
determine key interaction effects probing the limits of acoustic power
generation at very small scales.&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the research will address a
significant issue with glucose sensors, namely that their lifetime is severely
limited and they must be frequently re-calibrated because of their reliance on
the availability glucose oxidase and oxygen to perform accurate measurements.
The PIs will explore a new method using hydrogels with embedded aligned magnetic
particles to sense glucose rather than the traditional electrochemical process.
These functionalized hydrogels swell in the presence of glucose. The swelling is
sensed through the change in inductance value of a miniature coil placed next to
the hydrogel. This method not only overcomes several limitations that plague
current enzymatic continuous glucose sensors but also allows the electronics to
be robustly encapsulated as the sensing coil does not have to be in direct
contact with the hydrogel. The sensing coil will be multi-purposed to send data
back from the implant in a mm scale system demonstration. Taken together, the
three different aspects of this work could provide a basis for fundamentally
smaller, longer life implanted sensors.