* 1408309
* Many-Body Physics with Ultracold Atomic Fermions and Bosons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 561,379.00

Gases of atoms cooled to the ultra-low temperatures of 100 billionths of a
degree above absolute zero have emerged as a highly versatile platform for the
study of collective many-body behavior (the physics of how a collection of
objects behaves in ways that is different from what one would expect from
knowledge of how the objects behave individually). Such collective phenomena are
usually associated with electrons in solid matter, where details about the
crystal structure, strong interactions between electrons, and the underlying
theory in physics which describes the system (quantum mechanics) can combine to
create materials with highly unusual and sometimes very practical properties.
The best known examples of such materials are high-temperature superconductors,
in which electron currents flow without any resistance. Surprisingly, nearly 30
years after their discovery, physicists still do not understand the underlying
mechanisms that create high-temperature superconductors; nor do they know if
there is an upper bound on the superconducting temperature. Experiments with
ultra-cold atoms on a so-called "optical lattice" created with light waves may
help solve this mystery, thereby facilitating the development of practical
applications of high temperature superconductors, including the efficient
transmission of electrical energy and more cost-effective medical imaging. In
this experiment, lithium atoms, which obey the same basic laws of physics as
electrons, will act as stand-ins for the electrons in real materials. The atomic
system is much cleaner than the real material, since there are no impurities,
defects, or lattice dislocations. Furthermore, the parameters of the atomic
system, including the atom-atom interaction strength, density, and the lattice
parameters, are highly tunable. Ultra-cold lithium atoms will be used to create
the most promising model and determine whether or not it contains the essence of
superconductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will exploit the broad
Feshbach resonances in the lithium isotopes, the fermion Li-6 and the boson
Li-7, to explore many-body physics, in and out of lattices, in contexts that
have both fundamental and practical implications. Realization of the full
potential of ultracold atoms in optical lattices has been impeded by an
inability to cool to sufficiently low temperatures. The group has recently
demonstrated a method to evaporatively cool in optical lattices which resulted
in the observation of antiferromagnetic correlations in the Fermi-Hubbard model,
an archetypal model of condensed matter physics and the most prominent model of
high-temperature superconductivity. Even lower temperatures are needed to
explore the most novel strongly correlated phenomena. The group proposes to
refine the cooling method, using Bragg scattering from magnetic correlations as
a sensitive in-situ thermometer. With this system, the group plans to study the
phase diagram of the Hubbard model for both repulsive and attractive
interactions. Theory suggests that an attractive interaction combined with spin
polarization (population imbalance) offers an exciting opportunity to observe
the exotic FFLO pairing mechanism. Finally, for the bosonic isotope, the group
will conduct a fundamental investigation of matter-wave tunneling for non-
interacting and interacting Bose condensates to explore the role of the
nonlinearity, including the regime of solitons. The barrier forms a beam
splitter, which in a one-dimensional geometry constitutes a Mach-Zehnder
interferometer. Its coherence properties and hence, its suitability as a matter-
wave interferometer, will be explored.