* 1408442
* Quantifying Complex Behavior in Large-Scale Systems through Structured Uncertainty  Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bassam Bamieh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 485,318.00

Quantifying Complex Behavior in Large-Scale Systems through Structured
Uncertainty Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale systems of interacting
dynamical elements are ubiquitous in nature and are increasingly common in
engineered systems. Examples of such systems include large networks such as the
power grid, vehicular traffic, social networks and many more. Such networks
exhibit many complex phenomena arising from dynamic interaction between
individual components. Qualitative understanding and quantitative prediction of
these phenomena is a major current scientific and engineering challenge. This
award supports research to develop quantitative analysis methods based on the
techniques of structured stochastic uncertainty. These techniques model large-
scale systems operating in uncertain environments, which include external
forcing and attacks as well as internal disorder in interaction dynamics. The
main observation is that even though individual uncertainty sources may be very
small, their aggregate network effect may be large and even catastrophic,
leading to loss of network stability or performance. Structured uncertainty
analysis aims at quantifying exactly which type of small-scale uncertainty could
lead to large-scale network-wide phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainties
in large-scale dynamic systems can occur in system parameters or structure as
well as in uncertain forcing and disturbances. The theoretical aims of the
research program are twofold. The first is to develop a unified approach to the
seemingly distinct problems of large-scale networked systems on the one hand,
and systems over continuum space described by partial differential equations on
the other. These two sets of problems will both be treated as spatially
distributed systems, but with discrete space being described by the network
structure in the former, and continuum space in the latter. This theoretical
synthesis enables a comparative development of results and methods in both
settings in a manner similar to, but significantly richer, than analogies
between discrete- and continuous-time systems. The second aim is to develop
highly-scalable, simulation-free performance and stability tests for linear
systems with both additive and multiplicative noise. Application areas for which
specialized techniques will be developed are network/cooperative control where
both the network structure and conditions are stochastically varying, and fluid
flow with stochastic field coefficients. This methodological synthesis
contributes to the foundations of Control Theory in the area of additive and
multiplicative noise. It enables the solution of several problems in uncertain
systems that are typically investigated through expensive stochastic
simulations, and are therefore not scalable to large-scale systems. The ability
to address discrete and continuum space in a unified manner will allow for a new
synthesis of concepts and results between uncertain networks and systems
described by partial differential equations.