* 1408346
* Low-Resistance Transparent Conductors Based on Co-Percolation in Hybrid Graphene/Nanowire Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* David Janes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 04/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Title: Low-Resistance Transparent Conductors Based on Co-Percolation in Hybrid
Graphene/Nanowire Films

Non-technical: The program will investigate a new class of low-resistance
transparent conducting electrodes based on assemblies of two-dimensional (2-D)
and one-dimensional (1-D) materials, including single-layer graphene and metal
nanowires. A well-integrated experimental and modeling effort will investigate
electrical conductance and optical transmission properties as a function of
material parameters, including nanowire density and graphene grain size. The
proposed research will provide new understanding of conduction and contact
properties in a materials system which could provide performance superior to
indium tin oxide (ITO), using more earth-abundant materials and physical
advantages including flexibility. The insights from the proposed work can be
applied to advanced photovoltaic devices, transparent circuitry, light emitting
diodes, displays or detectors/imagers.

Technical: The proposed program will investigate a new class of low-resistance
transparent conducting electrodes based on co-percolating conduction in hybrid
graphene/nanowire networks. In large-area graphene layers and metal nanowire
networks, conduction is via percolation, with high-resistance grain boundaries
or nanowire junctions limiting the sheet conductance. Hybrid graphene/nanowire
systems can significantly reduce the sheet resistance, via percolation doping,
in which metal nanowires bridge the grain boundaries, or, via co-percolation, in
which the nanowires provide a second, coupled percolation path so that transport
bottleneck of one layer are bridged by the other network. Proof of concept
experiments have shown that sheet resistances of 20 Ohms/square can be achieved
at optical transmittances of 90% in hybrid networks operating in the co-
percolation limit, with stable performance observed over several months. In this
program, a well-integrated experimental and modeling effort will address two
themes. The first theme will focus on understanding the conduction mechanisms
and relationship between structure and electronic/optical properties in hybrid
graphene/nanowire networks tuned between percolation doping and co-percolation
limits. The second theme will focus on understanding the contact properties
between these hybrid networks and "device" layers including materials of
interest for organic photovoltaic devices or thin-film transistors. This theme
will apply the transparent conducting electrodes to contact structures of
interest for photovoltaic and transistor devices in order to study potential
performance improvements. The intellectual merits of the program include
exploration of the conduction and contact properties in a new class of
nanostructured 2D-1D hybrids of graphene and metal nanowires to address the
fundamental limits of these materials. The well-integrated experimental and
modeling efforts will explore the parameter-space of the composite to provide
insights into the nature of the conduction in such coupled systems, contact
properties to relevant device layers, and pathways toward improved sheet
resistance versus transparency relationships. In addition to standard
electrical, optical and structural characterization techniques, the experimental
effort will utilize thermo-reflectance imaging to provide information on current
pathways and bulk versus junction effects within the networks. The modeling
effort builds on unique capabilities for understanding nanoscale electronic
transport in disordered systems as well as fundamental models of
nanostructured/organic photovoltaic devices. The broader impacts of the program
include an integrated education and outreach program aimed at addressing
challenges in nanotechnology-related education/training arising from the
interdisciplinary nature of many of the projects, and aimed at providing
opportunities for participants from under-represented groups. The proposed
program includes i) development of modules for a "Nanohub-U" course, accessible
worldwide, ii) integrated research and professional development experiences for
undergraduates, and iii) a research and technology symposium focused on
transparent conducting electrodes.