* 1408745
* SHF: Medium: A Balance of Power: Programming and Reasoning for Software-Defined Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,004,152.00

Computer networks use switches, routers, and other devices to process and
forward traffic. In a traditional network, these devices coordinate to agree on
how traffic should be forwarded. Software-defined networks (SDN) replace this
distributed control with a logically centralized controller program which
dictates forwarding behavior to each device by installing rules which can
include instructions to send certain traffic to the controller for processing or
notification. Incorrect rules can lead to the controller missing vital
notifications, giving it an incorrect view of the network's state and
potentially harming network functionality. On the other hand, if traffic is sent
to the controller needlessly, performance can suffer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing Flowlog, a tierless SDN programming language. A tierless
language unifies the disparate layers of programming for SDNs: the controller
program itself, switch forwarding rules, and the controller's internal state.
Flowlog safely handles rule-management on the switches automatically, without
any intervention from the programmer. This not only simplifies development, but
also prevents the above bugs that can arise from manual rule-installation.
Finally, Flowlog programs can interact with arbitrary other programs, even those
not written in Flowlog. Since a failure in a controller program can compromise
the entire network, program reliability is of central importance. Thus, Flowlog
is designed to enable automatic reasoning about programs, and the project is
building in support for program verification (both for a specific network and in
general), differential analysis, fault-tolerance testing, and even automated
repair of errant programs.