* 1408849
* Making Academic Change Happen Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2015
* Julia Williams, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 02/28/2015
* USD 48,330.00

The lack of systemic change in STEM education points to an important problem
with the approach that the STEM education community has pursued thus far. Change
has been targeted at the course and curriculum levels, focusing on teaching and
learning methods and proving their efficacy (Borrego, Froyd, & Hall, 2010).
While beneficial, these activities have not fostered the underlying strategies,
motivation, communication, collaboration, and persuasion that are the foundation
for change on larger, more institutional levels. These change strategies are
well documented in the literature of other disciplines, such as organizational
psychology and behavior, but have not been brought into the conversation within
STEM education in a rigorous, accessible way. The workshop Making Academic
Change Happen (MACH) fills the need of academics for research-based skills
development and assistance in creating a plan for change. Through targeted
working sessions on specific topics (e.g. partnership development, generating
buy-in, institutional context, and identity discovery), participants learn
research-proven strategies for making large scale change happen on their home
campus. The MACH workshop helps faculty reach beyond their specific classrooms
to effect the systemic change needed to advance STEM education consistent with a
concert of national voices (for example, the National Academy of Engineering's
Engineer of 2020; President Obama's Educate to Innovate program; AAU's
Undergraduate STEM Education Initiative). By focusing on strategies, plans, and
the institutional framework, participants in the MACH workshop become change
agents.

A typical college or university faculty member is not trained as a change agent,
yet policy, administrators, and students are calling for change, especially in
STEM fields. The purpose of this workshop is 1) to assist faculty members in
learning and practicing skills needed to lead change, and 2) prepare working
documents around a variety of topics that are necessary to advance a change
project. By fostering the development of these skills and mindsets in the very
people who must lead change efforts, this workshop promotes meaningful change in
STEM higher education. The change projects advanced by the workshop participants
are expected to become model programs that can be mined for examples strategies
and processes for others hoping to implement similar ideas. These projects reach
beyond a single faculty member's classroom, focusing more on the underlying
processes, approaches, or philosophy of STEM education enacted on their campus.
By working within the institution's context, the change agents trained during
the MACH workshop will positively impact the student experience of STEM.