* 1408316
* Online Resource Allocation with Energy Harvesting for Underwater Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Yahong Zheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 376,000.00

Underwater wireless communication networks have found a wide range of
applications, such as environmental monitoring, offshore exploration, disaster
prevention, and military surveillance. These wireless networks are required to
provide sophisticated real-time data collection and serve for prolonged
deployment time, such as 30 to 50 years. The objective of this research is to
develop perpetual underwater wireless networks in which high-speed multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) transceivers are powered up by long-lasting super-
capacitors via energy harvesting from environmental energy sources. This project
will develop real-time resource allocation and stochastic optimization solutions
to efficiently allocate the bandwidth and power resources in underwater energy-
harvesting wireless networks, taking into account the unique dynamics of energy-
harvesting power sources and the time variation of the underwater channels. The
proposed approach will establish a practical design approach for energy-
harvesting MIMO transceivers to achieve high reliability, high data rate, and
high energy efficiency, in the presence of highly dynamic underwater acoustic
communication environments. Another important goal of the project is to train
next-generation researchers through a set of education and outreach activities
including course development, graduate and undergraduate student training,
service to local high school robotics teams, and participation in marine
robotics competition. These activities will also advocate responsible
engineering approaches for reducing sound pollution in
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underwater wireless communications often require
large MIMO transceivers to achieve the demanding requirements on reliability and
throughput. As such, resource allocation for energy-harvesting MIMO
communication becomes a complicated joint design of precoding and bandwidth
allocation that involves a large number of design variables. Meanwhile, the
dynamics of energy-harvesting power sources and the time variation of the
underwater channels are on a similar time scale, thus requiring online
stochastic optimization instead of the offline resource allocation commonly used
in MIMO RF networks. To address these unique challenges in perpetual underwater
wireless networks, this project formulates the joint online precoder design and
bandwidth allocation into a multi-variable stochastic dynamic programming (SDP)
problem, and proposes a novel nested optimization algorithm to solve it
iteratively with low computational complexity. This project contributes to
advancing wireless communications and network technology by a novel nested
optimization algorithm that solves the multi-variable SDP problem with linear
computational complexity and an online resource allocation method that uses
stochastic models on both communication channels and energy sources rather than
commonly used deterministic models. A hardware test bed will also be built to
verify the online resource allocation algorithms and super-capacitor energy
sources.