* 1408168
* Physical Mechanisms and Limits of Skyrmions for Information Processing and Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Roger Lake, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A magnetic skyrmion is a topologically protected, circular, swirling spin
texture in which the spins on the periphery are polarized vertically, the
central spin is polarized in the opposite direction, and, in between, the spins
smoothly transition between the two opposite polarizations. Skyrmions exist in
certain helimagnetic materials such as the B20 magnets in which broken inversion
symmetry gives rise to the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. The radius of a
skyrmion ranges from 3 nm to 100 nm depending on the ratio of the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and the symmetric Heisenberg interaction.
Skyrmion lattices and isolated skyrmions have been observed in bulk and in thin
films, and the electrical current required to move a skyrmion is 4 to 5 orders
of magnitude less than that required to move a more conventional magnetic domain
wall. Because of the their small size, their stability, the demonstration of
their individual creation and annihilation, and their facile movement with low
current, skyrmions are being investigated for magnetic information storage
applications. For such applications, an understanding of the process of skyrmion
creation, annihilation, decay, and readout is required. This project will
investigate these processes, and it will optimize a new method for low-energy
skyrmion creation and annihilation using nanosecond current pulses. Read-out
using the topological Hall effect will be analyzed. Four different architectures
exploiting the skyrmion as the state variable will be investigated. A successful
project could lead to new approaches to spin and topological based computing.
The exploitation of low-energy, stable, high-temperature, topologically
protected states can result in high-payoff in the technologies of memory and
computation. The developed software will be made available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic Skyrmions are topologically protected,
particle-like spin textures that are being investigated for magnetic information
storage applications. Four different architectures that exploit a skyrmion state
variable for information processing are proposed, and open questions concerning
the underlying physical mechanisms and fundamental limits of the Skyrmion
systems are identified. These questions will be answered using theoretical and
computational methods including the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, ab initio
density functional theory, and the non-equilibrium Green function formalism. For
the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert dynamical simulations of the spin system, a
stochastic field will be applied to include the effect of thermal fluctuations
at finite temperature. A new method for low-energy creation and annihilation of
skyrmions using a nanosecond current pulse will be optimized. The lattice
version of the topological charge will be used to analyze the microscopic
dynamical processes. It provides a clear picture of the spin trajectories and
orientations that locally trigger a topological transition, it reveals the
topological origin of a skyrmion?s stability at finite temperatures, and it
signals the exact moment at which a skyrmion is created or destroyed. A coupled
Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert / non-equilibrium Green function approach will be used
to investigate the use of the topological Hall voltage for skyrmion readout and
the interaction of spin waves with skyrmions for non-boolean, holographic
information processing.