* 1408955
* Dynamic and Reversible Control over Biological Signals in Hydrogel Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of Colorado at Boulder is cofunded by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG). This award
supports the study of adult stem cell for the potential treatment of injured or
diseased tissues. While these cell-based therapies provide a possible avenue to
restore function and improve quality of life, current limitations in their
translation include the inability to control the differentiation of the stem
cells, low survival of the transplanted cells, etc. Biomaterial systems that
provide the right signals to these cells could help overcome many of these
problems. To address this significant need, this project will develop advanced
biomaterial systems for the culture of bone-marrow derived stem cells, and the
materials and methods will allow us to better understand which signals are
important and how they should be presented to the cells. We expect that this
research will translate into new biomaterial systems for the delivery of adult
stem cells that will improve their safety and efficacy. During this research,
graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art methods at the interface
of biology with engineering, and prepared for scientific careers in areas of
national need (e.g., biomaterials, medical devices, and drug delivery). The team
will also integrate undergraduate students and high school students as part of a
sustained effort to communicate this work to the local public through outreach
programs. In addition to publication of results that will be broadly accessible,
we will also continue to develop hands-on demonstrations for visiting secondary
students, teachers and parents, as the visual aspects of imaging cells in 3D
captures the attention and excitement of many prospective future scientists and
engineers.

Technical: This award supports the development of hydrogel biomaterials for the
culture of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). hMSCs are adult stem cells that
are being used in numerous clinical trials to promote healing of injured or
diseased tissues. With this award, hydrogel scaffolds will be synthesized and
characterized that allow one to introduce important biological signals at the
interface of the biomaterial matrix with the hMSCs. The approach exploits a
thiol-ene reaction mechanism and particularly an allyl-sulfide functionality.
Many thiol-containing biomacromolecules (e.g., proteins, peptides) can be
conjugated to the ally-sulfide moieity through reversible exchange reactions,
which allow user-controlled modification of the scaffold biochemical
functionality. Since the expansion and controlled differentiation of hMSCs often
involves sequential presentation of biological signals, the materials developed
as part of this award will allow us to study and engineer systems for improved
culture of hMSCs, as well as design improved hMSC delivery vehicles for
therapeutic applications. As part of this research, students at multiple levels
(high school, undergraduate and graduate) will be trained in polymer and peptide
synthesis, bioconjugation techniques, hydrogel characterization, stem cell
culture and advanced light microscopy methods. The knowledge learned from this
research will be integrated into course content in advanced Biomaterials and
Tissue Engineering courses, as well as communicated to the general public
through numerous outreach programs at the University of Colorado.