* 1408751
* EAGER: Direct Storage of Solar Energy as Electricity
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Xiao-Dong Zhou, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2015
* USD 100,000.00

1408751 Zhou

An abundant supply of clean and affordable energy is vital to the economic
growth, quality of life, and security of the United States. There are two
aspects of the energy problem. World demand for energy is projected to more than
double by 2050 (from 13 to 30 terawatts) and more than triple by the end of the
century. The increasing demand will create fierce worldwide competition for the
gradually depleting fossil fuel reserves, putting in danger our quality of life
that depends on a supply of energy at a low cost. On the other hand, increasing
greenhouse emission is mostly likely linked to global warming. Indeed, the
concentration of CO2 - the key contributor to global climate change, in the
atmosphere, is at the highest recorded level since records began - and it is set
to further increase. The need to simultaneously increase our energy supply while
reducing CO2 emissions is one of the major challenges facing our global society
today.

Future energy sources that can meet these dual requirements include solar, wind,
and nuclear energy - all of which can produce electricity as the primary form of
energy. Solar power is the only truly renewable resource which can be harnessed
in sufficient quantities to seriously impact worldwide energy needs; however
storage of solar energy has been a great challenge to tackle. The

Intellectual Merit:

The focus is to tightly integrate conversion and storage systems into an
electrochemical reactor, named "direct solar-to-electricity (DSE) reactor". The
concept is to utilize solar energy to activate a liquid redox couple in a
continuous mode; as a result, solar energy can be directly stored as electricity
in a novel liquid flow battery. The proposed activities engage interdisciplinary
areas of electrochemistry, reactor design, organic synthesis and semiconductor
physics. The advantages of radical organic compounds for direct storage of solar
energy are (1) an extremely high power due to fast reaction kinetics of the
organic radicals, (2) ease of organic radicals to be modified to facilitate
specific functions and (3) absence of expensive or toxic metal ions in these
organic compounds. The concept of direct storage of solar energy as electricity
is a "high risk-high pay off" exploratory work in its early stages, but could be
transformative.

Broader impacts:

Specific anticipated broader impacts are as follows: (1) one graduate student
will be trained, increasing the pool of experts in the areas of batteries,
electrochemistry, and energy/environment; (2) two undergraduate students will be
actively recruited and leveraged with the Undergraduate Research Fellowships at
USC to build a diverse group that includes women and/or members of
underrepresented minority groups; (3) The PI will interact with middle school
teachers and students. Middle School has been chosen as the outreaching focus of
this project. Through this outreach activity, the PI hopes to spark interest in
the scientific and technological field, thereby encouraging students to follow a
STEM career into high school and ultimately into college, and (4) Timely
research developments on advanced energy systems will be incorporated into the
Materials curriculum within the College of Engineering at the University of
South Carolina.