* 1408916
* Topological phases of matter and disordered systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Nicholas Read, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to study and understand the properties and possible
phases of matter, particularly matter made of electrons in materials and in
engineered materials structures, under different conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological phases of matter are theoretically expected to
occur in various materials and materials systems. Important examples include a
two-dimensional liquid of electrons trapped at engineered semiconductor
interfaces in a high magnetic field, specific insulators known as topological
insulators, and in some types of superconductors. Superconductors are a state of
electrons in some materials that have distinctive quantum mechanical properties
and can transport electricity without loss. Topological phases are characterized
by properties that are robust, so they cannot be easily destroyed by
imperfections and defects, but they are not connected with symmetries as would
be the case in more traditional phases. Understanding topological phases
requires the theory of quantum mechanics in an essential way. Experiments have
discovered or confirmed the existence of some topological phases. There is great
potential for these phases of matter to lead or contribute to new technologies,
including spintronic devices which exploit not only on the electron's charge but
also its intrinsic magnetic properties for their operation, and in future
computer technologies based on the manipulation of quantum mechanical states.
The PI will build on his previous work and further develop the theory of these
phases, making theoretical predictions that can be tested in experiments or make
it possible to identify topological phases as they occur. The specific areas of
focus include methods for modeling topological phases as networks, and an
unusual form of viscosity that arises in some of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In other phases of matter, disorder, or
the effects of random impurities or defects that are endemic in solids, can lead
again to distinct phases of matter. This project will advance the theoretical
understanding of these, especially "spin glasses." In any given example of one
of these systems it is very difficult to guess what the lowest energy state is,
because there are many low-energy alternatives. Quantifying the number of these
is a topic of research. In a fundamental way, these glassy systems are related
to many other applications of networks, and to optimization in computer
programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on topological phases and disordered materials. Fundamental aspects of
topological phases will be considered, as well as applications and diagnostic
tools. The PI will investigate entanglement in the context of topological
phases. The PI plans to continue work on tensor network states for chiral
topological phases of matter; tensor networks have been fruitful in, for
example, classifying topological phases in one dimension. He aims to engage the
problem of transport phenomena that are related to basic topological properties
such as the "central charge," and the possibility of measuring the Hall
viscosity in quantum Hall systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On disordered systems:
the PI will use replica symmetry breaking theory to produce results on the
number of pure states in the spin-glass phase at low temperatures in the short-
range Ising spin glass model, and others. This relates to basic conceptual
issues in spin glass theory concerning the number and organization of pure
states, and is a subject of controversy.