* 1408734
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Black-Box Evaluation of Cryptographic Entropy at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Nadia Heninger, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 430,000.00

The ability to generate random numbers -- to flip coins -- is crucial for many
computing tasks, from Monte Carlo simulation to secure communications. The
theory of building such subsystems to generate random numbers is well
understood, but the gap between theory and practice is surprisingly wide. As
built today, these subsystems are opaque and fragile. Flaws in these subsystems
can compromise the security of millions of Internet hosts.

This project will develop black-box techniques for finding entropy failures at
Internet scale related to randomness. These techniques, which build on
programming languages, operating systems, networking, security, and
cryptography, will then be applied to perform a systematic, ongoing census of
the state of random number generation vulnerabilities. Through this census, the
project can analyze the "longtail" of deployed networked systems rather than a
handful chosen a priori.

The project will develop and disseminate defensive analysis tools that will help
programmers debug and correct entropy problems in their code before they ship
it. It will produce cryptographic countermeasures and entropy-gathering
subsystems that provide better security guarantees than existing systems,
reducing the impact of those entropy failures that do slip through.

The result will be a better understanding of entropy and more trustworthy
systems, today and in the future.