* 1408789
* Simultaneous Measurements of Coronal Magnetic Field and Plasma Properties with Upgraded CoMP (UCoMP)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Enrico Landi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,061,494.00

The Sun is the ultimate driver of the physical properties and evolution of the
entire Heliosphere, and can cause severe perturbations to the near-Earth space
environment due to large-scale dynamic events taking place in the solar
atmosphere, such as flares and Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs). Our society is
becoming increasingly dependent on technological assets that can be directly
damaged by these, so-called, Space Weather events. Consequently, predicting the
occurrence of such events is of critical importance to minimizing their damage.
Also, little is known on how the cradle of Space Weather, the solar atmosphere,
is formed and maintained. For example, the mechanisms that heat the atmosphere
of the Sun to multi-million degree temperatures are not known, and how the
continuous outward stream of highly ionized plasma known as the solar wind is
heated and accelerated is also still an open question. This project is a four-
year effort to perform an upgrade to an existing corona instrument installed at
the solar observatory at Mauna Loa to increase both the field of view of the
solar atmosphere that can be imaged and the range of the spectrum that it can
observe. The new measurements will open a new window in the observations of
CMEs, allowing for the first time quantitative studies of their thermal
structure, dynamics and evolution for the first time. In addition, they will
help deliver the continuous, long-term measurements of plasma dynamics,
magnetism and thermodynamics of the entire solar atmosphere that are needed to
answer fundamental questions about the heating of the atmosphere and the origin
of the solar wind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out in
collaboration between the University of Michigan and the High Altitude
Observatory (HAO) of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, each
contributing essential expertise and experience to ensure its successful
completion. An important expected outcome of the effort is the creation of an
integrated facility that will connect groundbreaking new observations of the
solar atmosphere and solar magnetic field with cutting-edge theoretical and
diagnostic tools, all of which will be made easily and readily available to the
solar and space physics research community. Undergraduate students will be
integrated into the project on yearlong research projects, through the
University of Michigan?s Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) at
no cost to this project. Likewise, while not funded in this project, plans are
included for graduate students at the University of Michigan to use these new
data and modeling tools for their dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Coronal Multichannel Polarimeter (CoMP), a visible light coronagraph and filter
polarimeter currently deployed at Mauna Loa Solar Observatory which already
routinely measures the Stokes I, Q, U, and V parameters between 1.05 and 1.38
solar radii, will be upgraded to include multiple chromospheric, transition
region and coronal lines. Specifically, the Upgraded CoMP (UCoMP) instrument
will extend the wavelength coverage and the number of wavelengths observed by
CoMP to include visible and near-IR emission lines in the 5000-11000 Ã… range.
The lines that UCoMP will observe are emitted by the quiescent and active corona
in the 0.8-4.0 MK temperature range, as well as by the core of accelerating CMEs
between 0.01 MK up to &amp;#8776;0.5 MK. In addition, a new set of dual
detectors will enable UCoMP to have nearly twice the FOV and twice the spatial
resolution as compared to the existing CoMP capability. &lt;br/&gt;As and
integral part of this effort, a joint data distribution and analysis center will
be built at HAO and the University of Michigan that will distribute to the space
physics community not only the data from UCoMP but also the necessary advanced
tools for spectroscopic diagnostics, data analysis, and modeling.