* 1408259
* SELF-ASSEMBLY OF ACTIVE NANOPARTICLES
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Angelo Cacciuto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2017
* USD 315,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Nature uses self-assembly to generate a vast
variety of functional structures. This process leverages thermal motion to
generate nanostructures at practically no external cost. Unfortunately, the
drawback of having to rely on random motion, as opposed to deliberate maneuvers,
is that all nanocomponents will indiscriminately find each other without
necessarily matching the correct partners. Over the last few years, a new kind
of nanoparticle has been synthesized. By converting chemical fuel dispersed in
solution into consistent, directed motion, these particles behave effectively as
nano-rockets (self-propelled particles), and represent the synthetic analog of
bacteria. Using a combination of theoretical and computational techniques, the
PI's group will study how this new exciting feature (propulsion), not only could
provide a general platform for creating novel functional materials with unusual
mechanical properties, but also, how it could greatly simplify or bias the
dynamical landscape associated with the self-assembly processes, by effectively
reducing its complexity. &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a number of outreach
initiatives, including the development of educational software for touch screen
devices, training of graduate and undergraduate students in theoretical and
numerical research, and other educational activities aimed at broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a computational, theoretical and educational program to study how self-
propelled nanoparticles self-assemble. The collective behavior that emerges in
systems of self-propelled particles is quite unique, and is reminiscent of the
beautiful correlated motion exhibited by some birds (flocking), insects
(swarming) and fish (schooling). The material properties of condensed phases
formed by active components are also exciting and very unusual, holding promise
for the development of the next generation of intelligent materials. This
proposal has two main goals: (1) To understand how very basic and well-
established phenomena in non-active systems (that can be used as a solid
thermodynamic reference) carry over when different degrees of activity are
imposed on the nanoparticles; thus leading the way to a better understanding of
the interplay between active and thermal forces that is at the core of the
phenomenological behavior observed in these systems. (2) To develop strategies
to control how active nanocomponents self-assemble, and transform their random
active motion into a coherent motion of the mesoscopic structures they form,
thus creating active aggregates that can perform work by exploiting chemical
fuel (or other sources of energy) at nanoscale.