* 1408511
* Broadband THz frequency comb generation in quantum cascade lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mikhail Belkin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 351,260.00

The scientific objective of this proposal is to create terahertz (THz) frequency
combs based on quantum cascade laser sources operating at room-temperature. The
research will focus on innovative designs of the quantum cascade laser to
produce hundreds of evenly-spaced THz emission lines. Based on these laser
sources, the PI intends to demonstrate a prototype spectroscopic system using
the frequency-comb emission lines. The proposed devices could lead to room-
temperature spectroscopic instrumentation for security and industrial
applications based on mass-producible semiconductor components. This project is
a multidisciplinary activity that offers a unique educational environment for
graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project. At least one
graduate student and several undergraduate students will be involved in this
research program. The PI will endeavor to recruit these students from
underrepresented minorities and will interact with students at the K-12 level
through the NSF-sponsored UTeachEningeering
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
attain the necessary knowledge to create room-temperature quantum cascade lasers
having THz frequency combs spanning the entire 0.5-5 THz range. The research
will focus on creating quantum cascade laser active region design that provides
broadband mid-infrared laser gain, giant third-order optical nonlinearity for
efficient mid-infrared frequency comb generation, and giant second-order
nonlinearity for efficient down-conversion of mid-infrared frequency comb to THz
spectral range. The laser waveguide will be designed to enable low group
velocity dispersion for mid-infrared TM00 laser modes and efficient terahertz
radiation generation and out-coupling via Cherenkov difference-frequency
generation. A subtle interplay of three- and four-wave mixing processes in mid-
infrared quantum cascade lasers will be investigated, linewidth measurements of
terahertz frequency comb emission from the lasers will be performed, and novel
low group-velocity-dispersion quantum cascade laser waveguide designs will be
optimized via iterative design-fabrication-measurements process. A prototype
frequency comb spectroscopic system based on quantum cascade laser sources and a
heterodyne detector, such as room-temperature Schottky-diode or cryogenically-
cooled superconducting or hot-electron bolometer, is to be demonstrated.