* 1408429
* Quantum optical resonators: a building block for quantum computing and sensing systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Stefan Preble, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 349,789.00

Quantum optical resonators: a building block for quantum computing and sensing
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum effects have the potential to revolutionize
computing, communication and measurement systems. Photons are particularly well
suited for the communication of quantum information, commonly known as qubits,
since photons can transmit over long distances with minimal information loss.
However, it has been challenging to use photons to realize quantum computers
since one photon cannot easily control another photon. Fortunately, it was
discovered by Knill, Laflamme and Milburn (KLM) that when photons interfere
within linear optical elements, such as beam splitters, and are then detected
that it is possible to realize an effective control of another photon. However,
this breakthrough comes at the cost of requiring many additional optical devices
that take up a lot of space on large optical tables, and as a result, have
limited the performance of quantum optical computers so far. Recently, attempts
have been made to miniaturize quantum optical devices onto microchips in order
to densely integrate all of the necessary components and to maximize
performance. In this project, the footprint of quantum optical circuits will be
significantly reduced further through the development of a new class of quantum
optical devices based on resonant optical cavities. These resonators effectively
force photons to propagate many times around in a small space of just a few
micrometers. The research team recently discovered that when the resonators are
excited with just a few photons that the photons interfere quantum optically in
surprising new ways. Specifically, this new quantum resonant interference
depends on the photon excitation itself, opening up the possibility to develop
new quantum computing gates. Furthermore, it has been found that this quantum
interference is more robust than in traditional optical components, such as beam
splitters. These quantum optical resonators can also be used to more than double
the sensitivity of optical sensors used for biological, chemical and
environmental sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is
to realize scalable quantum optical computing circuits based on resonant quantum
optical logic gates. The research team has recently shown that ring resonators
operating in the quantum regime exhibit a resonant response that depends on the
photon state. Unlike beam splitters, which operate with maximum fidelity with
only one set of parameters, this unique passive feedback in ring resonators
ensures high fidelity quantum interference over, effectively, an infinite device
parameter space. The devices compact size and ability to be reconfigured
dynamically with low energy requirements ensures that ring resonators are the
ideal building block for realizing complex quantum optical circuits. In this
project the following key advancements will be made: (1) Experimental
demonstration of robust quantum interference in a ring resonator. Specifically,
it will be shown that when two photons interact within a ring resonator a novel
Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) resonance occurs where the two photons can either bunch
together or stay apart. (2) The first universal quantum logic gates based on
resonators will be developed. And the parameter space that the logic gates can
operate over will be explored with the goal of increasing overall circuit
robustness. (3) Multi-photon interference in resonators will be used to enhance
sensing. Specifically, the quantum phase response of the resonator can vary much
more strongly than with classical light. This can be used to realize ultra-
sensitive biological, chemical and environmental sensors.