* 1408125
* Integration of Microelectrode Arrays and Polymer Nanostructures for High-Throughput Study of Neural Regeneration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mohammad Reza Abidian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2017
* USD 0.00

ECCS Prop. No. 1408125

Proposal Title: Integration of Microelectrode Arrays and Polymer Nanostructures
for High-Throughput Study of Neural Regeneration

Award Goal The research objective of this proposal is to develop a cost-
effective and high-throughput technology using microelectrode arrays and polymer
nanostructures that would generate controlled gradients of multiple guidance
cues (GCs) for a systematic investigation of the effect of these cues on axons.

Nontechnical Abstract

Guidance of axons is vital for the development and repair of nervous system. It
is known that axons navigate along specific pathways to their targets by relying
on guidance mechanisms of gradients of attractive and repulsive cues that exist
in their extracellular environment. Injuries to the central and peripheral
nervous system (CNS and PNS) can result in severe functional loss. Spontaneous
axonal regeneration is limited to small lesions within PNS and is actively
suppressed within CNS. This study aims to develop a technology platform and
enhance fundamental knowledge on the interactions between regenerating axons and
their microenvironment. Through systematic investigation of the effect of
gradients of different cues on the growth and guidance of axons, this research
will pave the way for a solution to the major clinical problem of neural
regeneration in peripheral and central nervous systems. According to the
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center, there are approximately 290,000
individuals in the US who suffer from spinal cord injuries with about 12,000 new
injuries occurring each year. The findings of this research will, therefore,
have a significant impact on public health. The educational objective of this
proposal is to promote the participation of women and minorities in the field of
biomedical science and neural engineering by creating multi-interdisciplinary
training opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.
This work aims to: 1) integrate research and education through curriculum
development, workshops, and training of students in an interdisciplinary
environment; 2) open the pipeline at both high school to college and
undergraduate to graduate levels for minorities by providing hands-on
experiences.



Technical Abstract

Spontaneous axonal regeneration is limited to small lesions within injured
peripheral nervous system (PNS) and is actively suppressed within central
nervous system (CNS). While tissue-engineering strategies have been used for
treatment of nerve injuries, regeneration of functional axons over long nerve
gaps remains a challenge due to the complex post-injury physiological
environment that contains multiple, often conflicting signals. An improved
understanding of these signals and their integrated effect on regenerating axons
is, hence, a prerequisite for development of effective therapies for nerve
injuries. The research objective of this proposal is to develop a cost-effective
and high-throughput technology using microelectrode arrays and polymer
nanostructures that would generate controlled gradients of multiple distinct
guidance cues (GCs) for systematic investigation of the effect of these cues on
axons. Using the proposed technology, this research aims to: 1) study the effect
of gradients of diffusible growth molecules on growing axons; 2) investigate the
effect of gradients of surface cues on rate and direction of axonal growth; 3)
study the effect of integration of gradients of multiple GCs on axonal
regeneration in a 3D scaffold with the capability of monitoring axonal
regeneration.