* 1408063
* High-specificity drug uptake using magneto-electric nanoparticles for cancer treatment
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Carolyn runowicz, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

The human circulatory system can deliver a drug to every cell in the body;
however, bringing a drug inside a tumor cell without affecting the healthy cells
remains a formidable task. Availability of a technology capable of high-
specificity delivery of anti-neoplastic drugs would be a breakthrough in cancer
research. The objective of this research is to conduct basic in-vitro and in-
vivo studies to understand the underlying physics of drug-loaded magneto-
electric nanoparticles (MENs) at highly localized tumor sites. The engineering
approach lies in increasing the porosity of the cell membrane, via application
of a low-energy magnetic field, to allow the drug to penetrate inside the cancer
cells without affecting the surrounding healthy cells. The proposed approach
will form a basis of a novel external-field-controlled procedure to treat
various cancers, including ovarian, breast and lung. An important goal of the
project is to motivate students, especially underrepresented minorities at FIU
and in South Florida, to pursue cross-disciplinary degrees at the intersection
of nano-engineering and medicine. The interdisciplinary research team includes
an electrical engineer, a gynecologic oncologist, a clinical pharmacologist and
a cellular biologist.

In ovarian cancers, intraperitoneal delivery through a surgically implanted
catheter has shown improved survival rates. However, catheter complications and
toxicity have precluded widespread adoption of this technique. In this study, a
new nanotechnology is proposed to take advantage of (i) the difference between
the membrane electric properties of cancer and healthy cells, and (ii) the
capability of magneto-electric nanoparticles (MENs) at body-temperature to serve
as localized converters of a remotely supplied magnetic field into the MENs'
intrinsic electric fields that can trigger local nano-electroporation effects.
The technique allows to remotely control the electric fields in the vicinity of
intravenously injected MENs-loaded drug and consequently to enable drug delivery
with required specificity to the tumor cells. Electroporation will be used to
deliver a drug inside the cytosol via application of high enough electric field
to overcome the threshold required for increasing the porosity for drug
penetration inside the cell. The required specificity is due to the lower
threshold of the cancer cells being by at least a factor of two than that of the
healthy cells. Scanning probe microscopy and comprehensive surface spectroscopy
will be used to understand the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the
MENs' interaction with both the cancer and healthy cellular microenvironment
under different field conditions. Ovarian cancer will be used as a model with
nanoparticles core shell of cobalt iron titanate and barium titatnate as basic
MENs in conjunction with paclitaxel as a popular mitotic inhibitor drug.
Standard assays will be used to study the MENs' toxicity under different field
conditions. A mouse animal model will be exploited to conduct in-vivo studies.