* 1408097
* Collaborative Project:  A workshop addressing comparative genomic approaches to understanding the evolutionary ecology of corals and other basal metazoans.
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Paul Falkowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2015
* USD 21,176.00

To help accelerate our understanding of corals and their relation to more basal
and derived taxa, a workshop will be held at Rutgers University in the winter
2014. This workshop will focus on improving the annotation of a draft genome for
the Red Sea coral, Stylophora pistillata, coupled with a comparative analysis
with more basal and derived taxa. The goal of the workshop is to finalize the
annotation of the genome of the widely used model coral. Workshop participants,
international in scope, would also compare coral genomes, provide a genomic
reference data base for the research community, and allow analyses of functional
genomic models of coral metabolism, biomineralization, evolution, and
development. The effort has both basic and applied science components. The basic
components are related to understanding the evolutionary ecology of corals and
their relationship to other basal animals. The applied components are related to
the sensitivity of corals to global climate change related stressors including
thermal stress and ocean acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scleractinian
corals are the architects of a threatened ecosystem that are highly valued
culturally, biologically and economically. Genomic resources for this important
taxonomic group are only now beginning to emerge and this workshop will advance
the framework required to interpret genomic data and provide open access to
genomic data, an activity that will build significant research capacity for the
field of coral reef science. In addition to a peer reviewed publication
summarizing the conclusion of the investigations, data will be disseminated
broadly in a referenced and interpretable database of coral genomes that will
serve scientists, educators, managers, conservation personnel and the lay
community via a web portal. In terms of training, two postdoctoral fellows and a
graduate student will be responsible for the detailed organization of the
workshop. This experience will allow them to understand how to develop
cooperative efforts in the scientific community as part of their mentoring plan
and provide networking opportunities with the very diverse group of workshop
participants that will be important in their career development.