* 1408007
* A Combined Experiment and Modeling Approach for Advancing Terahertz Imaging of Three Dimensional Breast Cancer Tumors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Magda El-Shenawee, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 404,896.00

Proposal Title: A Combined Experiment and Modeling Approach for Advancing
Terahertz Imaging of Three Dimensinal Breast Cancer
Tumors.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Unniversity of
Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make
important contributions in imaging and sensing applications of cancerous tissue
and will result in major advances in diagnosing cancerous excised breast samples
. It will have a major societal impact and will result in significant savings in
health care. Advancing THz imaging algorithms will impact other applications of
THz technology in defense, national security and industry.Many women diagnosed
with early stage breast cancer choose to have a breast-conserving lumpectomy.
Unfortunately, in 20-70% of lumpectomy surgeries, the tumor has positive margins
that cannot be identified during the first surgery, and a second surgery must be
performed to remove the remaining cancer. This delay between surgeries adds to
both the cost and risk of breast cancer treatment. The proposed research will
significantly impact women?s health by advancing the assessment of tumor
margins, reducing cancer recurrence and mortality, and thereby improving the
quality of life for breast cancer patients. The success of this research will
lead to a decrease in the rate of second surgeries and hence a reduction in
health insurance cost. The project will also impact education and research
programs by involving graduate and undergraduate students in hands-on training
with terahertz technology and will provide unique training opportunities for
underrepresented and minority students who will be recruited from well-
established diversity programs at the University of Arkansas. Advancing
terahertz imaging algorithms will greatly benefit other potential applications
in defense, national security, and the semiconductor industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to advance terahertz imaging
for real-time assessment of excised breast cancer tumor margins in breast-
conserving lumpectomy surgery. Terahertz technology has recently emerged as a
promising medical imaging modality as it provides non-destructive, non-invasive,
and real-time evaluation of biological tissue. Terahertz imaging uses
electromagnetic radiation that can retrieve information of the structural and
chemical attributes of cancer tissue that may not be visible with other
techniques. The proposed approach will incorporate electromagnetic modeling,
terahertz measurements, and image reconstruction algorithms to offer
quantitative analysis of tumor margins. The finite difference time domain method
will be employed as the primary electromagnetic model to simulate the terahertz
interaction with cancer tissue. The Debye model will be developed using the
experimental spectroscopy measurements of various tissue samples. The use of
this model will advance the understanding of the fundamental physics involved in
terahertz wave interaction with realistic, three dimensional, highly
heterogeneous tumor tissues. The success of using terahertz technology in the
assessment of breast cancer tumor margins will lay the groundwork for future
robust and accurate imaging techniques than can be used intraoperatively. The
proposed research will open future opportunities for integrating engineering
knowledge and medical imaging research.