* 1408361
* Collaborative Research: Electronically-Scanned Wideband Digital Aperture Antenna Arrays using Multi-Dimensional Space-Time Circuit-Network Resonance: Theory and Hardware
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Habarakada Madanayake, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 208,000.00

An aperture array is a group of antennas that can be deployed in particular
geometric patterns to detect radio signals at a given range of frequencies.
Using an array is beneficial for electrical engineering because it can magnify a
radio signal in the direction of that signal while suppressing noise and
interference through a process known as beamforming. In addition, an antenna
array can be used to detect the direction and distance of the signal's source.
Aperture arrays are a crucial component of scientific instruments that measure
the spatial distribution of radio sources. For example, radio telescopes, such
as the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) instrument, rely on aperture arrays to
generate precise radio images of electromagnetic sources for experimental
cosmology and space science. These instruments image the sky using closely
spaced radio beams known as radio pixels. Closely packed sets of such beams can
be achieved by using hexagonal pixel grids, which are considered ideal for
scientific studies. In order to build aperture beamformers to be used for a
specific purpose, efficient schemes for processing the antenna array signals
must be developed to reduce the computing time, energy consumption, and costs
for the hardware required in the system. The proposed research creates new
algorithms and digital computing architectures that will produce highly-focused
hexagonal radio pixels for the most demanding of microwave imaging applications.
The same aperture arrays are used in radar and wireless communication systems
for signature detection and signal intelligence. In fact, aperture arrays are
absolutely essential for national security and public safety from a threat
detection perspective. In addition to its scientific merits and benefits for
national security, this project will train highly qualified personnel (HQP), who
will contribute to commercial industry, scientific research, public safety
agencies, and the defense sector. Specific efforts will focus on promoting Women
in Engineering programs in higher education to recruit and guide female
engineering students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tackles the problem of highly
directional sparse aperture arrays using the mathematical properties of multi-
dimensional recursive digital filters. The NSF-sponsored effort will develop
hardware systems for aperture arrays based on the proposed concept of network-
resonant phased-arrays (NRPAs). Multi-dimensional (MD) circuit theory and
digital hardware form an enabling technology for imaging algorithms that can
greatly improve performance over traditional technologies. This research
proposes groundbreaking techniques based on array signal processing, circuits
and systems. It will result in a significant improvement in the directional
sensitivity while using a lower number of array elements compared to traditional
phased array receivers of the same sensitivity. The proposed NRPAs combine the
concept of network resonance with phased array technology to gain significant
improvement in both directionality and sensitivity. The MD circuit theoretical
concept of network resonance allows digital beamformers to have complex pole
manifolds. These properties are shown to have advantages in terms of ultra-
wideband frequency response, exceptional directionality, multi-beams with shape
control, rapid steerability, and low computational complexity. This project
investigates radio beams with a hexagonal sky-print for optimal sensing and
microwave imaging over wide fields-of-view and bandwidths. The proposed NRPAs
will be extended to both sparse and random arrays via theoretical formulations
for decreasing hardware cost, reducing energy expended in computers and
increasing design flexibility.