* 1408974
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative: Documenting the Occurrence through Space &amp; Time of Aquatic Non-indigenous Fish, Mollusks, Algae, &amp; Plants Threatening North America's Great
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Melissa Tulig, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 253,572.00

One of the greatest threats to the health of North America's Great Lakes is
invasion by exotic species, several of which already have had catastrophic
impacts on property values, the fisheries, shipping, and tourism industries, and
continue to threaten the survival of native species and wetland ecosystems.
Additional species have been placed on watchlists because of their potential to
become aquatic invasives. This project will create a network of herbaria and
zoology museums from among the Great Lakes states of MN, WI, IL, IN, MI, OH, and
NY to better document the occurrence of these species in space and time by
imaging and providing online access to the information on the specimens of the
critical organisms. Several initiatives are already in place to alert citizens
to the dangers of spreading aquatic invasives among our nation's waterways, but
this project will develop complementary scientific and educational tools for
scientists, students, wildlife officers, teachers, and the public who have had
little access to images or data derived directly from preserved specimens
collected over the past three centuries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This bi-national
Thematic Collections Network of &gt;25 institutions from eight states and Canada
will digitize 1.73 million historical specimens representing 2,550 species of
exotic fish, clams, snails, mussels, algae, plants, and their look-alikes
documented to occur in the Great Lakes Basin. It is one of the first efforts to
digitize liquid preserved specimens and to integrate cross-kingdom taxa and
these methods could become national standards for cross taxon digitization.
Students will be provided with hands-on experience in modern methods of specimen
curation and this cross-taxon network will provide greater flexibility to
existing web platforms for integration of data. This award is made as part of
the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).