* 1408872
* Precisely Functionalized Molecular Nanoparticles are Fundamental and Unique Elements for Macromolecular Science
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Stephen Z. Cheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 700,000.00

This award by the Polymer program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Akron is to study in precisely controlling self-assembled
supramolecular structures across different length scales, and these
supramolecular structures are the key to the 'bottom-up' nanofabrication
technology. New class of self-assembling materials, termed as 'giant molecules',
which refer to precisely-defined macromolecules composed of selected and
specifically functionalized molecular nanoparticles as the elemental building
blocks ('nano-atoms'), are designed to achieve this goal. These 'nano-atoms'
possess persistent volume, symmetry, and surface functionalities for further
processing in chemical assembly. Typical 'nano-atoms' are exemplified by the
derivatives of fullerenes, polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes,
polyoxometalates, and folded globular proteins. Highly efficient 'click-type'
reactions are used to construct prototype giant molecules in a modular and
precise manner. Novel and rich self-assembly behaviors have been demonstrated by
the newly-designed giant molecules in the bulk, thin-film, and solution states,
revealing a promising way to advance the understanding of self-assembly and to
obtain unconventional hierarchical structures and dynamics. Students and
postdoctoral researchers will be trained in this new interdisciplinary field,
and they will acquire a combination of synthetic skills, characterization
techniques, and physical principles, and provide them a platform to develop new
discoveries at the interface of chemistry, physics and life science and careers
in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research has the following
broader impacts. The education aspects of this proposal are intended to benefit
students at all educational levels in the community with the cutting-edge
research activities and scientific demonstrations. The PI will continue to
actively participate in recruiting and training undergraduate and graduate
students, and will provide them with hands-on experiences in the laboratory. In
addition, the PI is planning to develop a new course specifically focusing on
the progress related to the proposed research. The traditional collaboration
among the PI's research group, department and the Akron Global Polymer Academy
has provided STEM teaching and training opportunities for K-12 students from
local schools, and these activities will be continued with this award. The
proposed research is not only scientifically innovative and interesting, but
also technologically relevant, and the PI is actively involved in tech transfer
of his research findings. This is especially reflected by the recent efforts to
develop sub-22 nm nanopatterning technology with industry. The PI is also active
in developing a more diverse, interdisciplinary workforce through the advanced
training of students, specifically from various minority and underrepresented
groups, for the next-generation evolution in soft materials-based sciences,
engineering and technologies.