* 1408370
* Collaborative Research: BAMM: Baseband Accelerators for Massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Joseph Cavallaro, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 189,665.00

Wireless communication is one of the fastest growing technologies worldwide
creating ubiquitous access to mobile broadband services. The transition from one
to several (typically two to four) antennas at both ends of the wireless link,
known as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), was a key enabler for the
growing data rates during the last decade. However, as the demands for data
rates on the network are expected to increase by more than 1000x by 2020, novel
transmission technologies beyond small-scale MIMO become necessary. This project
will leverage recent theoretical results in massive MIMO, which promise that the
use of hundreds of antennas at the base-station will enable orders-of-magnitude
higher data rates than conventional small-scale MIMO systems. Since existing
algorithms and current integrated circuit architectures are unable to sustain
the excessive complexity caused by the massive amount of received data streams,
this project will jointly consider algorithms and efficient (in terms of cost
and power) computing architectures. The project will analyze system trade-offs
to develop low-complexity algorithms and corresponding integrated circuits that
will enable the capabilities of massive MIMO. Another goal of this project in
terms of broader impact is to develop open-access education materials and
semester-length courses on algorithms and hardware design aspects of massive
MIMO.

The computational complexity of existing data detection, multi-user interference
suppression (pre-coding), and impairment-compensation algorithms in systems
relying on massive MIMO grows super-linear in the number of base-station
antennas. Thus, the associated computational complexity prevents the use of
these algorithms in wireless systems having hundreds of antennas. To enable
massive MIMO in future systems, the project develops a set of novel
computationally efficient algorithms for detection, pre-coding, and impairment
compensation that can be implemented in dedicated digital very-large scale
integration (VLSI) circuits at low complexity and power. The proposed methods
will rely on approximate algorithms using series expansions and convex
optimization, which approaches optimal performance as the number of base-station
antennas increases. Furthermore, novel antenna-selection schemes are developed
with the goal of reducing the complexity and hardware costs incurred by the
presence of hundreds of base-station antennas. In addition to theoretical
analyses and algorithm development, experimental evaluation of the developed
baseband accelerators will be conducted on early-stage academic prototype
platforms. The results of this evaluation will be used to assess the
performance, complexity, and power consumption of the developed algorithm
accelerator designs in realistic environments and to identify both the potential
capabilities and limits of massive MIMO systems.