* 1408865
* Regioselective Control of Multiple Additions to Empty and Endohedral Fullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Luis Echegoyen, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Luis Echegoyen and his research team at
the University of Texas at El Paso will prepare and characterize endohedral
"clusterfullerenes", for potential uses as acceptor materials in high efficiency
organic solar cells (OSCs). Endohedral clusterfullerenes are carbon cages that
entrap a variety of clusters, resulting in unusual electronic properties. Of
fundamental importance will be the interplay between the properties of the
encapsulated clusters and the corresponding addition positions on the exohedral
carbon surfaces. The long range goal is to control, in a predetermined way, the
regiochemistry of multiple additions on the surfaces of these fullerenes. This
team will explore reaction regiochemistry using independent multiple addition
processes as well as tethered ones, where the adduct reagents are connected by a
well-defined spacer. The properties of these compounds will be characterized
using a wide variety of techniques, including X-ray crystallographic analyses,
spectroscopy and electrochemistry, specifically looking for evidence of endo-exo
cluster-cage interactions and their relationship to the overall chemical and
electronic properties of the compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses mainly on two families of endohedral clusterfullerenes, the trimetallic
nitrides, in which the carbon cages encapsulate M3N clusters, and the dimetallic
sulfides, which entrap M2S clusters. Efforts will be devoted to entrapping
mainly transition metals and avoid rare earths, including mixed metallic
sulfides, M1M2S@C2n, where M1 and M2 and transition metals and n&gt;39.
Intrinsic as well as chemical properties will be fully explored. An outreach
program will continue to impact middle school students, primarily eighth graders
of Hispanic origin, by exposing them to Energy and Nano concepts and laboratory
practices. Besides this important broader impact there are potential societal
benefits to be derived from the compounds and materials prepared, especially in
OSCs, and from the training provided to the students involved in the project,
many of whom are from Hispanic backgrounds. Because Professor Echegoyen is
heavily involved in international collaborations with many scientists around the
world, an additional broader impact results from these fertile intellectual
interactions.