* 1408617
* Theoretical and Experimental Ion Diffusion in II-VI Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 435,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract Many energy conversion, energy storage, and information
processing technologies involve ion diffusion through nano- or mesostructured
inorganic solids. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research, this project involves integrated
theoretical and experimental research aimed at understanding and controlling
such ion diffusion processes, with the overarching goal of yielding both new
materials and new fundamental knowledge with broad impact on future technologies
involving ion diffusion. This project also aims to provide advanced education
and training in interdisciplinary materials chemistries, preparing participants
to be future leaders in science, engineering, and education. Special emphasis is
given to integration of research and education at the undergraduate level
through (a) aggressive involvement of undergraduates in the proposed research,
(b) incorporation of experiments and concepts from the proposed research into
the University of Washington (UW) undergraduate laboratory curriculum, (c)
collaboration with faculty from undergraduate institutions, including hosting
such faculty and their undergraduate students as visiting scientists at UW, and
(d) mature outreach activities at North Seattle Community College and various
Seattle high schools.

Technical Abstract The research is focused on detailed investigations of ion
diffusion mechanisms in II-VI semiconductor nanocrystals, balancing experimental
and theoretical efforts by applying a combination of sophisticated spectroscopic
and chemical techniques in conjunction with rigorous analytical methods and
first-principle electronic structure theories and molecular dynamics to study
ion (H+, Li+, K+, etc.) diffusion into/out of colloidal II-VI semiconductor
nanocrystals with systematic variation of key structural parameters. The project
objectives include investigating the kinetics and thermodynamics of ion
diffusion in II-VI semiconductor nanocrystals, developing new complex-
composition nanomaterials guided by theory, and exploring such processes and
materials as model systems for next-generation ion batteries. The deep
fundamental understanding of ion diffusion in nanostructures gained from this
research promises to define the guiding principles needed for creating new ion
battery frameworks and new complex materials by design.