* 1408572
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Statistical Rating Organizations and Institutional Isomorphism
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Robert Hanneman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 5,569.00

The proposed research examines the extent to which major corporate bond rating
agencies, as gatekeepers to corporate investment capital, promote the adoption
of normative practices to firms through the bond rating process. According to
new-institutional theories, when facing uncertainty, institutional notions about
best practices often guide organizational behavior rather than rational
calculations based on economic efficiency. The high level of uncertainty present
in the bond rating industry and the lack of accountability that comes from the
few rating agencies creates an environment in which institutional notions about
best practices potentially inform rating decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on quantitative analysis of firm ratings. I hypothesize that
those firms engaging in normative behaviors (e.g. using popular forms of
financial reporting, engaging in typical levels of product diversification,
etc.) will be rewarded with higher credit ratings. I utilize regression modeling
to predict firm credit rating as a function of engaging in normative behaviors.
I further test whether or not engaging in the normative behaviors promoted by
major bond rating agencies is in fact a good predictor of firm health or
default. This research will make contributions to the existing organizational
literature in sociology. By examining the extent to which bond rating agencies
perpetuate institutionalized best practices, it tests theories of institutional
isomorphism that claim industry norms often trump economically rational behavior
in organizational fields. If theories of legitimacy can be used to explain some
of the variance in credit ratings, we will gain a better understanding of how
economic processes that appear irrational from a neoclassical economic
perspective continue to exist. Also, through the content analysis of publicly
available rating documents, this research directly observes a mechanism driving
institutional isomorphism by analyzing the means through which rating agencies
communicate appropriate behaviors to corporate bond issuers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to broader society by
examining the ways in which the existing bond rating sector, and by extension
the entire securities rating sector, might be prone to systemic risk. This
research examines an understudied group of powerful social actors who influence
the resources of major global corporations. By illuminating details of the
existing securities rating industry, this research will provide insight that
will help to more broadly understand credit systems.