* 1408607
* Digitization PEN: Ground-dwelling Insects in the Brigham Young University Collection, Enhancement to SCAN
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Neil Cobb, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 166,989.00

Activities in this project will result in the databasing of 52,300 insect
specimens from the Monte L. Bean Life Science Museum at Brigham Young University
(BYU). The BYU collection is the largest insect collection west of the Great
Plains and east of the Pacific coast. Many of the BYU specimens were collected
in the first half of the 20th century, and they therefore contribute a great
deal of legacy data critical for scientific studies. It preserves a wealth of
information on distributions and habits of important species, including
agricultural pests, medically important species, threatened and endangered
species, and beneficial species such as pollinators. This information will be
made widely accessible by cataloguing and photographing specimens and then
publishing the results on the Web. The project will provide an outstanding
mentored experience for numerous students, including those traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. In addition, the project will result in an
interactive museum display to teach basic principles in the change of organismal
distributions over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insect collection at Brigham
Young University (BYU) joins the Southwest Collections of Arthropods Network
(SCAN) in creating an extensive, Web-accessible catalogue of museum specimens.
Project activities include: (1) Capturing collecting and identification data
from 52,000 previously uncatalogued ground-dwelling arthropod specimens from the
BYU collection representing the four focal insect families in SCAN: Acrididae,
Carabidae, Tenebrionidae, and Formicidae. (2) Georeferencing specimen localities
contributed to SCAN, utilizing GEOLocate and other resources, and upgrading
fading locality labels on legacy specimens with archival quality labels. (3)
Producing high-resolution images of type specimens of all ground-dwelling
arthropod species whose type material is housed at BYU. (4) Contributing to
SCAN's synthetic regional database to promote accessible, well-structured,
taxonomically sound data for modeling climate change impacts on species
distributions, and thereby enhancing SCAN's remote specimen annotation and
identification workflows. This award is made as part of the National Resource
for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program, and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org) portals.