* 1408028
* Collaborative Research: The Influence of Tropical Convection on the Evolution and Transport of the Saharan Air Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Cynthia Twohy, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 329,971.00

Dust in the atmosphere has important impacts on clouds, precipitation and
climate. This is due to how the dust interacts with cloud particles and solar
radiation. One of the dustiest places on Earth is the Atlantic Ocean just west
of the Sahara Desert. A number of researchers have studied the effect of this
"Saharan Air Layer" on tropical cyclones and other cloud systems. However,
research under this award will look at the issue in reverse, asking the
question: How do clouds and precipitation affect the Saharan Air Layer? The
importance of this work is the discovery of how dust is transported and
redistributed by clouds and precipitation, which may have a significant impact
on climate. The removal of dust from the atmosphere through precipitation may
also impact ocean fertilization. In addition, the research will provide training
opportunities for the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of the project is to study how convection impacts the temporal
and spatial distributions of dust through cloud processing and transport. The
amount of dust and the impacts on the Saharan Air Layer will be assessed through
a combination of regional cloud modeling, existing aircraft data sets and
existing satellite data sets. The research team poses three main scientific
questions that will be addressed in this award: 1) Relative to pre-storm
amounts, how much dust is removed from the atmosphere and deposited to the ocean
through the action of precipitating storms? 2) Where do convective storms
preferentially redistribute dust in the atmosphere, and how is the vertical
distribution of dust changed by the passage of convective storms? 3) What are
the potential effects of the removal and redistribution of dust on ocean
fertilization, and the impacts on direct and indirect radiative effects both
locally and downstream of the storm development?