* 1408782
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: FTFS: A Read/Write-Optimized Fractal Tree File System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

Modern, general-purpose file systems offer poor performance on microdata
operations, such as file creation and destruction, small writes to large files,
and metadata updates, yet these operations are pervasive on today's computer
systems. Underlying this problem are fundamental limitations of the data
structures used to organize data on disk. This project will explore the
practical efficacy of a recently-discovered category of data structures, called
write-read-optimized (WRO) data structures, which have the potential to improve
microdata performance dramatically without sacrificing good performance on other
types of operations. This project will bring together a team of experts from
theory and systems who can bring cutting-edge algorithmic advances into
operating system (OS) designs. To this end, the team will build a general-
purpose file system for Linux, called FTFS, that uses WRO data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work of this nature has the potential to
eliminate the current trade-off between data locality on disk and small-write
performance. This project observes that WRO data structures, such as B^epsilon
trees and fractal tree indexes, can give comparable asymptotic behavior to a
B-tree for queries and bulk updates, as well as support small updates with
performance close to logging. Preliminary work demonstrates that these
asymptotic benefits translate to real performance improvements - up to two
orders of magnitude faster than a traditional B-tree for some operations. Modern
operating systems have certain assumptions about how file systems are designed,
such as inducing extra lookups during update operations (called cryptoreads).
Cryptoreads cause update operations to block on lookups, thus throttling the
faster updates that WRO data structures provide. The project will investigate OS
support for WRO data structures, as well as redesigning WRO data structures to
support the operations of a fully-featured file system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal is technology transfer and practical adoption. The effort will
advance the current state of the art in file system and operating system design.
Computers are a fundamental part of our society, with desktops and laptops
permeating schools and workplaces, individuals carrying at least one mobile
device, and scientists driving new discovery with supercomputers. File systems
are the backbone of these computing platforms, and improvements to the
efficiency of a general-purpose file system can improve the efficiency of our
national cyber-infrastructure, as well as reintroduce flexibility into the
storage stack needed to adapt to rapidly evolving devices.