* 1409317
* Domain Mechanisms in Magnetic Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yongmei Jin, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 206,665.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education that is aimed to advance fundamental understanding of domain
phenomena in magnetic shape memory alloys as well as other technologically
important multifunctional materials for applications in sensors, actuators,
transducers, and energy harvesting. Domains are usually tiny regions inside of
materials but still contain many atoms that have organized themselves in the
same way, for example with the same structure or same magnetic orientation, but
are organized differently in neighboring domains. Physical processes involving
domains are responsible for the properties of these materials that make them
useful for a particular application, their functionality. The PI will combine
complementary domain-level computational and experimental approaches to
investigate domain phenomena in complex magnetic materials with an aim to
establish connections between materials properties and domain processes. The
research will provide training for a graduate student in materials science, and
creates research opportunities and experiences for undergraduates. The research
outcomes provide valuable real-world inspired examples for teaching
computational materials science and physical behaviors of materials in courses.
The PI will participate in existing outreach activities at Michigan
Technological University to promote materials science and engineering among high
school students, women and underrepresented minorities.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education that is aimed to advance fundamental understanding of domain phenomena
in magnetic shape memory alloys and other technologically important
multifunctional materials. Magnetic shape memory alloys actively respond to
external magnetic, mechanical, and thermal stimuli, and are capable of energy
conversion. Magnetic shape memory alloy functionalities originate from the
evolution of coupled magnetic and elastic domain microstructures, which leads to
rich domain phenomena and sophisticated physical behaviors that are important
for both basic science and technological applications. The PI seeks to establish
correlations between macroscopic properties and internal domain processes,
identify underlying domain mechanisms, and find effective ways to optimize the
domain microstructures and control their evolution pathways to tailor the useful
properties. This project involves the quantitative investigation of coupled
magnetic and elastic domain processes to address important domain mechanisms by
domain-level modeling and simulations using phase-field micromagnetic
microelastic methods and in-situ domain observation experiments using an
interference-contrast-colloid technique. In particular, the PI will focus on the
effects of (i) magnetostriction, (ii) twin boundary mobility, (iii) magnetic
easy direction, and (iv) nanoscale structural heterogeneity on domain processes
and the resultant field-induced deformation behaviors. These effects determine
magnetoelastic properties, but their roles are yet to be clarified. The
objectives of the research are to: (1) develop computational tools to perform
realistic simulation studies of domain microstructure evolutions; (2) carry out
coordinated in-situ domain observation experiments; (3) identify important
domain mechanisms governing magnetoelastic behaviors; (4) advance fundamental
understanding of domain processes and provide insight into property improvement
and guidance for new materials development; and (5) integrate the research into
the PI's educational and outreach activities in functional materials and
computational materials science.