* 1409507
* SusChEM:  Structure and Property Study of Nascent Cellulose Nanocrystals and Their Use in Water Purification
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 520,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cellulose is an abundant renewable
polymer from plants and can be processed into fibers of different thicknesses
all the way down to the nanoscale. However, the morphology and property
relationships of the primary structural components -- cellulose crystals and
microfibrils -- in the natural cellulose are still not clear. In order to more
effectively incorporate sustainable nanoscaled cellulose into composite
materials, including water filtration membranes, it is necessary to improve our
fundamental understanding of the structure, morphology and properties of these
polymers as functions of fiber source and processing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes both an experimental and a
theoretical component and extends from fundamental science to water-filtration
applications. It will also have a broad impact in training of students in
scientific research relevant to sustainable materials. A range of educational
activities will be developed to engage undergraduate and high school students in
thinking about access to clean water as an issue of global sustainability while
learning about the fundamental concepts on water purification. This project has
the potential to lead to the development of new environmentally and economically
sustainable materials for water filtration that could positively impact the
lives of many people around the globe. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the structure, morphology and properties of
cellulose microfibrils (i.e., nascent crystals), their relationships with fiber
source and isolation method, and the applications of these naturally occurring
nanoscale materials for water purification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
takes advantage of the recent findings that the chemical treatment using TEMPO-
mediated oxidation followed by mechanical disintegration can produce negatively
charged cellulose microfibrils. The large surface density of charged carboxylate
groups in oxidized microfibrils not only improves the dispersion capability in
water, allowing detailed structural analysis, but also provides opportunities
for chemical grafting of other radicals. In this research, structural
information on cellulose microfibrils will be determined by combined synchrotron
small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and molecular simulation techniques. In addition, surface-
modified cellulose microfibrils (with both positive and negative charge
capability) will be explored as superabsorbent materials to remove contaminants
(e.g. viruses and toxic metal ions) in water, and their performance will be
correlated with structure and functionality.