* 1409256
* CSR:Medium:Collaborative Research: An Analytical Approach to Quantifying Availability (AQUA) for Cloud Resource Provisioning and Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Gregor von Laszewski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Cloud computing will significantly transform the landscape of the IT industry
and also impact the economy and society in many ways. The reliability and
availability of cloud services, affected by various hardware and software
component failures, becomes increasingly more critical, as government agencies,
business and people are expected to rely more and more on these services. Lack
of a guaranteed high availability of cloud services and applications is
considered by many IT professionals as the top concern for preventing a
successful implementation of cloud services, followed by device based security
and cloud application performance. This project aims to predict the service
availability for a given setting, and design effective resource provisioning and
allocation algorithms to guarantee a high availability level required by cloud
services. The project is expected to significantly advance the state-of-the-art
by offering deep insights into the knowledge about accurate prediction and cost-
effective guarantee of availability/reliability of cloud services. The outputs
from this project can be used to 1) improve service availability, performance
and resource utilization while minimizing the cost of overprovisioning, 2)
reduce huge losses in revenue and productivity due to service outages while
enabling new (mission-critical) applications and
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing approaches to ensuring availability
are qualitative in that they use heuristics to duplicate data or restrict the
number of virtual machines (VMs) that should be placed in the same rack/server
to improve reliability/availability of cloud services. However, it is essential
to be able to quantify availability for a given setting. Quantifying
availability for an often finite service duration via analysis (as opposed to
measurement or qualitative evaluation) requires transient, instead of steady
state probability analysis based on a wide range of failure and repair/backup
models. This project takes a holistic approach to addressing the open challenges
via both rigorous analysis and extensive experiments. More specifically, the
project leverages two large-scale HPC/Cloud production systems at PI?s
institutions to generate a rich set of fine-grained data about physical
component failures (which is not available in the public domain). The data is
then analyzed to build and verify/validate failure models. Based on the failure
models and for a given Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) request for n virtual
machines (VMs), a service duration of t time units and a desired availability
level a &lt; 1, the project develops an analytical model to predict the
availability that can be achieved for the service duration (t), if an additional
k backup VMs are allocated. The project also develops cost-effective, multi-
objective optimization based cloud resource provisioning and allocation
algorithms that determine the appropriate value for k (and the placement of
these n+k VMs) in order to achieve the required availability level a.
&lt;br/&gt;