* 1409529
* Geometric Control of Strain and Optical Properties in III-Nitride Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Hui Deng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 424,828.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description: Semiconductors made of group-III elements in the period table and
nitrogen are important materials that have applications in high-power
electronics and ultraviolet and visible light emitting devices used in defense
and consumer systems. Engineering of electronic and optical properties of III-
nitride nanostructures via strain, the topic of this research project, is
expected to improve performance, reduce power consumption, and potentially lead
to new system design concepts such as ultracompact light-weight devices for
efficient lighting, portable or wearable displays, and biomedical imaging
systems. The project increases public awareness of energy efficient and toxin-
free lighting and display technologies, and translates research findings to
industry via various education and outreach activities including student
training, graduate and undergraduate curriculum development, and, technology
transfer and start-up activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
The scientific objective of this project is to establish the relationship
between strain, both symmetric and asymmetric, and optical properties in III-
nitride nanostructures, more specifically, the InGaN nanodisk structures. The
research combines both experimental and theoretical approaches. Various InGaN
nanodisk structures exhibiting different indium compositions, active region
thicknesses, dimensions, and shapes are synthesized and characterized for both
structural and optical properties. The specific research tasks are: (1) to
establish an experimentally validated model relating the strain to the radiative
properties including emission wavelength, oscillator strength, and polarization;
(2) to explore the role of higher energy states on the polarization properties
of light emission in InGaN nanodisks; and (3) to extend the results to other
related nitride semiconductor heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;.