* 1409639
* CHS: Medium: Adapting to Affect in Multimodal Dialogue-Rich Interaction with Middle School Students
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kristy Boyer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,200,073.00

Affect, or emotion, profoundly shapes human experience. It influences how we
perform tasks, how we build relationships with one another, and how we navigate
the complexities of our daily lives. Affect is shaped and influenced by
communication with other humans, experiences with the natural world, and
interactions with machines. Affect plays a particularly prominent role in
learning. During learning, a recurring subset of the broad range of human
emotions such as confusion, frustration, boredom, anxiety, engagement, surprise,
and delight appear regularly. Different emotions are best responded to in
different ways. For example, task-based feedback and guidance is a helpful
response to emotions of confusion and frustration, while empathetic feedback is
more helpful for emotions of anger or excitement. Prior research has not
answered the question of how affective adaptation can maximize the benefit to
students as they interact with interactive computer-based learning environments.
And yet the investigators on this project are now well positioned to address a
central, unanswered question of how learning environments can adaptively respond
to students' affect to create the most effective, engaging learning experiences
while simultaneously promoting improved attitudes toward
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide important societal
benefits by generating theoretical and practical advances across multiple
disciplines. The project will lead to a deeper understanding of affect-rich
learning; a set of broadly applicable affect adaptation principles; and a
computational model of affective adaptation and dialogue that will be
incorporated into a learning environment for science learning. The resulting
affect-modeling technologies can serve as a foundation for the next generation
of adaptive educational software that will promote learning through affect-rich
adaptation. This will be broadly useful throughout education. The project will
address issues of diversity by partnering with the highly diverse Dunn Middle
School and Harnett Central Middle School, and through ongoing collaboration with
the STARS Alliance for Broadening Participation in Computing. To ensure societal
impact, the results will be disseminated to the public through middle school
outreach programs, and to the scientific community through publication at
scientific venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three major scientific goals of the
project are to: (1) Capture rich multimodal data of students' affective
experiences while interacting with a fully instrumented learning environment
with spoken dialogue. Observational studies will be conducted by having middle
school students interact with an existing learning environment for science
education called "Crystal Island." Crystal Island was developed by the
investigators on this project and has already been used by thousands of students
in middle school classrooms to learn microbiology, but it does not currently
support rich multimodal interaction or natural language dialogue. Crystal Island
will be fully instrumented to collect rich, multimodal data including speech,
facial expression, gaze, posture, skin conductance response, heart rate, and
problem-solving actions. (2) Design, develop, and refine an affect-understanding
model that integrates students' natural language, nonverbal behavior,
physiological response, and task-action phenomena into a rich multi-dimensional
stream of affective data. By utilizing this data collected from the
observational studies, an affect-understanding model will be constructed using
machine learned including hidden Markov modeling. This will be the first affect-
understanding model for learning environments that integrates the full
complement of affect signals of spoken language (including prosody, syntax, and
semantics), nonverbal behavior (including gaze and posture), physiological data
(including skin conductance response and heart rate), and task actions
(including navigation and manipulation actions in the learning environment). (3)
Design, develop, and refine an integrated affect and dialogue management model
that adaptively responds to students' affective states in the course of their
learning interactions. By utilizing the learning-interaction data collected in
the observational studies, a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) affect adaptation policy will be acquired with reinforcement learning,
integrating affect and dialogue management. The resulting adaptation policy will
govern both when and how the system responds to students' affect as they solve
problems. The computer-based mentor will provide problem-solving advice,
encouragement, empathetic responses, and other support as is needed to improve
the educational experience and outcome.