* 1409851
* Functional Hybrid Biotic/Abiotic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Brian Dyer, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 389,998.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Emory University is to develop hybrid biotic/abiotic
functional materials that will achieve light driven, multi-electron chemistry.
Two essential features of living systems are self organization of complex
structures and the associated compartmentalization of function, enabling them to
extract energy from the environment and store it as fuel used to power all life
processes. This proposal seeks to mimic these essential characteristics of
living systems by developing artificial materials that use biotic/abiotic
interfaces to enable efficient harvesting of light energy and its storage as
fuel in high energy density chemical bonds. The proposed work will develop a new
class of biotic/abiotic materials based on the integration of nano-structured
semiconductor materials, so-called quantum dots, with enzyme biocatalysts. The
quantum dots are designed to efficiently collect light and in the process
generate electrons that can be used for doing chemistry. The biocatalyst
efficiently generates the fuel hydrogen from water when given a ready supply of
electrons. The unique properties of the biological catalyst (self assembly and
the ability to tailor the interface by structural evolution) will be used to
properly wire the two components together into a hybrid material that is stable,
robust and efficient at converting light into hydrogen fuel. This project also
provides a unique training opportunity for high school and undergraduate
students because it integrates multiple disciplines, including molecular
biophysics, spectroscopy and materials science, to solve a problem of direct
practical relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Storing light energy in
high energy density chemical bonds requires new functional materials to achieve:
1) efficient light harvesting; 2) long-lived charge separation; 3) interfacial
charge transfer to a catalyst; and 4) robust catalysts for multi-electron
chemistry. The proposal is to develop hybrid materials that integrate a light
harvesting and charge separation component with a highly efficient biocatalyst.
The specific objectives are: 1) to design, synthesize and characterize hybrid
hydrogenase:quantum dot functional materials; 2) to determine the interfacial
structures and dynamics that affect function; and 3) to develop photo-electrodes
based on the hybrid materials that are capable of light driven hydrogen
production. A major challenge is the inherent single electron nature of
photosensitizers, which has been the primary limitation of their efficient
application to light driven redox chemistry. The proposed work will test whether
quantum confined semiconductor materials are capable of acting as multi-electron
photosensitizers, by generating and harvesting multiple excitons to drive
catalytic chemistry. The proposed work will serve as a foundation for teaching
and training students highly interdisciplinary skills in molecular biophysics,
spectroscopy and materials science, through the Emory Chemistry Intern Program
for high school students, and the Emory Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience.