* 1409346
* SusChEM: The Role of Disorder in an Expanded Family of Nitride Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kathleen Kash, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 389,706.00

Non-technical Description: The binary nitride semiconductors (gallium nitride,
aluminum nitride, and indium nitride) and their alloys have found commercial
applications in optoelectronics and high-power electronics. However, their
applications are limited by materials constraints. In particular, gallium and
indium are expensive, and indium is scarce. The research activities here center
around the idea of replacing the valence 3 element gallium or indium by equal
proportions of valence 2 and valence 4 elements, such as, for example, zinc and
tin, or magnesium and silicon, all of which are less expensive and more
abundant. In addition, these new ternary semiconductors are expected to have
unique properties that will make possible new, important applications. The
educational activities of this project include the recruiting and training of
graduate and undergraduate students, and the involvement of local area high-
school teachers in professional development and in the design and development of
high-school science curricula.

Technical Description: The research focuses on the synthesis of the zinc- and
magnesium-containing ternary nitrides using vapor-liquid-solid methods. The
primary objectives include the elucidation of the roles of defects and disorder
on the optical properties, the development of new growth techniques, and the
development of understanding of the thermodynamic properties. Temperature-
dependent steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and
photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy provide insight into the band
structure, defect properties, and carrier relaxation and recombination
processes. The development of the ternary nitride semiconductors provides a
transformative potential that would extend the capabilities of the binary
nitrides, which could not only overcome some of the lingering problems of the
latter materials, in particular extending the accessible wavelength range for
light emitters further into the ultraviolet and through the entire visible
spectrum, but also lead to entirely new applications.