* 1409137
* Protein folding: mechanism and principles
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* S. Englander, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2019
* USD 945,890.00

Protein folding is perhaps the most fundamental of all protein functions.
Protein folding is a difficult process and is potentially dangerous when it goes
wrong. Correct folding and misfolding are key to the function of all cells and
to maintain health. Yet there is still no general agreement about how this basic
process works: do proteins fold through discrete well defined intermediates in
discrete pathways, as in the classical view, or do they fold by way of multiple
independent unrelated pathways as in the so-called new view. This work uses a
powerful new approach developed in the last award to understand the protein
folding problem, and is likely to provide the insightful information to define
the folding process in some detail and answer key questions in the field. These
studies will engage and actively train, teach, and support postdoctoral,
undergraduate, and high school students in active hands-on research at the
forefront of modern structural biology.

Naturally occurring protein hydrogen exchange (HX) behavior is very sensitive to
the biophysical properties that allow protein molecules to accomplish their
myriad biological functions. It has therefore been able to contribute
importantly to protein science research, especially when measured by NMR at
amino acid resolution. However NMR is limited to the study of relatively small
proteins in quantity at high concentrations. Recent work in the PI's laboratory
has developed an advanced mass spectrometry analysis (HX MS) that can measure HX
at near amino acid resolution in large and complex protein systems in previously
unreachable situations using minuscule amounts of biological material. This
technique will be used to study the protein folding problem, which lies at the
base of many important problems in biological science. The detailed mechanism of
protein folding itself is not understood, mainly because transient folding
intermediates and folding pathways are beyond the reach of the usual high
resolution structural methods. The newly advanced HX MS technology is able to
track the kinetic folding process and describe the intermediate forms and
pathways that carry an initially unfolded protein to its final native state. In
the proposed work, HX MS technology will be used to ask how proteins fold, why
they fold in that way, and how helper chaperone molecules function to promote
folding. The how question will be addressed in studies of a biologically typical
large protein, unlike almost all previous studies (both theoretical and
experimental) which have been directed at small proteins that account for only a
few percent of the biological proteome. The why question will be addressed by
studying at high structural resolution the folding of laboratory-designed
proteins that have not been shaped and selected through biological evolution.
Chaperone function will be addressed by studying the detailed folding of a
protein while it is contained within the active GroEL chaperonin cavity. This
work may well change the current protein folding paradigm and, more broadly,
will provide a powerful new tool for protein structure-function studies that
have simply not been possible before. This work is being funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of BIO,
and co-funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division of MPS.