* 1409668
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Towards a Binary-Centric Framework for Cyber Forensics in Enterprise Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dongyan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 846,820.00

Emerging attacks such as Advanced Persistent Threats pose significant threat to
cyberspace. These attacks are often stealthy, low-and-slow, and disguised via
deceptive campaigns. This research focuses on the forensics of cyber attacks
targeting enterprise environments, with the goals of (1) understanding an
attack's intent, strategy, steps, and targets, (2) collecting digital evidence
for legal proceedings, (3) revealing hidden attack behaviors to prevent or
minimize damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, an integrated
framework is being developed which covers three key aspects - temporal, spatial,
and malware-behavioral forensics. All three aspects face the common challenge of
analyzing binary executables. More specifically, temporal forensics requires
finer-grain program logging for identifying attack provenance and ramifications.
The solution is to partition a binary program's execution and data for high-
accuracy causal analysis. Malware forensics involves revealing malware behaviors
that are multi-stage, condition-guarded, and environment-specific. The solution
is a new binary analysis approach that force-executes an unknown binary without
input or environment setup and exposes the malware's behavior along the
execution paths forced into. Temporal forensics requires understanding unknown
file formats and in-memory data structure contents. The solution is to identify
and reuse the file parsing/generation and data structure rendering logic in the
corresponding binary programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance
the state-of-the-art in cyber forensics, a critical need as our nation and
society become increasingly dependent on cyberinfrastructures. It will help
train next-generation cybersecurity experts by exposing students to real case
investigations. Under-represented students are being involved in research
activities and cyber forensics exercises.