* 1409416
* CSR: Medium: Availability-Consistency Tradeoffs in Key-Value and NoSQL Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jose Meseguer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 584,508.00

Key-value/NoSQL storage systems are a key component of the cloud computing
revolution. Today's key-value/NoSQL storage systems lie at different points on
the tradeoff spectrum of availability (i.e., fast reads and writes) vs. data
consistency (across multiple clients) vs. partition-tolerance. This project will
better characterize what is achievable along this spectrum, to make these
systems dynamically adapt along the spectrum to meet application requirements,
and to benchmark the actual availability and consistency achieved by real
systems under real conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will follow two
synergistic thrusts. The first thrust will use probabilistic models for
availability, consistency, and partitions to analyze the tradeoffs among these.
Then it will design adaptive techniques to meet an SLA (Service Level Agreement)
or SLO (Service Level Objective) which specifies either an availability
constraint or a consistency constraint, while optimizing the other metric.
Finally, these techniques will be implemented in some of the leading key-
value/NoSQL storage systems in use today in industry. Our second thrust will
apply the large body of formal verification research to key-value/NoSQL systems.
The work herein includes use of a formal modeling language to specify models for
key-value/NoSQL stores, and use of standard as well as statistical model-
checking to analyze and characterize the behavior of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will imbue existing key-value/NoSQL
storage systems with the ability to adapt to the tradeoffs between consistency,
availability, and partition-tolerance, as a function of provider and customer
requirements, at run-time. It will lead to better SLAs and SLOs that combine
both consistency models and availability models in a practical and achievable
way. Thus, the project will directly impact the large developer and user
communities of key-value/NoSQL storage systems. The project will produce open
software and meaningful datasets.