* 1409590
* Metal/Indium-Zinc Oxide Semiconductor Heterostructures: A Platform for Radio-Frequency Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* David Paine, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Description: Semiconducting materials are an essential component
of all modern electronics. In recent years, a new class of amorphous oxide based
semiconducting materials has emerged. These materials are unique in that they
can be deposited at room temperature on many solid surfaces while maintaining
good electrical properties. The first application of such amorphous metal oxides
has been in flat panel displays. The aim of this research project is to explore
the fundamental materials science of miniaturized amorphous oxide devices
integrated with new types of dielectric oxides. The structures can be made near
room temperature and may enable an entirely new approach to design of electronic
devices operating at radio frequencies for potential applications ranging from
cell phones to satellites. Further, the combination of fundamental materials
science and prototype device fabrication has educational impacts in and out of
the classroom at Brown University. For instance, the low-cost, low-temperature
amorphous oxide technology makes it ideal for a prototype fabrication lab in an
undergraduate course on electronic materials and devices.

Technical Description: Indium zinc oxide (IZO) in the amorphous form can be
deposited at room temperature and achieve a high charge carrier density. This
control over charge carrier density during and after deposition, combined with
high mobilities, arbitrary substrate compatibility, easy regrowth and low-
temperature in-situ oxidation for doping control and dielectric formation, makes
these materials a promising platform for integration-ready high-current radio-
frequency transistors. In this project, researchers examine the kinetics,
electronic properties, and interface structure of metal/IZO formed by an in-situ
self-limiting interface reaction. The goal is to achieve localized controllable
ultra-high doping and self-limiting dielectric formation. The fundamental
materials science knowledge obtained on reacted metal (Ti, Al) oxide/IZO
interface structures is applicable to the fabrication of prototype transistors,
particularly IZO-based high-current radio-frequency devices. Several critical
materials challenges are low-resistance metal/IZO contacts, high and stable
carrier density channels, and integration of materials with high dielectric
constants. To tackle these challenges, thermodynamic/kinetic modeling of
interface stability is combined with analytical techniques ranging from high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy, glancing incidence angle x-ray
diffraction, to interface electronic characterization techniques.