* 1409550
* RUI: Polymer Assemblies as Model Drug Delivery Vehicles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Sarah Goh, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 203,852.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to Williams College is to develop a novel
drug delivery system using polymer based micelles. Micelles, comprised of
amphiphilic block copolymers, have hydrophobic cores suitable for sequestering
hydrophobic therapeutics. Importantly, these polymer shells increase a drug's
solubility, retention time, and provide opportunities for targeting its delivery
- all means of improving a drug's efficacy. This project seeks to improve the
micelle stability and targeting ability by using three key synthetic strategies:
incorporation of chiral aminoacid side chains for stability and tunable
hydrophobicity, decoration of the shell with sugar moieties for targeting
carbohydrate receptors, and introduction of radical scavengers to suppress anti-
inflammatory responses. In addition to delivering small molecule therapeutics,
these polymers scaffolds will be used to develop enzymatic delivery strategies.
The polymer synthesis and biological evaluation will be carried out with
undergraduate students at Williams College. Ranging from first-year to senior
thesis students, these promising researchers will engage not only in the
laboratory and analytical aspects of the project, but also the oral and written
dissemination of the research. Planned polymer-related workshops at local
elementary schools will inspire and encourage a younger generation as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is to develop polymeric scaffolds as drug delivery vehicles. Non-covalent
assemblies of amphiphilic block copolymers are synthesized with aminoacid
monomers, imparting chirality and pH- and thermo-responsiveness, with the aim of
increasing stability and encapsulation efficiency. Incorporation of simple
carbohydrates and antioxidant molecules improve the scaffold's targeting ability
and moderate the inflammatory response of diseased cells. Covalent assemblies of
these functional polymers with therapeutic enzymes offer an alternative drug
delivery strategy. Undergraduate students, from first-year to senior thesis
students, will be involved in all aspects of the project - from synthesis to
characterization to biological evaluation. They will learn such techniques as
air-free controlled radical polymerization, characterization of polymer size and
shape, and protein characterization, as well as in-vitro experiments of cell
viability and targeting. Students will play a major role in the oral and written
dissemination of the project's results.