* 1409172
* TWC: Medium: Leakage of Communications Signatures: Analysis of Eavesdropping Attacks and Proactive Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2019
* USD 660,000.00

As society continues to depend on the rapidly expanding wireless ecosystem, we
are challenged with serious threats related to user privacy, data
confidentiality, and critical system availability. A significant portion of
these threats is attributed to the broadcast nature of wireless transmissions.
Using commodity radio hardware, unauthorized parties can easily eavesdrop on
over-the-air transmissions and breach the privacy of communicating users by
tracking their whereabouts and movements, and inferring their associations,
health state, and preferences. Common (application-level) cryptographic
mechanisms fail to provide adequate security and privacy, as they leave low-
level transmission identifiers open to traffic analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on designing and evaluating privacy-
preserving communication methods for mitigating information leakage due to
eavesdropping. Novel physical-layer obfuscation techniques that carefully
control intentional interference from transmitters and/or receivers are being
designed to prevent traffic analysis at the frame level. The goal of these
techniques is to render packets (including their unencrypted headers)
undecodable by any unauthorized party. These physical-layer techniques are
augmented with traffic normalization mechanisms at the flow level, whose
objective is to hide complex network and traffic features, such as device role,
routing paths, etc. Colluding eavesdroppers who monitor the system for long
periods of time are also being investigated. The outcomes of this project are
expected to have profound impacts on the security, privacy, and usability of a
wide range of critical systems that rely on wireless technologies, including
transportation and aviation networks, mobile computing platforms, e-commerce,
critical national infrastructures, medical systems, and others.