* 1409698
* Advanced Optical Characterization and Imaging of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Robert Weisman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 605,730.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor R. Bruce Weisman of Rice University is
developing new ways to characterize and purify a scientifically and
technologically important class of nanomaterials: single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs). These nanotubes display many remarkable properties that make them of
great current interest to researchers pursuing basic science as well as real-
world applications. However, progress in this field is often limited by
difficulties in finding the amounts of specific nanotube structures that are
present in samples, assessing the nanotube quality, detecting them in trace
quantities in biological and environmental specimens, and sorting nanotube
mixtures into pure structural forms. This project addresses these challenges
using novel experimental methods. This research will provide broader impacts
through the participation and professional development of underrepresented
minority and women science students. In addition, the experimental methods and
findings of the project should speed the development of new and economically
valuable commercial technologies based on carbon
nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore and develop variance
spectroscopy, a new optical technique that serves as a bridge between bulk and
single-particle regimes and can reveal nanoparticle concentrations, emission
efficiencies, inhomogeneities, and aggregation. A recently developed method will
be used to directly measure the absolute, structure-specific absorption cross-
sections needed to quantify the compositions of single-walled carbon nanotube
(SWCNT) samples. Improved analysis methods will support efforts to more
effectively sort SWCNTs by length. The project will also focus on enhancing the
sensitivity limits for detecting and imaging SWCNTs present in complex samples
at trace concentrations.