* 1409660
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Persistence of Informal Economies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Dana Kornberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 11,970.00

Theories of economic development have long predicted that employment outside of
formal, regulated organizations would eventually become obsolete, but informal
economies continue to provide a livelihood to around 60 percent of workers in
poorer countries and 30 percent in richer ones. India is a particularly
important case when studying informal economies because over 90 percent of its
workforce is informal. This project analyzes informal waste collection and
recycling in Delhi, India, which, despite challenges from legal and private
actors, continues to persist and facilitate positive environmental outcomes in
India?s capital city. The research asks: What are the relationships and
institutions that allow the informal recycling workforce to thrive in spite of
private opposition and formal regulation?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed as an extended case study, which assembles original ethnographic data
to revise and build sociological theory on the relationship of state and market
institutions to informal urban economies. The primary data to be collected are
extensive participation observation with informal recyclers and at least 125
interviews with informal recyclers and legal actors. Two hypothetical positions
are examined: the first holds that there is a division between higher and lower
levels of legal operation, which results in support for informal enterprise at
the local level despite high level disavowal, and a second proposes that while
social relations such as kinship and ethnicity prevail within singular informal
enterprises, market relations are a primary source of regulation between these
informal enterprises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes steps to
understand urban processes in the twenty-first century. From the global cities
literature, we know that cities are becoming increasingly connected through
markets. However, that research attends only to the world?s wealthiest cities
and takes a high-level perspective, when what is needed are more detailed
analyses of how global flows and local practices combine to produce urban
change. This study draws on sociological tools to open up the "black box" of
urban informality and theorize how it is produced from the ground up. A detailed
look at negotiations between informal actors and those in market and legal
institutions provides an opportunity to revise essential sociological theory,
while the combined focus on structural barriers and potential for agency holds
promise as a paradigm for future urban research. Understanding the formal ties
of informal work allows researchers to contribute to the difficult question of
how to create change where formal institutions are less strong. Additionally,
there is a need to study informal practices that contribute to an urban
sustainability agenda. This project addresses both of these issues in a context
where approaches to waste management could be revised to produce more positive
social and environmental outcomes.