* 1409093
* Emergent Phenomena in the Macroworld:  Jamming and Flow of Particulate Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 328,897.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and educational activities focused on emergence in the macroworld.
Diversity in the natural world emerges from the collective behaviors of large
numbers of interacting objects. The origin of collectively organized structures
at atomic and molecular scales is the competition between energy and entropy,
with thermal motion providing the mechanism for organization by allowing
particles to explore the space of configurations. This well-established paradigm
of temperature-assisted emergent behavior breaks down for collections of
macroscopic objects ranging from grains of sand to asteroids. Sand dunes are
created by shearing forces, and asteroid belts self-assemble under gravity. Even
in this granular world, however, there are structures that resemble gases,
liquids and solids. But without the regularizing influence of thermal motion,
the changes can be abrupt and often catastrophic. Avalanches and earthquakes are
examples of such catastrophic failures. The overarching goal of this research
project is to establish the unifying principles of emergence in systems where
friction and dissipation are important, thermal motion is absent and the
dynamics is dominated by large, rare fluctuations. To achieve this, the grand
challenge is to construct a predictive theoretical framework analogous to
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will impact the understanding of a broad range of materials, which do not
necessarily belong to the macro world, but whose structures and collective
properties are shaped by internal and external stresses, and not by temperature.
These include active materials such as assemblies of biopolymers and motors, and
carbon nanotube suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts,
sand is the quintessential playground of children and an ideal platform to
awaken their scientific curiosity. The education part of this project builds on
the idea to create hands-on-activities for Elementary School children. Sparking
interest in Physics and Materials Science in children at this age has the
potential to sustain excitement in these subjects through the Middle and High
School years, a time when many minorities and women lose interest in science.
The activities will be showcased at the Acton Discovery Museum in Massachusetts,
which is participating in a program called "Portal to the Public". The museum-
related activities will be designed at Brandeis with the help of graduate
students and postdoctoral associates. This training of early-career scientist in
conducting informal science education will enhance the broader impact of the
scientific community as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
educational activities with focus on the collective properties and emergent
behavior of athermal systems. The PI's group will study materials that epitomize
non-thermal matter, which stay in a single configuration unless driven
externally. Examples of such systems include granular materials, and dense, non-
Brownian suspensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the atomic and molecular levels,
thermal motion allows the system to organize into structures that are determined
by a competition between energy and entropy. This well-established paradigm of
temperature-assisted emergent behavior breaks down, however, for collections of
macroscopic objects ranging from grains of sand to asteroids. In this world of
macroscopic objects, mechanical forces are all important and the ambient
temperature is completely ineffective at exploring phase space. Without the
regularizing influence of thermal fluctuations, failures are often catastrophic,
and there are no established relations between fluctuations and response. Using
a judicious combination of modeling and data analysis, the PI's group will
address fundamental questions such as (i) what characteristics can be used to
distinguish fluids from solids in the macroworld where thermal fluctuations are
irrelevant, (ii) are there universal features of transitions between these
phases, (iii) the nature of large scale fluctuations such as failures and flow
of solids. These explorations are intended to establish a theoretical framework,
analogous to that of equilibrium statistical mechanics, which can predict the
collective behavior of athermal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
would impact our understanding of a broad range of materials including those
that do not belong to the macro world, but where internal and external stresses,
not temperature, shape structures and collective properties. These could include
active materials such as assemblies of microtubules and motors, tissues
undergoing morphogenesis or wound healing.