* 1409160
* RUI: Radiation selectivity of photo-induced structural transformations in covalently bonded glassy thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Andriy Kovalskiy, Austin Peay State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Chalcogenide glass thin films, due to their
multifunctionality and unique properties, are remarkably promising materials for
emerging applications in infrared photonics, non-linear optics, all-optical
computing, micro(nano)-lithography, and phase-change memory devices. These
materials are exceptional because of their multilevel sensitivity to exposure by
light or particles (electrons, neutrons, ions); this sensitivity depends on the
intensity and energy of the radiation source. Light treatment can also be used
to accelerate structural relaxation in amorphous films, stabilizing their
properties for further applications. However, to control the photo-(or
light-)induced effects and predict behavior of the exposed material, the
mechanisms of photostructural transformation on the surface and inside of the
films at different light energies and intensities needs to be better understood.
The goal of this project is to develop, using advanced experimental methods, a
new level of understanding of the photostructural transformations and establish
an efficient way to stabilize the structural relaxation of chalcogenide glass
thin films prepared by different methods. Undergraduate research is an essential
part of the project, providing students access to the advanced experimental
facilities and inspiring them to consider a career in science or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: As-S(Se) (pyramidal) and
Ge-S(Se) (tetrahedral) binary chalcogenide glass thin films, within a wide
compositional domain, thermally deposited in vacuum as well as spin-coated from
solution are being studied. The thermally-deposited films are known for their
high photosensitivity and a large concentration of homopolar bonds, even for
stoichiometric compositions. While, the spin-coated films are relatively photo-
stable with structure close to the bulk analogue. The project's planned outcome
is an atomistic picture of the structural response to photoexposure and its
dependence on photon energy and fluence for pyramidal and tetrahedral
chalcogenide glass thin films obtained with the two different methods. The
mechanisms of photostructural transformations are studied with Raman microscopy,
high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, optical spectroscopy,
X-ray absorption and neutron scattering methods. The project's results have the
potential to stimulate major progress in application of chalcogenide glass thin
films in emerging fields such as photonics, memory devices, and
micro/nanolithography. As well, one of the main objectives of the project is the
development of a nationally recognizable undergraduate research training program
in experimental and computational glass science.