* 1409284
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Micro Virtual Machines for Managed Languages: Abstraction, defined and contained
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2020
* USD 683,681.00

Title: Micro Virtual Machines for Managed Languages: Abstraction, contained

A large fraction of today's software is written in managed languages. These
languages increase software productivity by supporting programming at a very
high level, hiding the complexity of modern computer hardware and operating
systems. Examples include JavaScript, PHP, Objective-C, Java, C#, Python, and
Ruby. These languages have great economic importance. Unfortunately, most of
these languages are inefficient, imposing overheads as large as a factor of
fifty compared to orthodox language choices such as C. The broader impacts of
this research are two-fold: (1) Since managed languages are increasingly
becoming economic linchpins, deployed in the engine rooms of global e-commerce
platforms and Internet applications (including those of key software companies
such as Amazon, Google, Facebook, Apple, Oracle, and Microsoft), improving the
reliability and performance of these managed language platforms will lead to
economic efficiencies as well as resource efficiencies in the form of reduced
power costs to data centers and improved battery lifetime on mobile devices;(2)
Concerning human diversity in the computing field, the research will engage
undergraduates from under-represented groups, and encourage them to pursue
graduate school and careers in computing and research.

This research project is defining, developing, evaluating, and refining the
essential components of a new foundation layer for managed language
implementation. In doing so, it addresses a key source of systemic inefficiency,
by pioneering the "micro virtual machine" (microVM) as an efficient high-
performance substrate for managed language implementation. The relationship
between a microVM and existing managed language implementations is analogous to
that between an operating system micro kernel and monolithic operating systems
such as Linux. The microVM captures the insight that there exists a well-defined
foundation common to most modern languages that can take responsibility for
fundamental abstractions over hardware, concurrency, and memory. By isolating
and exposing this substrate, the microVM embodies state-of-the-art base
technology available to language implementers while isolating them from the
pernicious complexities of these abstractions, freeing them to focus on all-
important language-specific optimizations. The research is enabling more
efficient software and a distinctly sharper focus for language implementation
research and development. The intellectual merits of the research are: (1)
Researching and identifying, via prototyping and evaluation, the right microVM
abstractions, allowing clean separation of low-level language-neutral and high-
level language-specific concerns, capturing the core behaviors, while also
admitting high-performance language implementations; (2) Generating secondary
research challenges, especially with regard to the effective and efficient
combination of abstractions for hardware, concurrency, and memory; and (3)
Creating a viable target for formal verification because the microVM has a
relatively small code base, thus taking one step on the way towards trustworthy
subsystems for assurance of managed software.