* 1409723
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enabling GPUs as First-Class Computing Engines
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Saugata Ghose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 456,652.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are rapidly bringing the
computing&lt;br/&gt;power traditionally associated with massively parallel
supercomputers&lt;br/&gt;into the mainstream devices we use today. They have the
power to&lt;br/&gt;revolutionize computing by enabling orders of magnitude
faster and&lt;br/&gt;more efficient execution of many applications.
Unfortunately, many&lt;br/&gt;modern applications and users cannot take
advantage of the computing&lt;br/&gt;capability present in today's GPUs because
today's GPUs are used as&lt;br/&gt;secondary devices to the much less powerful
CPUs. As a result, the massive&lt;br/&gt;computing power of GPUs gets wasted and
underutilized for a large&lt;br/&gt;number of important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to take a fresh and
comprehensive look at GPU design&lt;br/&gt;with the goal of enabling GPUs as
first-class computing engines that&lt;br/&gt;can benefit an overwhelming
majority of real-world applications and&lt;br/&gt;users. To this end, this
project systematically investigates the&lt;br/&gt;hardware/software design space
of three new execution models, which&lt;br/&gt;progressively turn a GPU into an
independent, first-class compute&lt;br/&gt;engine in a hybrid computing system:
1) an enhanced master-slave model&lt;br/&gt;where the GPU is able to perform
multiple-application execution, 2) a&lt;br/&gt;new peer-to-peer model where the
GPU is autonomous of the CPU, 3) a&lt;br/&gt;hybrid model where GPUs and CPUs
are integrated on the same die and&lt;br/&gt;are equals from the applications'
and system's viewpoint. The project&lt;br/&gt;comprehensively develops software,
hardware and software/hardware&lt;br/&gt;cooperative scheduling, resource
management, and system design&lt;br/&gt;techniques for all three
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project can pave the way to
making GPUs&lt;br/&gt;first-class computing engines used in all aspects of our
everyday&lt;br/&gt;lives for a majority of applications. Doing so is not only
expected to&lt;br/&gt;lead to much higher degrees of energy efficiency and user
productivity&lt;br/&gt;but can also potentially enable new applications and
devices that can&lt;br/&gt;take advantage GPUs.