* 1409396
* Functional Patchy Nanoparticles by Interfacial Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 372,576.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoparticles are generally stabilized
with an organic capping layer, forming an organic shell-metal core structure.
The materials properties and functions are therefore largely determined by these
two components. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research, this research project is focused
on the development of effective procedures for the preparation of a special
class of nanoparticle materials where the organic ligands as well as the metal
components may be independently incorporated into the nanoparticles in a
spatially controlled manner. This provides a unique way to further manipulate
the nanoparticle structures and properties. Neapolitan nanoparticles are used as
the initial illustrating examples, analogous to a layered Neapolitan cake with
structurally distinct organic/metal components at the two poles and at the
equatorial ring. These nanoparticles may be used to prepare more complicated
nanoparticle materials and structures, and for electrocatalytic reduction of
oxygen, a critical reaction at fuel cell cathode. The research activities are
intimately integrated with various educational efforts, from on-hands training
of diverse student researchers including graduate students, undergraduate
students and high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The specific aim of this research project is to develop
effective protocols based on deliberate interfacial engineering for the
preparation of Neapolitan nanoparticles with a tri-patchy structure not only of
the organic capping layers but also of the metal cores. This is built upon the
prior success of the PI's laboratory in the preparation of amphiphilic Janus
nanoparticles. In the present research project the focus is on Neapolitan
nanoparticles that exhibit distinctly different chemical functionalities at the
two poles and on the equatorial ring of the nanoparticles. Concurrently, the
original monometallic nanoparticle cores may be converted to bimetallic or even
trimetallic ones by taking advantage of galvanic exchange reactions between the
nanoparticles and metal-thiolate complexes, with the second and third metals
also distributed asymmetrically on the nanoparticle cores. The ready and
independent manipulation of both the organic capping layers and the metal cores
into segregated patches may be exploited for further and more complicated
chemical functionalization of the nanoparticles. The fundamental insights are
anticipated to further advance our understanding of the mechanisms that control
the organized assembly of nanostructured materials in general.