* 1409940
* Geometric Evolution of Multicomponent Amphiphilic Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2018
* USD 328,438.00

The development of efficient energy conversion and storage devices is a
fundamental goal of 21st century science. Many of the most prominent devices,
such as dye-sensitized and bulk-heterojunction solar cells, lithium ion
batteries, and polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, rely upon ionomer
membranes with charge-selective transport properties that arise from nanoscale
networks of charge-lined pores. Progress in the improvement of these devices
requires new materials based upon a fundamental understanding of the formation
of these pore networks, which typically self-assemble during casting processes.
The investigator presents a mathematical framework that characterizes the
evolution of network morphologies arising in blends of charged polymer
(amphiphile) with solvent. A better understanding of how these networks shape
themselves can enable the development of better devices. The framework is based
upon an incorporation of the powerful descriptive properties of dynamical
systems within a higher-order free energy landscape. Students are trained in the
course of the project.

The Functionalized Cahn-Hilliard (FCH) free energy unites the languages of
dynamical systems and calculus of variations to produce a model of network self-
assembly in amphiphilic polymers that play a central role in the cost-efficient
self-assembly of materials with nano-structured interfacial morphology. The
investigator studies the mechanisms of geometric evolution and competition-
induced bifurcation of network morphologies of binary and multicomponent
amphiphilic systems within the framework of gradient flows of the FCH free
energy. For binary mixtures of amphiphilic polymer and solvent, the investigator
analyzes the pearling bifurcation induced by competition between codimension one
bilayer morphologies and codimension two pore morphologies. Rigorous existence
of pearled morphologies for curved codimension one interfaces are derived via
spatial dynamics center manifold reduction, and rigorous sharp-interface
reductions of FCH gradient flows to mass-preserving Willmore flows via
renormalization group techniques are pursued. End cap and line defects play a
significant role in the evolution of network morphologies, and the investigators
characterizes reduced representations for these defect structures and quantifies
their impact on roll-up of bicelles (a bicelle is a flat bilayer with an end-cap
boundary). For multicomponent mixtures, the investigator follows three
approaches to the bilayer existence problem: a novel billiard limit involving a
piece-wise smooth potential with sharp transitions, a homomorphic reduction, and
a singular perturbation limit. Each approach permits explicit construction of
coexisting symmetric and asymmetric bilayer morphologies, and an analysis of the
resulting bifurcation structure. The investigator derives a sharp-interface
competitive geometric evolution for families of distinct, coexisting bilayer
networks and a non-zero intrinsic curvature limit for asymmetric bilayers
subject to non-gradient form perturbations.