* 1409258
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Tracking low-dimensional information in data streams and dynamical systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Wakin, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 349,662.00

Many applications of significant societal impact are modeled
by&lt;br/&gt;complex dynamical system behavior, including the (life,
physical&lt;br/&gt;and social) sciences, medicine, economics, law, urban
development,&lt;br/&gt;international politics and global conflict. Fortunately,
recent&lt;br/&gt;advances in sensor technology have allowed observation of
these&lt;br/&gt;phenomena at an unprecedented scale. Unfortunately, the volume
and&lt;br/&gt;complexity of available data present many challenges to
extracting&lt;br/&gt;meaningful information about these systems. Low-dimensional
models&lt;br/&gt;serve as a useful structure for understanding the information
in&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional signals and systems. However, this
information&lt;br/&gt;often changes over time, and so these models can further
be&lt;br/&gt;improved by exploiting temporal dynamics. This project is
concerned&lt;br/&gt;with developing new methods for tracking changing low-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;structure in data streams and dynamical systems,
particularly in&lt;br/&gt;settings where the observations may be missing,
incomplete,&lt;br/&gt;corrupted, or compressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
research aim in this project is to develop new and&lt;br/&gt;substantially
improve existing techniques for tracking&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional structure
and, in particular, to extend tracking&lt;br/&gt;capabilities far beyond
conventional signals to much more general&lt;br/&gt;data sets with intrinsic
low-dimensional structure. A second&lt;br/&gt;research aim is to develop new
tools for tracking low-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;structure in systems jointly with
estimating the content of&lt;br/&gt;time-varying signals and data sets. A third
research aim is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with higher-dimensional and more complex
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems, and the goal is to develop improved methods that
exploit&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional structure to perform quantitative and
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;analysis in systems that are too complex and high-
dimensional for&lt;br/&gt;system identification. In a fourth, educational aim,
accessible&lt;br/&gt;K-12 outreach materials are being developed for
dissemination&lt;br/&gt;through an online digital library.