* 1409622
* STRAIN DRIVEN  DYNAMICS OF PHASE TRANSITIONS IN OXIDE ANTIFERROMAGNETS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Xia Hong, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions refer to changes
in a material's properties, often driven by temperature changes. The ubiquitous
phase transition of water, which transforms from ice to liquid water to steam as
the temperature increases, serves as an excellent example. Pressure
significantly alters the temperature of water's transitions, as anyone who has
baked a cake at high altitude well knows. The research component of this project
will investigate the effects of rapidly changing pressure on phase transitions
of technologically important magnetic materials by focusing a very fast
(ultrasonic) sound wave on the material. By varying the pressure at rates of up
to 10 billion times a second, the investigators will probe how the material's
properties vary. The fundamental questions being probed are how quickly can the
material respond, what will the response be and why does a particular material
respond the way it does. The educational component is informed by the PIs'
extensive experience in outreach and education at all levels ranging from
preschool, K-12 and undergraduate education. New activities on phase
transitions, tailored to the needs of a particular age group, will be developed
to tie in with this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will investigate the
dynamics of strain driven phase transitions in materials that show intricate
entanglement between structure and ordering, viz. the magnetoelectric
antiferromagnet Cr2O3 and the antiferromagnetic Mott insulator NdNiO3. In both
cases the antiferromagnetic ordering is coincident with the appearance of
another transition, surface boundary magnetization for Cr2O3 and a metal-
insulator transition for NdNiO3. Focused surface acoustic wave transducers will
generate strains that are comparable in magnitude to fixed, epitaxial strains
and allow for controlled variable strain on a single sample, as well as the
ability to drive strain at high frequencies. This approach of precisely
controlled lattice excitation is unique in its the ability to drive materials
back and forth across the phase transition at GHz frequencies, resulting in
large changes in the order parameter, rather than small perturbative changes.
This approach can be extended to a wide variety of strain sensitive ordering in
thin film materials and will answer two fundamental questions. First, it will
quantify the effects of external strain on the phase transition temperature of a
single thin film sample, eliminating the uncertainties associated with thin film
growth. Second, it will measure the temporal scale over which these strain
driven phase transitions occur. The educational objectives will extend the reach
of this cutting edge science by expanding the PIs' portfolios to include topics
that are relevant to this project. The PIs will share their knowledge, skills
and excitement with the already extensive ongoing outreach and education
projects that include K-12 students and teachers, science cafes, science clubs,
and senior citizen groups.