* 1409056
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Software Defined Internet Exchange
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jennifer Rexford, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 350,000.00

The Border Gateway Protocol(BGP) is the protocol used to administer and control
the flow of traffic between the separately administered networks that connect
together to form the Internet. Because many of the current failings of the
Internet are due to BGP's poor performance and limited functionality, this
project aims to explore incrementally deployable ways to leverage Software-
Defined Networking's (SDN) power to improve interdomain routing. These
improvements will facilitate higher return on investment via load balancing and
traffic engineering, increased capabilities to respond to denial-of-service
attacks, and new services such as application specific peering where two
networks exchange traffic only for certain applications (e.g., video).
Additionally, the project will improved the ability of network operators to
track and engineer peering relationships based on traffic
volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the re-emergence of Internet
eXchange Points (IXPs) to create Software Defined eXchanges (SDXs) that
fundamentally change network control. The project has two major themes: (1)
near-term solutions that coexist with BGP; and (2) long-term solutions that
replace BGP entirely, using IXPs as the dominant mode of interconnection. In
terms of near-term solutions, the central intellectual question explores the
improvements that are possible when a single IXP deploys SDN-based technology.
Longer term, assuming that SDXes will one day become more prominent, the project
is developing solutions that replace BGP entirely with an SDX-mediated Internet,
where all peering takes place at these interconnection points. Such a design
would make policy only relevant to the endpoints (the sending and receiving
domains) and would eliminate policy complications from intermediate providers.
The project is also investigating how these endpoint policies might emerge, how
the inter-SDX routing is done, how the longer-term design might be incrementally
deployed, and what its impact might be in the provider ecosystem. The SDX design
may point the way to a more stable, secure, and economically sound Internet.