* 1409399
* Collaborative Research: Extrinsic Size Effects in Ferroelectric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Jacob Jones, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 580,508.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ferroelectric materials are used to couple electrical
and mechanical energy and store information. Therefore, they are used
pervasively as sensors, actuators, and energy and memory storage components in
microelectronics, ultrasonic devices, and consumer products. The properties of
ferroelectric materials can change significantly as their size is reduced. In
ferroelectric thin films, it is now widely recognized that significant size
effects are observed at film thicknesses between 10 nm and 1 um. At these
thicknesses, the effectiveness of these materials at storing and transducing
energy is dramatically reduced - in some cases being suppressed to &lt;20% of
the values seen in their larger counterparts. Using state-of-the-art
experimental approaches offered by a collaborative team of investigators, this
project elucidates the atomistic origins of these size effects in ferroelectric
thin films. This understanding enables the design and realization of next-
generation devices at substantially smaller length scales with superior
performance and functionality. Examples of devices impacted by this research
include piezoelectric microelectromechanical systems and scaled
capacitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of the project is
to develop a universal physical understanding of the fundamental structure-
property-processing relationships that govern extrinsic size effects in
ferroelectric thin films. The specific objectives include proving the extrinsic
mechanism(s) affecting the size effects in ferroelectric thin films, quantifying
the relative contributions from intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms to
properties, and establishing new fundamental structure-property-processing
relationships. To accomplish these objectives, the Trolier-McKinstry group at
Penn State synthesizes high-quality thin films and analyzes property
measurements using Rayleigh and Preisach models. The Jones group at North
Carolina State University uses in situ X-ray diffraction while applying voltage
to quantify the intrinsic and extrinsic contributions under equivalent
electrical loading conditions. The integrated results provide a quantitative
understanding of contributions of intrinsic and extrinsic effects to the
dielectric and piezoelectric coefficients in ferroelectric thin films as a
function of film thickness and other key variables. The fundamental nature of
the mechanisms and the results in the present work will be applicable to many
ferroelectric thin film compositions including those being developed for high-
temperature and lead(Pb)-free applications. Graduate students gain additional
exposure to facilities and scientists through conducting experiments at the
Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. The educational outreach
program includes participation by the project participants at workshops and
camps directed at elementary, middle school, and high school students. Students
from underrepresented groups will be engaged in the project through targeted
recruitment and outreach activities.