* 1409898
* Structural Dynamics and Domain Reorientation of a Phosphohexomutase:  Long Range Effects and Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lesa Beamer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Structural dynamics and domain reorientation of a phosphohexomutase: long range
effects and catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigators will address
fundamental questions about the functions of enzymes, the intricate molecular
machines found in all living things. In particular, this work will define
pathways used for transmitting information across the three-dimensional
structures of enzymes. The program will train young scientists in powerful,
state-of-the-art biophysical methods and their applications for unraveling the
mysteries of biological macromolecules. The research and associated training
activities in this project will benefit the chemical and biotechnology
industries in the U.S., as well as the research communities in protein science
and biophysics. The PI will expand her Science ARTreach program at a local
elementary school, using art to improve science literacy of a diverse student
population. The co-PI will launch Scoutreach to introduce molecules of living
cells to adolescent youth and will enhance teaching of biophysical methods in
the graduate student curricula, to provide highly skilled employees for the work
force. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Catalytically relevant motions among domains and
in internal networks will be investigated in the enzyme
phosphomannomutase/phosphoglucomutase (PMM/PGM). PMM/PGM is a member of a large
enzyme superfamily whose members have important roles in carbohydrate
biosynthesis. Previous studies showed that both phosphorylation and ligand
binding affect the structure and flexibility of this enzyme. As phosphorylation
and allostery are topics of wide interest, the mechanisms involved in long-range
phospho-regulation of catalysis have implications for understanding many enzyme
systems. Specifically, this will be investigated at the levels of fluctuating
domain orientations and networks of communicating and mobile residues, using a
combination of cutting-edge X-ray crystallography, NMR, and protein chemistry.
Multiple enzyme states (phosphorylated, dephosphorylated, etc.) will be
characterized in terms of the nature and populations of their side chain and
domain conformers, their dynamics, and residue networks of transmission and
dynamics. How these characteristics are affected by covalent phosphorylation vs.
noncovalent ligand binding will be compared and contrasted. This will provide a
comprehensive case study of long-range communication in an enzyme, and its
tuning by phosphorylation and ligand binding.