* 1409555
* CSR: Medium: Salt: combining ACID and BASE in a distributed database
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Lorenzo Alvisi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 10/31/2017
* USD 900,023.00

Most large web applications are built using distributed databases.
&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles a fundamental question: as these applications
&lt;br/&gt;grow, leading to more query and update processing, can we scale
&lt;br/&gt;application performance without requiring a massive reprogramming
&lt;br/&gt;effort. The premise of this project is that today's two leading
database &lt;br/&gt;paradigms -- ACID and BASE -- are profoundly unsatisfying.
ACID implementations &lt;br/&gt;provide strong properties that make it easy to
develop an application &lt;br/&gt;and reason about its correctness, but they
struggle to keep up in &lt;br/&gt;performance and availability as the volume of
accesses to the database &lt;br/&gt;grows; and while the BASE programming
paradigm can meet these needs, &lt;br/&gt;the price is to give up all ACID
guarantees, drastically increasing &lt;br/&gt;both development time and the
possibility of introducing bugs. This &lt;br/&gt;project aims to develop the new
theoretical framework necessary to &lt;br/&gt;overcome this impasse and
simultaneously support consistency, availability, &lt;br/&gt;and scalability;
and to build a database prototype that implements the &lt;br/&gt;mechanisms
necessary to support this new framework. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
introduces a new programming framework that combines the ease &lt;br/&gt;of ACID
transactions with the performance of a BASE implementation &lt;br/&gt;by
introducing a new abstraction, BASE transactions. The &lt;br/&gt;syntax and
semantics of BASE transactions are driven by two &lt;br/&gt;goals. First, BASE
transactions should achieve high performance and &lt;br/&gt;availability by
loosening the overly-tight coupling between atomicity &lt;br/&gt;and isolation
of the ACID paradigm, while nonetheless retaining its &lt;br/&gt;ability to
express and enforce the atomicity requirements motivated by &lt;br/&gt;a given
applications semantics. Second, it should be possible to &lt;br/&gt;surgically
transform performance-critical ACID transactions into BASE
&lt;br/&gt;transactions without affecting either the correctness or the
&lt;br/&gt;performance of the unmodified ACID transactions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate this new programing framework, this project will
develop &lt;br/&gt;Salt, a database that combines the desirable qualities of
both ACID and BASE &lt;br/&gt;paradigms. The project will apply this work to
Health Care IT through a partnership &lt;br/&gt;with a 501(c)(3) entity in
central Texas charged with providing health information &lt;br/&gt;technology
solutions to local health care infrastructure.