* 1409981
* Dipolar Molecular Rotors in Surface and Bulk Inclusion Compounds.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Paul Beale, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 380,127.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to construct a new
class of materials, "roto-electrics", in which crystalline materials, normally
thought of as composed of rigidly bound atoms, also contain molecular components
that are free to rotate. Of particular interest are cases where the rotating
components carry a permanent electric dipole moment. These materials have long
been predicted but appear not to exist in nature and provide an opportunity to
learn how to build new and potentially useful materials by design. Roto-electric
phases are special examples of ferroelectric phases and ferroelectrics find
application in such areas as memory sticks, high frequency filters in cell
phones, and for controlling light polarization in displays. Roto-electrics offer
the opportunity to miniaturize such components and to make them operate faster.
The project supports the education of a graduate student, who receives
Ph.D.-level training in the design of dipolar materials, in a wide variety of
experimental spectroscopy techniques, and in the underlying materials theory.
The project looks to involve under-represented minorities in nano-engineering
research. It further leverages the training of future engineers in both nano-
scale modeling and experiment, by the integrating the research results into
materials science and engineering curricula. Project results and materials
design insights are further distributed through physics, engineering, and
educational websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team builds crystalline arrays of
nearly-freely rotating dipolar molecules with a host / guest molecular-
engineering approach. The present host systems are crystals, thin-films, and
crystalline powders of the well-documented tris (o-phenylenedioxy)
cyclotriphosphazene (TPP) material, which forms a hexagonal structure with open
channels directed along the hexagonal c-axis. The channels are known to accept a
large variety of guest molecules. The team investigates the dielectric phases
that result from placing specially synthesized dipolar molecules, specifically
designed to allow for nearly free rotation of the dipolar components, in the
bulk of the TPP channels (3-dimensional materials) or at TPP surfaces
(2-dimensional materials). These compounds are studied using a combination of
radio-frequency dielectric spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction, solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, bulk and micro-Raman spectroscopy, and, for
surface-localized and thin-film materials, with atomic force microscopy. Other
probes, especially neutron diffraction and tip-enhanced Raman are investigated
via collaborations. The new roto-electric materials are predicted to have
ferroelectric waves that propagate at speeds far below those of traditional
ferroelectrics, allowing e.g., for miniaturized surface acoustic wave devices.
This research makes contributions to the assembly of molecular systems of
nearly-freely rotating molecular components, and in demonstrating ordered
dielectric phases in such materials. The project works to provide new insights
into the construction of dipolar phases of matter, and has the potential to
provide new useful materials.