* 1409797
* NeTS: Medium: New Technologies for Next-generation Infrastructural Tagged Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2018
* Yuguang Fang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 10/31/2018
* USD 914,934.00

Barcode systems have brought a revolution in the retail industry by speeding up
the checkout process with a laser scanner that reads the product ID from barcode
printed on each item and retrieves its price automatically from a database.
However, there is a serious limiting factor: barcodes can only be read in a very
close range with direct sight, which makes it impossible to batch-access objects
that are piled on store racks or in shopping carts. RFID (radio-frequency
identification) technologies remove this limitation by integrating simple
communication/storage/computation capacities in attachable tags, whose IDs can
be read wirelessly over a distance, even when obstacles exist between tags and
the RFID reader. Today, RFID tags are ubiquitously available in retail products,
library books, debit cards, passports, driver licenses, car plates, medical
devices, etc. The current application model treats tags simply as ID carriers
and deals with each tag individually for the purpose of identifying the object
that the tag is attached to, which may be a vehicle passing through a toll
booth, a wild animal under monitoring, a luggage being transported in an
airport, or a commercial product through the chain of manufacturing, assembly
and shipping. Going beyond the current model, the uniqueness of this project is
to change the traditional individual view to a collective view that treats
universally-deployed tags together as a new wireless infrastructure, on which
novel applications can be developed for large-scale automated warehouse
management, cyber-physical data collection, sophisticated inventory control, and
even transportation traffic monitoring on the streets of a city. Such a new
wireless platform can be further enhanced by integrating miniaturized sensors
into tags for real-time information collection, by exploiting the mobility of
tags, by supporting security functions, etc. These developments will greatly
expand not only the scope of applications but also fundamental research into the
next-generation infrastructural tagged systems. The proposed research has the
potential of making significant practical impact, given the wide applicability
of tag technologies in industries and customer markets. Moreover, as part of the
project, new educational materials will be developed to timely incorporate
research results into graduate courses.

The research activities include the following: First, this project makes the
case that a small number of carefully-chosen tag primitives have the potential
of not only solving some existing problems much more efficiently, but also
handling many open problems that have not been studied before. In particular,
three fundamental primitives, called logical mixmap, tag ordering and tag
selection, will be thoroughly investigated with the objective of producing
generic tags that are simple yet versatile in their ability to support different
application needs. Second, while most prior work focuses on optimizing time
efficiency, this project brings in a new dimension, application-level energy
efficiency, for systems that use tags with internal power sources. The proposed
research will design energy-efficient solutions and provide means to control
energy-time tradeoff. Finally, should tags be pervasively deployed, people's
privacy would become a serious concern. Next-generation tags will help improve
the quality of people's lives, but meanwhile can reveal location if people carry
them in their pockets or by their cars. To address such concerns, this project
will study privacy-preserving information collection and authentication in
future tagged systems. In summary, the results from this project will advance
our understanding of tagged system design in terms of versatility, energy
efficiency and privacy protection. The expected outcome includes a set of
fundamental primitives (designs, analysis, evaluation, and implementation) that
together provide optimized solutions for a large number of interesting
applications.