* 1409335
* Hybrid Composites for Light-Controlled CO and Silver Delivery to Malignant Sites and Infection
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Pradip Mascharak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to University of California Santa Cruz is for
the development of biocompatible nanoparticles with photoactive carbon monoxide-
donors that can elicit either cell recovery or death depending on the
concentration. Although carbon monoxide (CO) is commonly known as the 'silent
killer', in recent years salutary effects of low doses of this noxious gas have
been demonstrated in oxygen-deprived tissues (as in stroke or heart attack) and
in organ transplants. This surprising discovery has prompted the research
community to develop new delivery modes in which controlled doses of CO can be
delivered to biological targets. Because CO induces programmed cell death in
cancer cells at elevated levels, attempts are also being made to deliver high
doses of CO selectively at malignant sites to combat cancer. This research
focuses on development of silica-based nanoparticles with photoactive CO-donors
that can elicit either cell recovery or death depending on the concentration.
Entrapment of the CO-donor within the porous nanoparticles will ensure very
little side effects from the byproducts of the drug. Research will also be
directed toward development of a cellulose-based bandage material that
incorporates another salutary agent, namely silver. The bandage material will be
impregnated with fluorescent silver compounds to track the sustained delivery of
silver to infected wounds, often encountered on burn victims. This new delivery
mode will allow monitoring of the wound healing process with time and amount of
silver applied to the wound site. Together, these composite materials will
provide new and convenient ways to treat inflammation, transplant failures,
malignancies, and chronic wound infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of the project, photoactive carbon
monoxide (CO)-donating metal complexes designed in the Principal Investigator's
(PI) group, will be incorporated into the pores of 50-70 nm mesoporous silica-
based nanoparticles for on-demand CO delivery to: a) provide protection to
oxidatively-damaged sites (as in ischemia and balloon angioplasty) under low-
flux regimen; and b) eradicate malignant cells (colon or breast cancer) under
high dose conditions. Characterization of the nanoparticle will utilize the
expertise of the co-PI's group while the biological assays will be completed in
the PI's laboratory. Confinement of the CO sources in the nanoparticles will
ensure very little toxicity from the byproducts of the CO-donors in each case
and the enhanced uptake of the nanoparticles will allow preferential kill of
cancer cells in the latter application. The second part of the project is
intended to develop carboxymethyl cellulose bandage materials with impregnated
fluorescent silver compounds to track silver delivery to infected wounds, often
seen in burn victims. This research effort will use designed silver complexes of
fluorescent ligands for slow release of silver (to avoid precipitation as is the
case with ordinary silver salts) and tracking the extent of drug delivery
through turn-on or turn-off of fluorescence. Participation in these projects
will allow the graduate and undergraduate students (some from underrepresented
groups) to acquire experience in a wide range of fields including chemical
synthesis, biochemistry, materials science, drug-design and assays, and cell
biology. Successful completion of the work will afford new biocompatible
composites that could be employed to deliver CO (a difficult gas to handle in
hospital settings) and silver for various high-impact biomedical applications
such as the treatment of infections, vasorelaxation, cytoprotection from
oxidative and inflammatory damage, and cancer therapy.