* 1409367
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Architecture and System Support for Power-Agile Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Geoffrey Challen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 282,931.00

Short battery lifetimes are one of the top complaints of today's smartphone
users and are limiting the transformative potential of these mobile devices.
Hardware components continue to offer new energy-saving features, but today's
mobile operating systems are ill-prepared to utilize these new capabilities.
This project investigates novel hardware-software coordination mechanisms to
make use of existing and next-generation hardware energy-saving features more
effectively. The focus is improving "power agility", a measure of a system's
ability to adaptively reallocate energy between hardware components to meet the
changing needs of running applications, through the introduction of new
operating system interfaces and abstractions.

In contrast to previous approaches that attempt to manage energy directly, this
project explores the idea of measuring and managing energy inefficiency, defined
as the amount of extra energy actually used to perform a task above the minimum
required for the task. Allocating inefficiency, rather than energy, addresses
many of the problems with previous energy management approaches while still
allowing the operating system to prioritize energy usage between tasks. By
allocating inefficiency, power-agile operating systems can safely allow tasks to
tune hardware components directly using userspace tuning libraries, allowing
them to make cross-component tradeoffs in response to changing requirements
while pursuing a wide variety of different energy management strategies. The
project also integrates education with the research through a new course on
power-agile computing at both of the collaborating institutions.