* 1409129
* CSR: III: CGV: Medium: Architectures for Energy Efficient Ray Tracing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Alan Davis, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 899,991.00

Computer graphics have become an integral part of nearly all modern computing
devices. These machines range from high-performance systems, scientific
workstations, and desktop computers, to dedicated gaming consoles, and to mobile
electronics such as laptops, tablets, and phones. All of these devices have
dedicated accelerators that enable high-performance 3D graphics. However, these
accelerators, known as graphics processing units - GPUs, are becoming limited by
power consumption and associated thermal issues. Improvements in process
technology can help reduce energy requirements as chips migrate to the new
processes, but in computer graphics, scene complexity and new demands for image
quality are ever increasing. This places new demands on the GPU, and conspires
to keep the power/thermal envelope high regardless of whether the GPUs are
deployed in desktop workstations or energy constrained mobile platforms. This
project aims to address this problem by developing new algorithms and new
architectures for highly realistic 3D computer graphic image synthesis that
consume significantly less power than current GPU growth
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is to target ray tracing as a rendering
algorithm. Ray tracing has well-understood advantages in supporting realistic
rendering with high quality composite global lighting effects. It is also highly
amenable to parallel processing, albeit utilizing a different type of
parallelism than offered by current commercial GPUs. Ray tracing can also be
naturally throttled to adjust the image quality given real-time temporal or
energy constraints. This is much more difficult with the Z-buffer based
rendering techniques used by current commercial GPUs. Starting from a proven
framework with lightweight multiple-instruction, multiple-data (MIMD) thread
processors that perform well with computations that are not efficiently executed
in single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) bundles, the plan is to
simultaneously develop new architectures and new algorithms that will work
together to produce images with a lower energy
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected primary contributions of the overall project
include: a detailed examination of the energy required to render images with
various lighting effects; techniques for trading off image quality, energy, and
rendering speed through ray throttling and hardware-assisted frameless rending
techniques; memory system enhancements to reduce data movement and the
associated energy cost; novel extensions of our recent work in data streaming
and runtime pipeline reconfiguration in many parts of the ray tracing algorithm;
algorithmic improvements that take advantage of our custom architecture. If
successful, this work has the potential to change fundamentally the way that
computer graphics is delivered to a huge variety of end users. The promise of
improved image quality and lower energy costs could change the way we experience
graphics on future computing devices.