* 1409524
* Signposts of Planetary Systems around Evolved Stars: A New Perspective on Extrasolar Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Roman Rafikov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 396,472.00

This is an award to study asteroid belts and debris disks orbiting white dwarfs
in order to better understand the general nature of planetary systems. White
dwarfs are very dense stellar remnants produced at the end of a low-mass star's
life, and composed mainly of electron-degenerate matter. Any debris disk or
planetary system orbiting a white dwarf is thought to have survived from an
earlier disk that formed around the progenitor star. Existing theoretical
understanding will be applied to these new unique circumstances to learn more
about the properties of planetary systems around evolved intermediate-mass
stars. The PI and his team will model the fragmentation and destruction of
asteroid bodies within the debris disks, and will derive predicted observational
signatures that can be compared to existing observations of white dwarf debris
disks. The PI will train and mentor a graduate student in research, involve
undergraduate students in research, and develop movies for the general public
illustrating the physics of planets around white
dwarfs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global time-dependent models for the evolution of
both gaseous and solid debris disks around white dwarfs will be developed and
compared with observations. The team will also explore the origin of eccentric
distortions in the disks of metallic gas, and the condensation of metallic gas
onto the solid particles. They will also explore possible role of
electromagnetic effects on the disk evolution.