* 1409589
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Tango: Performance and Fault Management in Cellular Networks through Device-Network Cooperation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2018
* USD 375,000.00

Cellular networks have become a part of the infrastructure that we rely on
without pausing to think of the enormous complexity that underlies such
networks. These networks serve an amazing diversity of mobile devices and
operate in an amazing diversity of radio environments. Failures in such networks
are not uncommon and we take their consequences in our stride as a fact of life,
complaining about call drops and data disconnections. Similarly, we also
encounter performance degradations, either in voice quality of calls or
connection speeds. With the fast increasing amount of traffic on cellular
networks and the cellular spectrum crunch, these conditions are expected to
become more severe in the near to mid-term future. Further, in today's networks,
there is no facility to provide services to a device by orchestrating an entire
network of geographically dispersed mobile devices, such as, for providing a
"video" of the path of an oncoming tornado.

In this project, the researchers put forward the view that rather than reactive
management of failures or performance degradations, there is a need to build
into cellular networks, proactive management of such events. The primary
difficulty for this is that, to the end devices, the network is considered
essentially as a black box. Conditions about the network, such as, congestion or
overload of some elements of the cellular infrastructure, are not made visible
to the applications on the mobile end devices. Likewise, much of the application
eco-system within a device is not made visible to the network. Thus, it is not
known to the network what is the latency requirement of some application or what
demand it is going to place in the near future on the network. The proposed
solution approach will turn this black box approach on its head and enable
proactive fault and performance management and an entirely new class of
applications through cooperation between the network and the devices, a Tango of
sorts.

The project goals will be accomplished through two synergistic project thrusts.
In the first, called "Fault Management and Orchestrated Services", the team will
develop computational and statistical models for the real-time cellular data and
analytics tools for the same, machine learning algorithms for predicting hard
and soft failures, and mitigation actions for avoiding predicted failures. It
will also develop orchestrated services between the cellular network and the end
users to achieve system-wide goals under the broad umbrella of "participatory
sensing". In the second thrust, called "Performance-driven Design", the team
will develop an API that will allow the cellular devices and the cellular
network to cooperate for achieving common desired system-level properties, such
as, higher data bandwidth. It will provide advanced traffic management schemes
through back-filling of delay-tolerant traffic and computation offloading from
the mobile devices, leveraging a team member's recent efforts in the Cirrus
Clouds Project. The project will result in the development of a miniature
LTE/UMTS testbed for open experimentation, open data access, and evaluation of
the protocols mentioned above.