* 1409348
* Investigating the Importance of Workplace Flexibility for Women in STEM at a Teaching-Intensive University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Martina Arndt, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,000.00

Bridgewater State University (BSI) will examine how flexibility in the
workplace, meaning flexible hours and conditions of work, may improve the
representation and advancement of women faculty in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). BSU will conduct a series of interviews and
a survey to better understand how women in STEM, especially women faculty of
color, who work either full time or part time at teaching-intensive
institutions, may be supported in the academic environment. Both men and women
faculty, especially at teaching-intensive institutions, will benefit from the
findings because the project will result in recommendations on changing the work
place environment to achieve better work-life integration and a more supportive
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has a two-pronged approach to
understanding workplace flexibility by 1) investigating full-time faculty
members' access to, and experiences with, workplace flexibility, and 2) by
examining how to better support part-time faculty so that part-time work is a
more viable path to workplace flexibility using a mixed methods approach.
Special attention will be paid to the perspectives of women faculty of color,
given their severe underrepresentation on campus. Previous published research on
women in STEM has focused almost entirely on research institutions, so this
study will offer a significant contribution to the literature by systematically
documenting the experiences of women faculty in STEM at a teaching-intensive
university. Previous research has shown that women scientists often experience
identity interference, which occurs when the norms and expectations of being a
woman interfere with those associated with being a scientist. However, faculty
at teaching-intensive universities may have a strong teacher identity that can
bridge the gap between their woman identity and scientist identity, so long as
they are provided the workplace flexibility to explore different facets of their
professional lives and achieve effective work-life integration. This study will
test this hypothesis while empirically exploring how to increase workplace
flexibility for both full- and part-time faculty members. This study is
specifically designed to provide empirical support that will motivate
institutional transformation to support the advancement of women in STEM at BSU.
Results of this study are expected to impact the experiences of women in STEM
across the state university system. Furthermore, because there is a dearth of
information in the scientific literature regarding faculty in STEM beyond
research-intensive institutions, disseminating the results of this study can
inspire other teaching-intensive institutions to consider the ways that they can
support the advancement of women in STEM. While this study is focused solely on
faculty experiences, supporting faculty at teaching-intensive universities can
have a positive effect on a large number of students, given the close
relationships between faculty and undergraduate students at teaching-intensive
universities. Finally, because previous research has suggested that workplace
flexibility is crucial to the advancement of women of color in STEM,
transformations motivated by this project could increase the racial and ethnic
diversity of STEM fields.