* 1409125
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Re[DP]: Realistic Data Mining Under Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Michael Hay, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2020
* USD 328,084.00

The collection and analysis of personal data about individuals has
revolutionized information systems and fueled US and global economies. But
privacy concerns regarding the use of such data loom large. Differential privacy
has emerged as a gold standard for mathematically characterizing the privacy
risks of algorithms using personal data. Yet, adoption of differentially private
algorithms in industry or government agencies has been startlingly rare. This
failure of adoption stems largely from a mismatch between the idealized problem
settings considered to date by privacy researchers and the complex real-world
workflows needed for mining personal data. This project will expand the
practical usefulness of privacy algorithms, encouraging their use through
technology transfer to the US Census and medical researchers at Duke University,
and ultimately ensuring privacy protection with increased data sharing and
transmission of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
systematically study the complete workflow involved in mining personal data, and
solve key problems that have diminished usability and prevented widespread
deployment of differential privacy. Research activities include developing (i)
private algorithms for data preprocessing (cleaning, imputation, and other
transformations), (ii) algorithms to support parallel and iterative model
selection, (iii) semantically meaningful guidelines for setting privacy policies
and utility benchmarks. Results will guide the design and implementation of a
novel web-based framework (DPcomp) for testing and evaluating the deployment of
privacy algorithms. Broader impacts of this project include technology transfer
to the US Census and medical researchers at Duke University, and incorporating
privacy themes into new undergraduate courses. DPcomp will stimulate interaction
between data owners and privacy researchers, and help unearth new research
questions.