* 1409813
* SHF: Medium: Stochastic Program Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Alexander Aiken, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2019
* USD 798,159.00

Title: SHF: Medium: Stochastic Program
Optimization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all software today is written by a
combination of man and machine. Programmers write programs in programming
languages that cannot be executed directly---these languages are designed to
make the task of programming easier but cannot actually be run on a computer
without a second step, where the human-written program is translated into a
language that the machine can execute. Many changes to the program are made
during this translation and especially important are optimizations that improve
the performance of the final program on the
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimizing programs is a very complex process as
there are many tradeoffs to be made in how to best use the limited resources of
the target architecture. Traditionally this large problem is solved by breaking
it into many small sub-problems, each of which focuses on a particular class of
optimizations. In this project a very different alternative will be explored,
using randomized search techniques to simultaneously consider all of the factors
that go into producing the fastest possible code. Preliminary results have shown
this approach can match or outperform production compilers for important short
kernels; a focus of this research will be to try to scale these results up to
full programs. The intellectual merit of this work is to reconsider how to
perform compiler optimizations in light of the dramatic advances in
computational power over the last several decades, a period in which the basic
structure of compilers has hardly changed. The broader impact will be to
demonstrate novel methods based on stochastic search, for producing, with a
significant degree of automation, consistently much faster low-level code than
today?s compilers. Thus, instead of compiler projects requiring years to produce
reliable and high performance code for new architectures, stochastic optimizers
that perform even better and with higher assurance can be built much more
quickly by smaller teams of people. The techniques that will be developed will
also be widely disseminated through massively online course portals.