* 1409543
* III: Medium: SimSQL: A Database System Supporting Implementation and Execution of Distributed Machine Learning Codes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Christopher Jermaine, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

Statistical machine learning (ML) is a commonly-applied framework for analyzing
very large data sets. In statistical ML, the goal is to learn a statistical
model that can be used to understand the data, find patterns, or make
predictions. Thus, many new software systems have been designed to support easy
implementation and fast execution of parallel/distributed ML computer codes over
large data sets. Almost all of those systems are "non-relational" in the sense
that they utilize data and programming models that are very different from
today's relational database management systems. Still, the attractiveness of the
relational or database-oriented approach to data processing persists. For
example, codes running on top of a database are declarative, so a programmer
need only be concerned with what he or she wants, and not how to obtain it. This
makes it easier to write codes and get them to run in a distributed environment,
enabling a strong separation between the code and the database data processing
algorithms, storage, hardware, and indexing, and even from the database schema.
Further, much of the world's structured data sits in relational databases, and
extracting anything more than a small subsample of a large data set for external
use is typically a non-starter. Being able to execute a ML inference code within
the database, using the database engine, would greatly increase applicability of
statistical ML.

This project will perform the fundamental research necessary to make ML-in-the-
database a mature technology. All of the ideas developed by the project will be
prototyped, evaluated, and distributed within the context of SimSQL, which is a
parallel, relational database system, augmented with the ability to perform
"stochastic analytics". This means that SimSQL has special facilities that allow
a user to define special database tables that have simulated data---these are
data that are not actually stored in the database, but are produced by calls to
statistical distributions. Since tables of simulated data in SimSQL can have
such recursive dependencies, it is easy to use SimSQL to run stochastic ML
inference algorithms (such as MCMC) over "Big Data". Research tasks include
increasing the level of performance of SimSQL by exploiting the optimization
opportunities presented by large-scale, iterative, ML computations. They also
include expanding the types of ML inference algorithms that can easily be
specified in SimSQL's SQL dialect, making SimSQL applicable for various
stochastic inference algorithms such as MCMC (Markov Chain Monte Carlo) and
Monte Carlo EM (Expectation Maximization). Further, the project will investigate
automatically compiling R and BUGS-like ML algorithm specifications into SimSQL
SQL. All of the software developed by the project will be available open source
under the Apache license. The code can be downloaded from (and more information
can be found at) http://cmj4.web.rice.edu/SimSQL/SimSQL.html