* 1409658
* Programmable and Emergent Structures in Soft Matter: Chirality, Polarity, and Auto-Origami
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Robin Selinger, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for theoretical
studies of responsive liquid crystal polymers, a form of plastic that
spontaneously changes shape under heating or cooling. Rod-shaped liquid crystal
molecules bonded to the polymer's main chains are disordered in orientation at
high temperature but align at low temperature, inducing the polymer chains to
extend in a parallel direction, and as a result the material stretches when
cooled. Some materials containing light-sensitive dyes also change shape in
response to illumination. A sample prepared with a non-uniform imposed pattern
of local molecular orientation, a process known as blueprinting, shows complex
shape evolution as the induced stress/strain is not uniform. The blueprinted
pattern thus encodes a complex trajectory of movement from an initial state,
e.g. a flat thin film, to a final state that is folded, curved, or twisted, a
form of programmed auto-origami. Computer simulation studies of this process
will explore the mathematical relationship between blueprinted structures and
the resulting shape change. These materials have potential application in
robotics, light-driven mechanical devices, touch displays, biomedical devices,
and switchable surface textures. Related studies will examine shape change,
pattern formation, and phase behavior in lipid membranes and liquid crystals.
Outreach efforts, including research internships for 60+ high school students
and annual science fair for six school districts, attract students to STEM
careers and aim to improve the diversity of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical/computational research and education in soft matter physics. It
combines computer simulation and fundamental theory to investigate mechanisms of
microstructural/shape evolution and pattern formation in soft matter. The
proposed theory/modeling studies of orientationally ordered lipid membranes and
nematic solids are united by themes of differential geometry, curvature,
topological defects, complex ordering and response, topology, and self-assembly.
The principal problems to be investigated are: (1) Auto-origami: nematic solids
as programmable, stimuli-responsive materials; (2) Lipid membranes: coupling of
topological defects and curvature; (3) Phase transitions in liquid-crystal
elastomers: kinetic evolution of polydomain structures; (4) Flexoelectricity in
liquid crystals: formation of complex modulated phases. In all of these cases,
the PI's will collaborate with experimental scientists to compare predictions
with experiments on physical and biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is connected to fundamental problems in self-assembly, nonlinear
elasticity, topological defects, and differential geometry. Potential
applications of outcome of this research could include soft actuators, shape
control of lipid vesicles for drug delivery, self-assembly of vesicles for
photonic crystals, and new liquid-crystal display technologies and switchable
surface textures.