* 1409406
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Subspace Matching and Approximation on the Continuum
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Davenport, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 514,738.00

In a diverse range of application areas--including astronomical imaging,
microscopy, wireless communications, radar, sonar, and many others--one must
confront the problem of estimating or extracting information from a signal that
is governed by a small number of unknown (continuous-valued) parameters.
Customized to each of these applications, unique methods for handling these
unknown parameters have been proposed in the past. This research involves the
development of a unified framework for addressing problems in all of these areas
systematically, efficiently, with awareness of the fundamental limits, and with
provable accuracy.

There are two main components of this framework. The first component involves
the development of models where the signals of interest lie within or close to a
subspace or a union of subspaces. In the case where the underlying parameters
for the signal are continuous-valued, this is a challenging task. Rather than
attempt to simply discredit these problems (a program potentially fraught with
difficulty), this research involves the development of finite approximations for
a locally infinite range of subspaces using efficient local subspace fits whose
dimensions match the effective number of local degrees of freedom. The second
component of this framework consists of techniques for identifying the range of
subspaces responsible for generating a signal from a set of discrete
observations, confronting difficulties posed by the coherence, by the continuous
nature of the parameter space, and by the fact that some signals may be
synthesized from a narrow (but continuously-indexed and therefore infinite)
range of subspaces. These components combine to enable the efficient
acquisition, processing, and estimation of signals arising from the
parameterized subspaces model.