* 1409068
* In-situ Electron Microscopy of Memristive Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Fernando Ponce, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 443,757.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
and the Ceramics Program, both in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This project addresses
fundamental materials science mechanisms responsible for the reversible and
nonvolatile changes of resistivity in resistive switching devices used in novel
high-density computer memories. The research activities rely to large extent on
advanced electron microscopy techniques. Better understanding of such mechanisms
allows for improved quality and reliability of resistive switches and thus leads
to more powerful computers. The project involves graduate and undergraduate
students at Carnegie Mellon University. Each year, two freshmen work on
semester-long research projects involving memristors, through a university-
funded program. One of them is expected to continue the research to senior year
with a fellowship from the Semiconductor Research Corporation. Principal
Investigators actively collaborate with semiconductor companies such as
GlobalFoundries, Applied Materials, and Intel. The collaboration brings summer
internship opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project explores the
fundamental mechanisms of bipolar resistive switching phenomena in
metal/oxide/metal systems. It is known that the small diameter conducting
filament forms in the high resistance functional oxide film during a
conditioning process referred to as electroforming. The model of electroforming
and resistive switching developed during the PI's prior NSF project asserts that
either one of these processes has two stages. In the first stage, the electron
transport instability leads to appearance of negative differential resistance in
the device characteristics, which in turn causes formation of the high current
density filament. This stage of the filament formation is fully reversible,
i.e., the filament dissolves if the voltage is reduced. If the current density
exceeds a critical value, in the second stage the localized Joule heating leads
to nonvolatile changes in the oxide structure. This project focuses on the
fundamental mechanisms in both stages of filament formation using advanced
electron microscopy techniques, i.e., in-situ imaging of the nanoscale metal-
insulator-metal devices under bias. The imaging techniques include electron
energy loss spectroscopy, differential diffraction, high-angle annular dark
field, and electron holography, in collaboration with Arizona State University.
The experimental findings are used to delineate several possible mechanisms of
electronic instability and to assess the nature of the nonvolatile changes in
the oxide layer.