* 1409953
* Two-Dimensional Layered Materials: Thermodynamic and Electrical Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Leslie Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 345,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, this
project focuses on the basic scientific research of the properties of small
crystals, the education of graduate and undergraduate students, and the further
development of specialized scientific instruments such as nanocalorimetry. Using
a newly discovered method, small, two-dimensional crystals of important
materials will be grown and the melting temperature and conductive electronic
properties will be investigated. The comprehensive study of these crystals will
help develop breakthrough technologies in electronic materials and will provide
a new understanding in biological membrane science. Further development of fast-
scanning nanocalorimetry will also enhance the national infrastructure of
scientific instrumentation. One of the important broader impact goals will be to
increase participation in scientific and technical education through the
building of devices (e. g. voltmeter and student nanocalorimeter measuring solar
and battery heat) within the Native American community. Blackfeet Community
College (BFCC) is located in Browning, Montana, which is the center for the
Blackfeet Nation. The activities include a Science Summer Camp at the BFCC for
the local students from the middle school, high school and the community
college. The research team includes faculty and students from BFCC and the
University of Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will prepare and characterize
extremely thin crystals of two-dimensional layered materials (e.g. graphene and
chalcogenides). One key attribute of all two-dimensional layered materials is
the very weak van der Waal bonding between layers which allows the stacking of
just a few layers. Special thermodynamic and electronic properties of these
materials are only revealed if the crystals are extremely thin - as thin as a
single layer of atoms or molecules. The focus of this project is to synthesize
and characterize variations of silver alkanethiolates (AgSCn) and chalcogenides
using a newly developed vapor deposition technique developed in the principal
investigator's laboratory. The rigid central (Ag-S) plane of the AgSCn crystal
controls crystal structure and is the key to its unique electronic properties.
The synthesis activity focuses on incrementally decreasing the number layers of
AgSCn (and chalcogenides) down to a single layer and decreasing the chain-length
(n) of the alkane side chains down to one-carbon (AgSC1) thiloate. Using
nanocalorimetry, which has the capability of measuring the melting of a single
layer of atoms, the principal investigator will measure the melting
characteristics of AgSCn crystals. The research team will also study the
vertical and lateral conductive properties of the AgSCn and chalcogenides
crystals using conductive probe atomic force microscopy. This dual synthesis and
characterization approach will uncover the ultimate structural and electronic
properties of these two material systems. New understanding of these systems is
applicable to biological lipid membranes which are another example of single-
layer materials, consisting of a single bilayer of organic molecules.