* 1409676
* Functional Anatomy of the Knee and Development-Implications for Interpreting Early Hominin Locomotion
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2014
* Marisa Macias, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2014
* USD 202,466.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the training and education of a Mexican
American Postdoctoral Fellow, an under-represented minority in science and
especially paleoanthropology. As a Chicana and first generation college
graduate, the Fellow is personally committed to broadening participation of
under-represented individuals in STEM fields. The research project explores
bipedalism in humans. Walking on two legs is a defining feature of the human
lineage, and yet major questions remain about the origin and evolution of human
gait. Bipedalism evolved early in the human lineage, possibly as early as six
million years ago; however, major debate has persisted over whether the earliest
hominins walked essentially like modern humans do today, or whether various
hominin species differ in their gait biomechanics. The recent discovery of an
unusually complete, 2 million year old skeleton belonging to Australopithecus
sediba has inspired new inquiry into the development and function of the hominin
lower limb. In particular, recent interpretations of Au. sediba have refueled
the debate as to how different species of australopiths may have varied in their
form of bipedalism. The only way to directly test those hypotheses relies on
examining aspects of the skeleton are sensitive to biomechanical demands during
growth, and thus provide evidence of the biomechanics of gait during growth.
However, little is currently known about how gait biomechanics influences the
development of the lower limb. This project combines experimental, ontogenetic,
and comparative approaches to interpret and reconstruct early hominin
bipedalism. First, the effect of locomotor regimes (vertical climbing, pedal
grasping canopy climbing, and wheel-running) on lower limb morphology are
studied in a mouse experimental model, addressing skeletal plasticity of the
femur and tibia. In running this project, the Fellow recruits minority students
to be trained as assistant researchers through minority student organizations at
GWU such as the Bouchet Society. The Fellow continues to present her research to
children through outreach programs targeting low-income and minority students
interested in science. This relies on previous experiences implementing age-
appropriate activities, piloted during graduate school. Other efforts to improve
public understanding of science include engaging broad audiences through the
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History's outreach programs
(e.g., Scientist Is In, Human Origins Today (HOT) Topics), based on
presentations originally developed for the NC Museum of Natural Sciences during
the final year of her dissertation. The Fellow continues to be active in
Graduate Women in Science, supporting other female scientists across STEM fields
as well as coordinating outreach and volunteer opportunities for these
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances our understanding of how and
when our modern style of upright, bipedal gait evolved. The current paradigm
views all early human ancestors and relatives as essentially the same, when in
fact there may be considerable adaptive diversity in the early phase of human
evolution. This project therefore has the potential to transform the current
paradigm in paleoanthropology, and integrates experimental, developmental, and
comparative data to achieve a more rigorous understanding of the functional
significance of knee anatomy in humans. The experimental component provides the
context for interpreting the results of a comprehensive ontogenetic primate
comparative study, which examines whether developmental trajectories are
correlated with behavioral changes throughout development, and addresses whether
deviations from the general mammalian and primate pattern of epiphyseal fusion
are correlated with specialized locomotion. Finally, lower limb fossils
belonging to early Homo erectus and other early hominin species are included to
test and advance hypotheses about the functional significance of developing
morphology in light of the aforementioned experimental and ontogenetic
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;