* 1409261
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Subspace Matching and Approximation on the Continuum
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Wakin, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,874.00

In a diverse range of application areas--including
astronomical&lt;br/&gt;imaging, microscopy, wireless communications, radar,
sonar, and&lt;br/&gt;many others--one must confront the problem of estimating
or&lt;br/&gt;extracting information from a signal that is governed by a
small&lt;br/&gt;number of unknown (continuous-valued) parameters. Customized
to&lt;br/&gt;each of these applications, unique methods for handling
these&lt;br/&gt;unknown parameters have been proposed in the past. This
research&lt;br/&gt;involves the development of a unified framework for
addressing&lt;br/&gt;problems in all of these areas systematically, efficiently,
with&lt;br/&gt;awareness of the fundamental limits, and with provable
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main components of this framework.
The first&lt;br/&gt;component involves the development of models where the
signals of&lt;br/&gt;interest lie within or close to a subspace or a union of
subspaces.&lt;br/&gt;In the case where the underlying parameters for the signal
are&lt;br/&gt;continuous-valued, this is a challenging task. Rather than
attempt&lt;br/&gt;to simply discredit these problems (a program potentially
fraught&lt;br/&gt;with difficulty), this research involves the development of
finite&lt;br/&gt;approximations for a locally infinite range of subspaces
using&lt;br/&gt;efficient local subspace fits whose dimensions match the
effective&lt;br/&gt;number of local degrees of freedom. The second component of
this&lt;br/&gt;framework consists of techniques for identifying the range
of&lt;br/&gt;subspaces responsible for generating a signal from a set
of&lt;br/&gt;discrete observations, confronting difficulties posed by
the&lt;br/&gt;coherence, by the continuous nature of the parameter space, and
by&lt;br/&gt;the fact that some signals may be synthesized from a narrow
(but&lt;br/&gt;continuously-indexed and therefore infinite) range of
subspaces.&lt;br/&gt;These components combine to enable the efficient
acquisition,&lt;br/&gt;processing, and estimation of signals arising from
the&lt;br/&gt;parameterized subspaces model.