* 1409831
* SHF: Medium: DNA-based Molecular Architecture with Spatially Localized Components
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2018
* Luis Ceze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 900,000.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing progress in the
miniaturization of electronic devices is driving computer technology inexorably
towards molecular scale devices. In just a few more "Moore's Law Cycles,"
components will approach the size of individual molecules, at which point new
computing architectures need to be found. Importantly, the problem is not just
to develop molecular-scale computational logic, but to interface the logic to
its environment, namely a molecular-scale
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular logic circuits may one day be at the
heart of embedded chemical controllers for biochemical, nanotechnological, or
medical applications --- environments that are inherently incompatible with
traditional electronic controllers. Performing computation inside living cells
offers life-changing applications, from improved medical diagnostics to better
disease therapy to intelligent drugs. Due to its bio-compatibility and ease of
engineering, DNA is an ideal physical substrate for carrying out molecular
computation. However, current DNA circuits are not fully modular and have not
yet been demonstrated to operate in living cells. An approach to DNA computing
in which all circuit elements are co-localized on a DNA nanostructure can help
address both challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA circuits that rely on the strand
displacement mechanism constitute the biggest rationally designed molecular
circuits by far. However, to make this technology useful for practical
applications two major challenges need to be addressed. First, truly composable
DNA need to be developed. In current DNA logic circuits all components diffuse
freely in solution and encounter each other at random. Whether two components
--- the logic gates and the signals connecting them --- react with each other
depends on the chemical sequences of the components, rather than their location.
Therefore, to compose a circuit with multiple gates, each signal and logic gate
must be built with a different set of DNA sequences to avoid interference
between gates or modules. The need to specifically design sequences of
interacting components limits composability and forms a major hurdle in scaling
up the size of DNA circuits. Second, architectures need to be developed that are
well-suited for in-cell computing. So far, no complex DNA circuits have been
demonstrated to work reliably in cells: the delivery of circuits with many
independent components to living cells is challenging, and the relatively simple
single and double-stranded components from which existing circuits are assembled
are easily degraded by cellular nucleases. A novel approach to DNA computing in
which all circuit elements are co-localized on a DNA nanostructure will be used
to address these seemingly distinct challenges.