* 1409106
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Content Delivery over Heterogeneous Networks: Fundamental Limits and Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Bruce Hajek, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

There has been a paradigm shift in the design of communication networks due to
the content revolution: the focus has shifted from making a connection to
delivering content. Content Distribution Networks carry much of the data of the
modern Internet, with video alone occupying nearly 80%, consuming a massive
amount of resources. The energy cost of data centers rivals that of medium sized
countries. Traditional content distribution network designs have involved
centralized capital-intensive infrastructure. For scalable performance, next
generation content distribution networks will have to harness the "edge-cloud,"
consisting of vast numbers of highly capable end user devices such as smart
phones, tablets, and e-readers. In this project we address the issues of models,
fundamental limits, and storage and delivery algorithms associated with the
distributed nature of next generation content distribution networks. The main
goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive theory for characterizing the
fundamental capacity and performance limits of such networks, and to design the
associated content storage and distribution algorithms to achieve these limits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Content distribution networks generate the vast majority
of all internet traffic, and we expect our results to guide the next generation
of such networks. In particular, we explore ways to support robust and efficient
distributed storage and delivery of content over heterogeneous networks. An
integral and key aspect of our proposal is to closely tie the theoretical and
conceptual aspects of the project with the practical and real-world engineering
issues. This approach is highlighted by building testbeds at each of the
universities of the investigators as well as specific to each of the main topics
(storage, centralized delivery, and peer-to-peer delivery) of the
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As multimedia content consumption becomes the
centerpiece of today's on-line experience, the results of this work are expected
to contribute to a seamless end-user experience, while freeing up significant
backhaul resources and avoiding the saturation that would otherwise plague
today's network infrastructure.