* 1409092
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Meaning of Economic Stratification in the Post-Recession
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Alford Young, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 11,663.00

SES-1409092&lt;br/&gt;Alford Young, Jr. &lt;br/&gt;Jessica
Wiederspan&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United
States, scholars have long argued that the primary way in which individuals
collectively explain the process of economic stratification is through the
ideology of the American Dream, or the belief that all people have a reasonable
chance to achieve economic success based on their own hard work and effort. Yet
research suggests that individuals born to parents in the bottom or the top of
the income distribution are likely to remain in those positions as adults,
placing into serious question whether all Americans have a reasonable chance to
achieve economic success. Despite this contradiction, it is unclear how
individuals reconcile broader cultural messages about meritocracy with their own
experiences and observations in order to construct a worldview that is generally
consistent with, or in opposition to, the ideology of the American Dream.
Through in-depth interviews with 80 individuals in two Midwestern cities, the
investigators will generate a qualitative dataset uniquely capable of addressing
the question of how worldviews about economic opportunity are formed. My
specific research questions are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.How do
individuals explain the process of economic stratification in the United
States?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.Under what circumstances do individuals'
worldviews tend to reproduce the dominant ideology of individualism, and under
what conditions do they tend to challenge it? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.Are there
trends in why certain cultural schemas or personal experiences and observations
seem to be more salient than others in the development of individuals'
worldviews on economic stratification? What mechanisms and processes seem most
prominent in the development of these views? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying the
dominant way in which the people in a society collectively explain the process
of economic stratification can help us understand how and why particular social
arrangements are reproduced, especially if those arrangements appear to
disadvantage many individuals. This research can also provide insight into the
potential that exists for social transformation and help us to make sense of
individuals? behavior as economic and civic actors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issue of what
individuals think about economic stratification has been the subject of national
surveys (such as a series conducted by the Pew Research Center's Economic
Mobility Project in 2009 and 2011) and stories by media outlets such as National
Public Radio. Yet because there is no compelling account of why people believe
what they do, as well as the mechanisms that lead people to reject or reproduce
this dominant ideology, this project has the ability to fill a gap in the public
knowledge on this issue and appeal widely outside of academic circles. In
addition, the Director of Economic Development for one of the cities in which
interviews will be concerned has expressed interest in this research, as it has
the potential to provide insight into the types of economic challenges faced by
families in the area. The results will also be offered to officials in the
second city.