* 1409700
* Collaborative Research: Combined Theoretical/Experimental Approach to Understanding Irradiation-Induced Morphology Evolution
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michael Aziz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Description: The irradiation of solid materials with ion beams
holds great promise for shape and surface control in materials processing at the
nanoscale. When materials are irradiated by ions at sufficiently low energies
that the ions don't penetrate into the bulk but rather stay near the surface,
several interesting phenomena are observed. Certain irradiation conditions lead
to ultra-smoothing, which has important potential applications in fields ranging
from X-ray optics to light trapping devices to surgery tools. Under other
conditions, one observes self-organized arrays of nanoscale surface ripples,
mounds, or pits, with potential applications in fields such as optoelectronics.
Although both phenomena are potentially rich sources of technological
applications, currently the fundamental physical mechanisms determining ultra-
smoothing or self-organized behavior are not well understood. The project is a
tightly-integrated experimental (Harvard University) and theoretical (Southern
Methodist University) study of the fundamental physical principles governing
nanoscale morphology evolution during ion irradiation. The research activities
are integrated with educational activities to train graduate students in
nanoscience and nanotechnology.

Technical Description: This collaborative project explores the fundamental
physical mechanisms of both the nanoscale topographic pattern formation by a
high energy ion beam at a glancing incident angle, and the ultra-smoothing using
low energy ion beam irradiation. The ultimate goal is to develop deep
understanding and theory that could predict the outcome of arbitrary irradiation
conditions. An important aspect of the project is the combined experimental
approach and atomistic simulation to identify individual (nano-scale) ion
impacts and correlate them with observed (macro-scale) morphological evolution.
On one hand, a new multi-scale theoretical framework promises the ability to
identify, via atomistic simulation, the atomistic origin of continuum effects
such as stress. On the other hand, access to versatile experimental facilities
allows measuring the continuum behavior and the critical material properties and
testing theoretical predictions.