* 1409214
* SBE: TTP Option: Medium: Data-Driven Cyber Vulnerability Maintenance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2018
* USD 688,002.00

Researchers have found that over 90% of successful cyber attacks exploit
vulnerabilities that could have been fixed with available patches.
Vulnerabilities can be weak passwords or software with bugs on personal
computers, mobile devices, or printers. Yet, decision-making about manually
applying patches is difficult. First, a substantial fraction of vulnerabilities
are fixed each month by automatic patching. Second, applying patches can have
side-effects, making software unusable. Third, organizations have limited
abilities to estimate the profit from applying patches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research generates optimized policies that specify
which patches should be applied to which hosts. It does this by creating models
of related costs that are based on data. The methods include a novel type of
error estimation procedure which addresses the fact that data is limited,
particularly in relation to the costs of actions that have rarely been applied.
The associated mathematics extends a general decision tool called Markov
decision processes to address uncertainty from limited data. This extension is
achieved by solving open, fundamental mathematical problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are multiple real world applications planned in the
transition to practice. The major partner is The Ohio State University which
agrees to share monthly data on tens of thousands of computers and teams with
the PIs for policy improvement. In addition to tuning individual host
vulnerability-related policies, the PIs address password updating and network
vulnerability policies.