* 1409601
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scalable Algorithms for Spatio-temporal Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2019
* USD 709,342.00

Acceleration of computing power of supercomputers along with development and
deployment of large instruments such as telescopes, colliders, sensors and
devices raises one fundamental question. "Can the time to insight and knowledge
discovery be reduced at the same exponential rate?" The answer currently is
clearly "NO", because a critical step that combines analytics, mining and
discovering knowledge from the massive datasets has lagged far behind advances
in software, simulation and generation of data. Analysis of data requires "data-
driven" computing and analytics. This entails scalable software for data
reduction, approximations, analysis, statistics, and bottom-up discovery.
Scalable and parallel analytics software for processing large amount of data is
required in order to make a significant leap forward in scientific discoveries.
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops innovative, scalable, and sustainable data
analytics algorithms to enable analysis and mining of massive data on high-
performance parallel computers, which include (1) bottom-up and unsupervised
data clustering algorithms that are suitable for spatio-temporal data, massive
graph analytics, community computations, and detection of patterns in time-
varying graphs, different types of data, and different data characteristics; (2)
change detection and anomaly detection in spatio-temporal data; and (3) tracking
moving data and cluster dynamics within certain time and space constraints.
These parallel algorithms use the massive amount of data generated from
scientific applications, such as astrophysics, cosmology simulations, climate
modeling, and social networking analysis, for result verification and
performance evaluation on modern high-performance parallel
computers.&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses the critical needs for
spatio-temporal data analysis, performance scalability, and programming
productivity of large-scale scientific discovery via parallel analytics software
for big data. This work will impact applications of enormous societal benefits
and scientific importance such as climate understanding, environmental
sustainability, astrophysics, biology and medicine by accelerating scientific
discoveries. Furthermore, the developed software infrastructure can be used and
adopted in commercial applications, such as commerce, social, security, drug
discovery, and so on. The source codes are open to the public for all community
to adapt, build-upon, customize and contribute to, thereby multiplying its value
and usage.