* 1409586
* Microbial Control of Carbon Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Pamela Silver, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Approximately one third of all the photosynthesis on earth is performed by
aquatic bacteria. In the absence of membrane-bound compartments inside their
cells, these organisms create a favorable environment for carbon-fixing enzymes
by tightly packaging them inside protein compartments called carboxysomes.
Despite the importance of carboxysomes to the global carbon cycle and their
potential to serve as a platform for synthetic biology, the carboxysome assembly
process is still poorly understood. This research will elucidate the molecular
mechanisms specifying the size, number, and internal environment inside
carboxysomes. It will blend biochemical approaches, synthetic biology, and
fluorescence microscopy to explore the assembly process of whole carboxysomes
over time, and to place this process in the context of cellular physiology. An
understanding of the basic biological mechanisms by which carboxysomes are
formed will lay the groundwork for future engineering of these compartments.
Toward this end, this project will further the NSF's mission of expanding
science and engineering research potential, whether by improving on natural
carbon fixation or building nanoscale factories for other sensitive chemical
reactions within living cells. This project will provide also an ideal
interdisciplinary educational and training program. More broadly, the ultimate
goal of the carboxysome work is to improve the engineering of novel
functionalities. Such a synthetic life-like system could be endowed with the
ability to sequester and contain reactions otherwise incompatible with the
bacterial cytoplasm, or improve upon carbon fixation to create more efficient,
living remediators of carbon dioxide. Reducing the levels of atmospheric carbon
dioxide, a major greenhouse gas, would forestall climate changes, and therefore
offer major societal benefit.

As atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are approaching 400 ppm, understanding
biological mechanisms of carbon fixation is becoming increasingly important. A
large fraction of carbon dioxide is remediated by photosynthetic cyanobacteria,
which concentrate the machinery required to fix carbon into proteinaceous
microcompartments called carboxysomes. In Synechococcus elongatus, these
organelles, are composed of a layer of shell proteins surrounding a matrix of
the enzymes RuBisCO and carbonic anhydrase. Despite their importance to the
global carbon cycle, the factors controlling assembly of these complex protein
machines are poorly understood. Dr. Pamela Silver and her group at the Harvard
Medical School will employ biochemical reconstitution, genetic perturbations,
and quantitative live-cell microscopy to study the molecular basis and metabolic
consequences of the spatial and temporal organization of carboxysome biogenesis.