* 1409204
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Estimating simultaneously structured models: from phase retrieval to network coding
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Babak Hassibi, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

In modern data-intensive science and engineering, researchers are faced with
estimating models where available observations are far fewer than the dimension
of the model to be estimated. The key to the success of compressed sensing,
matrix completion, and other problems of this type, is to properly exploit
knowledge about the "structure" of the model. While structures such as sparsity
have been separately studied, the problem of "simultaneous structures" has been
neglected, since it is implicitly assumed by practitioners that simply combining
known results for each structure would solve the joint problem. Interestingly,
the PIs recently proved that this approach can result in a significant
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will develop theory and computationally
tractable methods for estimating simultaneously structured models with minimal
observations. It combines (1) a top-down approach to understand the fundamental
limitations based on the geometry of how structures interact, and (2) a problem-
specific, bottom-up approach to exploit domain knowledge in constructing
appropriate penalties. This work addresses a variety of applications including
(1) sparse principal component analysis, a central problem in statistics seeking
approximate but sparse eigenvectors, (2) sparse phase retrieval and quadratic
compressed sensing in signal processing, and (3) code design for communications
and network coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to systematically derive
structured models from data will have far-reaching impact on engineering
challenges in the era of Big Data and ubiquitous computing. Handling models with
multiple structures poses deep theoretical and computational challenges that
this proposal focuses on. Applications in machine learning, signal processing,
and network coding are discussed. The PIs will incorporate research results in
their teaching, organize technical workshops to bring together mathematicians
and engineers, and seek the involvement of undergraduate students in this work
through summer research programs.