* 1409581
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Commitment and Disengagement in Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Rory McVeigh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

SES- 1409581 Rory McVeigh Daniel Escher University of Notre Dame

This project examines why some efforts to create social change fail while others
succeed. The study builds on classical theories of collective action by focusing
on the interactions between activists, organizations, and community members in
central Appalachia, home to a contentious mining practice called mountaintop
mining. Some organizations succeed in gaining the support and participation of
community members while others tend to fail. The investigators hypothesize that
the reason for this is their ability to match culturally in certain key ways. In
other words, successful cultural matching is an important process enabling
activists to convert the structural potential for change into residents' actual
mobilization. The co-PI will examine this process through 65 interviews with
randomly and purposively selected residents and activists, examining various
moral commitments, symbolic boundaries, and personal and collective memories.
The investigator will also observe interactions between these two groups over
the course of three months of fieldwork. This study will contribute to scholarly
understanding of why social movements sometimes fail (or never even begin) by
showing a key yet overlooked component of collective action.

Broader Impacts

This project has two broader impacts. First, this project is useful for
practitioners who work for social change among marginalized populations and the
scholars who study them. It demonstrates that factors like grievances,
organizational resources, and appropriate framing are not enough to fuel a
movement; building trust with local residents is a key initial component of
organizing for community change. This project highlights what effective
organizations accomplish and also reveals some of the salient values and
priorities of residents that are likely to be similar across the globe,
particularly in rural areas with limited economic diversification. I will
distribute my findings to the environmental organizations I examine and present
and publish them widely. Second, this project brings to the fore an
underrepresented group, bringing to light their attempts to live out their
commitments amid severe structural disadvantages. Results from this study will
enable community groups to better understand the people they serve.