* 1409095
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enabling GPUs as First-Class Computing Engines
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 484,068.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are rapidly bringing the computing power
traditionally associated with massively parallel supercomputers into the
mainstream devices we use today. They have the power to revolutionize computing
by enabling orders of magnitude faster and more efficient execution of many
applications. Unfortunately, many modern applications and users cannot take
advantage of the computing capability present in today's GPUs because today's
GPUs are used as secondary devices to the much less powerful CPUs. As a result,
the massive computing power of GPUs gets wasted and underutilized for a large
number of important applications.

This project aims to take a fresh and comprehensive look at GPU design with the
goal of enabling GPUs as first-class computing engines that can benefit an
overwhelming majority of real-world applications and users. To this end, this
project systematically investigates the hardware/software design space of three
new execution models, which progressively turn a GPU into an independent, first-
class compute engine in a hybrid computing system: 1) an enhanced master-slave
model where the GPU is able to perform multiple-application execution, 2) a new
peer-to-peer model where the GPU is autonomous of the CPU, 3) a hybrid model
where GPUs and CPUs are integrated on the same die and are equals from the
applications' and system's viewpoint. The project comprehensively develops
software, hardware and software/hardware cooperative scheduling, resource
management, and system design techniques for all three models.

If successful, this project can pave the way to making GPUs first-class
computing engines used in all aspects of our everyday lives for a majority of
applications. Doing so is not only expected to lead to much higher degrees of
energy efficiency and user productivity but can also potentially enable new
applications and devices that can take advantage GPUs.