* 1409779
* Biomimetic Assembly of Microphysiological Lacunocanalicular Network
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Woo Young Lee, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Stevens Institute of Technology is to develop human
tissue-like materials that could be used in place of animal testing for drug
evaluation. The regulation of osteoblasts by osteocytes for new bone formation
is a major target for development of new drugs for treating 10 million
osteoporosis patients, and cancer patients with bone metastases which result in
350,000 deaths every year in the U.S. For these diseases, this project will
provide a more clinically relevant method of evaluating drugs than animal
testing, as the latter is known to poorly predict drug response in humans. This
study will, therefore, offer an important new insight in addressing
pharmaceutical industry's need to lower the number of costly drug failures that
occur during clinical trials. With regard to broader impacts, this project will
bring the excitement of discovery, collaboration, and entrepreneurship to: 1)
graduate students through interdisciplinary activities; 2) undergraduate
students via summer research experiences; and 3) high school students through
the American Chemical Society's Summer Research Internship Program for
Economically Disadvantaged High School Students. Students will be challenged to
develop business plans that can translate discoveries to entrepreneurial
opportunities at levels appropriate for their educational stages. This
innovation theme is important in our geographical area where biomedical research
plays a key role in propelling the regional, national, and global
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: With this award, the investigators
will reconstruct in vitro the 3-dimensional (3D) lacunocanalicular network
structure of cortical human bones. In order to mimic the network's multi-scale
3D geometrical features, a biomimetic approach will be used to hierarchically
assemble microbeads and nanoparticles with primary osteocyte cells harvested
from human bones within a microfluidic perfusion culture chamber. The biomimetic
approach will enable: (1) long-term culture of primary human osteocytes which
has not been possible to date; and (2) ex vivo investigation of biomaterial
effects on the cellular response of osteocytes for the first time. The specific
objectives of the project are to: (1) investigate the effects of biphasic
calcium phosphate and hydroxyapatite nanoparticles on extracellular matrix
production by human primary osteocytes and remodeling of their lacunocanalicular
space; and (2) reproduce the physiological role of the reconstructed osteocyte
network in incorporating neighboring osteoblasts into the cellular network and
regulating the spatiotemporal transition of the osteoblasts to osteocytes, as
mechanisms by which new bone tissue is formed during homeostatic bone
remodeling.