* 1409612
* Computer Science meets Anthropology: A novel approach for reconstructing locomotion from fossil human footprints
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Gabriel Sibley, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 202,474.00

Bipedal locomotion is a unique and fundamental behavior that has driven and
shaped the evolution of the human species. Yet the evolutionary history of human
bipedalism remains poorly understood. This project is the first to apply
interdisciplinary techniques to understand the evolution of bipedalism. The PI
also engages the broader public in this research through ongoing collaborations
with the Smithsonian Institution's Human Origins Program. Results of this
research, and its implications for understanding the evolution of our species,
are presented through regular lectures and participation in educational programs
at the museum's Hall of Human Origins. The PI and co-PIs recruit and train
research assistants from The George Washington University's Trachtenberg
Scholars Program. This program supports the education and training of promising
students from the District of Columbia public school system, who typically come
from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Consistent
efforts are also made to disseminate results to a diverse range of professional
audiences in biological anthropology, evolutionary biology, and computer
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, discoveries of several sites
preserving fossil human footprints have offered an exciting new form of data
from which to understand the evolution of bipedalism. However, novel techniques
are required to analyze the wealth of information contained within these diverse
sources of data. This project is transformative in its experimental approach for
linking footprint morphologies to the patterns of locomotion that produced them.
Experimental biomechanics will be bridged with techniques for robotic vision, to
understand how details of locomotion are recorded by 3-D footprint morphology.
Those data are used to develop powerful machine learning algorithms, applying
technologies from a rapidly-growing field at the intersection of computer
science and statistics, to build detailed reconstructions of locomotion from
fossil human footprints. By doing so, this project sheds new light on the
evolutionary history of the human species.