* 1409207
* Accurate Stellar Opacities To Solve Astrophysical Problems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Anil Pradhan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2020
* USD 440,142.00

In order to carry out any detailed study of nature on large scales, we often
require a precise understanding of the microscopic processes that govern our
universe. One of these, called opacity, measures the precise way that
electromagnetic radiation (light, in all of its forms) interacts with atoms,
molecules, and free-floating subatomic particles. Recent results from studies of
the Sun's interior indicate that previous calculations of the relative abundance
of the elements are off by an uncomfortable amount. The PI and his collaborators
are world leaders in the field of laboratory astrophysics. They will improve the
accuracy of opacity calculations guided by results from computer models of
stellar interiors, by recent experimental physics results, and by including
effects that were previously omitted. While it is primarily theoretical, this
work has a very broad range of practical applications in and beyond
astrophysics. These include nuclear fusion and medical physics. The PI is active
in several programs promoting collaborative US-India efforts in STEM education.
This project will involve specialized training of a postdoctoral fellow in this
multi-disciplinary research.

The PI will lead an effort to properly account for bound-free autoionization
resonances and calculate mean opacities for a variety of compositions using
improved atomic data and a new high-precision version of the Opacity Project
codes. Recent helioseismology results, results from the Z-pinch inertial fusion
device at Sandia National Laboratory, and re-examination of current opacities
all suggest that true opacities are significantly higher than current models.
This work could lead to the solution of the "solar abundance problem", and it is
all but guaranteed to lead to improvements in fundamental atomic physics, the
equation of state appropriate for stellar interiors that incorporates opacities
of elements produced in r-process nucleosynthesis, and improved Rosseland and
Planck mean opacities. It is a continuation and extension of prior successful
work by the PI and his collaborators, guided by recent measurements and by
improvements in computational techniques. Results will be made available to the
physics, chemistry, and astrophysics communities via electronic databases.