* 1409925
* Atomic Resolution Dual-Point Superconducting Phase STM
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Christopher Lobb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research supports the development and proof
of feasibility of a novel phase-sensitive superconducting dual-tip scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) to generate novel atomic-resolution images. Since
their invention in 1981, scanning-tunneling microscopes (STMs) have
revolutionized the understanding of the physics of materials by providing images
and detailed electronic information of solids down to the atomic scale. An STM
creates an image by measuring the current from electrons that tunnel between a
sample surface and an extremely sharp tip that is scanned very closely above the
sample surface. Tunneling is a quantum-mechanical process that allows electrons
to flow through regions that they are forbidden from entering by the laws of
classical physics. The novel type of STM being developped uses two
superconducting tips connected by a superconducting wire; it operates a fraction
of a degree above absolute zero temperature, and allows the imaging of coherent
Cooper pair tunneling. This project, when completed, will be used to study
superconductivity at the atomic scale in conventional superconductors as well as
newer materials which display exotic forms of superconductivity. Measurements
made with a dual-tip superconducting STM can be used to probe the underlying
mechanisms causing superconductivity. The project involves undergraduate and
graduate students as well as postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research supports the development of a
novel phase-sensitive superconducting dual-tip scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) and the use of the instrument to generate novel atomic-resolution images
and gain new insight into the mechanism producing superconductivity in high-
transition temperature (Tc) superconductors and interesting phenomena in other
materials. The system is based on a modification of an existing millikelvin STM
in which two tips can be independently scanned, and can be either normal or
superconducting, allowing for quasi-particle tunneling, or Cooper-pair tunneling
in the quantum phase-fluctuation limit. By adding a superconducting wire
connection between two superconducting tips, and using a superconducting sample,
a Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) loop is formed with the
sample. With suitable biasing of the tips, this reduces fluctuations in the
gauge-invariant phase difference across the nano-scale tips, allowing flux and
phase sensitive imaging. In particular, this new capability will allow imaging
of the spatial dependence of the gauge-invariant phase difference on the surface
of superconducting samples at the atomic scale. The microscope will be tested at
35mK on well-understood superconducting materials such as Nb and Al and images
generated of spatial variations in the local gauge-invariant phase difference
near vortex cores, atomic defects, steps, and other surface irregularities. The
project involves undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdocs.