* 1409551
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Data is Social: Exploiting Data Relationships to Detect Insider Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2019
* USD 975,999.00

Insider attacks present an extremely serious, pervasive and costly security
problem under critical domains such as national defense and financial and
banking sector. Accurate insider threat detection has proved to be a very
challenging problem. This project explores detecting insider threats in a
banking environment by analyzing database searches.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses the challenge by formulating and devising machine learning-
based solutions to the insider attack problem on relational database management
systems (RDBMS), which are ubiquitous and are highly susceptible to insider
attacks. In particular, the research uses a new general model for database
provenance, which captures both the data values accessed or modified by a user's
activity and summarizes the computational path and the underlying relationship
between those data values. The provenance model leads naturally to a way to
model user activities by labeled hypergraph distributions and by a Markov
network whose factors represent the data relationships. The key tradeoff being
studied theoretically is between the expressivity and the complexity of the
provenance model. The research results are validated and evaluated by intimately
collaborating with a large financial institution to build a prototype insider
threat detection engine operating on its existing operational RDBMS. In
particular, with the help of the security team from the financial institution,
the research team addresses database performance, learning scalability, and
software tool development issues arising during the evaluation and deployment of
the system. Research results are reported via technical papers and disseminated
through conferences and journals, through a new research webpage at the UB's
NSA- and DHS-certified center of excellence (CAE) in Information Assurance, and
at the center's future workshops.