* 1409401
* TWC: TTP Option: Medium: Voting Systems Architectures for Security and Usability
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Philip Kortum, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,215,958.00

The security and integrity of elections is paramount in the furtherance of
democracy. However, enhanced security often comes at the cost of making voting
systems significantly more difficult for voters to use. With input from
stakeholders in the voting process (most notably Travis County, Texas), we are
constructing a prototype voting system and investigating how to design such a
system so that it is significantly more secure than current solutions, without
making it harder to participate in the election process. This research is
closing knowledge gaps identified when designing a complex voting system that
must satisfy stringent security, auditability, and usability constraints. We are
conducting research on all aspects of this secure-but-usable voting system by
defining the cryptography-user interactions, establishing scalable public
bulletin-board systems that allow and encourage voters to verify their votes,
engineering the software for the voting console, determining the correctness of
the vote tallying system and understanding how voters and poll workers select
and authorize specific voting stations. We are employing an iterative usability
assessment and rapid design strategy that allows us to converge onto an optimal
voting solution that satisfies the often-conflicting constraints of usability
and security. At the conclusion of this research, we intend to have a fully
operational prototype of this voting system that has been extensively tested by
real voters in the laboratory and the field and is usable in its operation while
being robust in its reliability and security.