* 1409243
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Volunteering and Democratization
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Thomas Janoski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,876.00

SES-1409243 Thomas Janoski Sara R. Compion University of Kentucky

The research addresses a significant gap in knowledge concerning volunteering in
emerging democracies, by contributing an African-centered, sociological
perspective to theories of civil society. The co-PI will employ a sociological
approach and the notion of civic capital to study how associational volunteering
shapes and is being shaped by democratization. The researcher will use a mixed-
method, cross-national comparative approach to study domestic volunteering in 20
democratizing African countries. First, the study will identify a profile of
Africans who actively belong to volunteer organizations. Next it contextualizes
volunteering as a function of the varying civic and economic climates in which
these individuals live. This is done through a multi-level statistical analysis
of the 2008 Afrobarometer survey data. Finally, ethnographic case studies in
South Africa and Zambia will be completed to analyze how cultural repertoires,
values, and identity shape notions of democratic citizenship and inform
volunteering behavior from the bottom up.

Findings from this research will identify the types and characteristics of
people who actively join associational volunteer organizations in 20 African
countries. The quantitative models will reveal if democratic advancement
facilitates individual volunteering. The qualitative case studies will offer
explanations about why and how people volunteer, and if their volunteering
builds their civic capital which in turn fosters democracy.

Broader Impacts

Research findings will contribute to our understanding of how the deeply
intertwined relationship between associational volunteering and democracy
unfolds within developing and democratizing contexts. Results will have broader
scholarly potential by contributing to comparative, quantitative analysis of
African countries that increases the generalizability of existing theories on
civil society to countries beyond the West. The findings can direct future
efforts dedicated to maximizing the civic action of volunteering populations,
and building targeted strategies for encouraging and recruiting those who are
not yet civically engaged. State planners can use the evidence from this study
to direct foreign aid towards those volunteer activities that increase the civic
capital necessary for democratic nation building. Finally, non-profit
organizations can benefit from the best-case scenarios on how to make their
organizations more democratic, participatory, and civically oriented.