* 1409531
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Personal Contacts and Employment Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Steven Lopez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Work is a central activity of economic life. The ability to earn a decent living
affects individuals' material and psychological well-being, and a productive
workforce is essential for national development. Prior research has shown that
individuals commonly find employment through personal contacts. Personal
networks are developed when repeated, satisfactory exchanges between individuals
lead to stable and enduring ties. However, in high-poverty, high-underemployment
contexts, maintaining enduring ties with others can be difficult. The objective
of this study is to understand individuals use personal contacts to find work in
a context of pervasive underemployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the proposed
study, in-depth interviews, including detailed work histories and social network
information, will be collected from 100 low-income workers and job-seekers in
urban Nicaragua, a case well suited to this inquiry that adds to a generalizable
understanding of employment opportunities via comparison with other research in
the US around the world. By studying these processes in a setting where paid
work is scarce and institutional supports for job-seekers are few, the factors
that determine the effective use of personal contacts can be more clearly
identified. This project will also build upon existing research on networks and
employment by clarifying the subjective meanings of ties and by testing the
assumption that networks are used optimally. This study will parse personal
choices (one's willingness to call upon contacts) and structural constraints
(one's ability to call upon contacts) by examining unsuccessful searches for
work as well as successful searches. Further, researchers studying networks tend
to impose definitions of tie strength, even though relationship quality is
subjective and dynamic. For the working poor in particular, relationships with
others can be both a burden and a resource. This study will ascertain which
types of ties were used to obtain jobs, and respondents will be asked for their
subjective evaluations of the relationship with those contacts. Thus, this study
will lead to the refinement and specification of social capital and network
theories while elaborating social processes in detail through in-depth
qualitative data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this study will enable
the identification of techniques to increase levels of social capital and
economic independence in low-income communities. The proposed project also will
inform development practice, by identifying vulnerable workers who are locked
out of employment opportunities due to inadequate networks or the inability to
use their contacts effectively. The data collected will result in a PhD
dissertation, academic conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal articles,
and a book. Also, qualitative studies such as this can be a valuable teaching
tool for educating students about complex social phenomena such as labor markets
and economic development.