* 1409918
* "Research Initiation Award: Enhancement of Research and Education in Computational Nanomechanics and Nanoscale Testing at Tuskegee University"
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Shaik Zainuddin, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2018
* USD 239,833.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University's RIA
project, within the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE),
develops its research capabilities in Computational Nanomechanics and Nanoscale
Testing, areas of research which are essential to the development of a deeper
understanding of the interaction of nano fillers with the matrix materials and
their role in enhancing the mechanical properties of composite structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific activities undertaken through this project
include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Setting up the initial structure with various
amounts of cross-linking between SWCNT and Epon molecule and with varying
diameters of SWCNT, &lt;br/&gt;2) Determination of interfacial binding energy
and frictional stresses between carboxylic (COOH) functionalized SWCNT and Epon
composites,&lt;br/&gt;3) Measurement of frictional stresses as a function of the
density of chemical bonds between COOH-SWCNT and Epon composites, &lt;br/&gt;4)
Quantification of how these stresses scale with the surface area of COOH-SWCNT,
&lt;br/&gt;5) Determination of interfacial strength using fiber pull-out and
nanoindentation tests to compare the trends in shear strength with respect to
SWCNT size and density of interfacial bonds observed in MD simulations,
and&lt;br/&gt;6) Involvement of undergraduate students in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration with the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, the Air Force Research Laboratory and the NSF
funded Materials for Information Technology (MINT) Center at University of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a competent and diverse workforce
in MSE is very critical for the United States to maintain global competitive
edge. The RIA allows TU to introduce new research areas and academic courses to
prepare undergraduate students who can compete successfully in the global
market. A robust infrastructure and expertise exists at the institution in
cutting-edge research in various aspects of advanced materials that are of
interest to the military, automobile, sports, civil and healthcare industries.
In addition to broadening participation through the inclusion and development of
underrepresented minorities in STEM, the institution broadens participation in
STEM geographically as an Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) jurisdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of research and
education outcomes generated from the project?s implementation will be available
in several venues including publications in refereed journals and presentations,
including student research presentations, at national and international
conferences.