* 1409422
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Tracking low-dimensional information in data streams and dynamical systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Christopher Rozell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 370,009.00

Many applications of significant societal impact are modeled by complex
dynamical system behavior, including the (life, physical and social) sciences,
medicine, economics, law, urban development, international politics and global
conflict. Fortunately, recent advances in sensor technology have allowed
observation of these phenomena at an unprecedented scale. Unfortunately, the
volume and complexity of available data present many challenges to extracting
meaningful information about these systems. Low-dimensional models serve as a
useful structure for understanding the information in high-dimensional signals
and systems. However, this information often changes over time, and so these
models can further be improved by exploiting temporal dynamics. This project is
concerned with developing new methods for tracking changing low-dimensional
structure in data streams and dynamical systems, particularly in settings where
the observations may be missing, incomplete, corrupted, or compressed.

The first research aim in this project is to develop new and substantially
improve existing techniques for tracking low-dimensional structure and, in
particular, to extend tracking capabilities far beyond conventional signals to
much more general data sets with intrinsic low-dimensional structure. A second
research aim is to develop new tools for tracking low-dimensional structure in
systems jointly with estimating the content of time-varying signals and data
sets. A third research aim is concerned with higher-dimensional and more complex
dynamical systems, and the goal is to develop improved methods that exploit low-
dimensional structure to perform quantitative and qualitative analysis in
systems that are too complex and high-dimensional for system identification. In
a fourth, educational aim, accessible K-12 outreach materials are being
developed for dissemination through an online digital library.