* 1409175
* CSR: Medium: Resource-Efficient Implementation of Mixed-Criticality Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Sanjoy Baruah, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,133,657.00

In safety-critical embedded systems, functionalities with different
criticalities are often supported upon shared hardware platforms, to enable
size, weight, and power (SWaP) reductions. For example, in an automotive system,
highly critical vehicle-control functions and less critical driver-alert
functions might be hosted on the same hardware platform. While such platform
integration may be essential to make more efficient use of platform resources,
care must be taken to isolate failures of less-critical components so that more-
critical components are not affected. This project is directed at developing new
tools, techniques, and methodologies for deriving mixed-criticality system
designs that ensure such isolation, particularly on platforms that utilize
multicore processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thesis explored in this project
is that ensuring both correctness and resource-efficiency in mixed-criticality
systems requires the development of fundamentally new perspectives on the
modeling of these systems, and different approaches to resource allocation and
scheduling. Specific goals include devising new models for representing mixed-
criticality systems, new metrics for quantifying the effectiveness of techniques
for designing such systems, and new methods for performing resource allocation
and scheduling upon integrated architectures that support mixed-criticality
systems. These new models, metrics, and methods inform the development of new
tools and methodologies for deriving mixed-criticality system designs that are
both correct by construction and implementable in a resource-efficient manner.
Continuing collaborations with partners in the avionics and automotive
industries enable these results to push research on mixed-criticality systems
forward to address national industrial needs. This project is also expected to
produce new open-source software and tools, new course content, and public
outreach through participation in UNC's demo program (which is aimed at K-12
students, college students, and school teachers) and lectures and seminars by
the investigators at national and international forums.