* 1409280
* Supported Solid and Liquid Metal Films for Growth of Single-Layer Graphene and Boron Nitride Lateral Heterostructures.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Jeff Drucker, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 504,944.00

Non-technical Description: This project investigates the growth of graphene and
hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), as well as their heterostructures in the lateral
directions, on thin metal films. Both of these two-dimensional materials are
one-atom-thick crystals with their atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure. They
have novel electronic, photonic and magnetic properties that can be exploited in
next-generation technologies. The size and shape of individual graphene and h-BN
crystallites are manipulated through variations in growth conditions to achieve
desired properties for specific applications. Using the edges of existing
crystallites as one-dimensional substrates for lateral growth of the other
material enables formation of a wide variety of laterally heterostructured films
including interleaved arrays of graphene and h-BN nanowires and graphene quantum
dots in a h-BN matrix. This project trains one PhD student in fabrication and
characterization of these unique materials. The principal investigator is
collaborating with the "Science is Fun" program at Arizona State University to
develop age-appropriate curriculum modules for Phoenix area K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project employs cold-
wall chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to grow single-layer monocrystalline
graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) lateral heterostructures onto thin
metal films. The size and shape of isolated graphene and h-BN crystallites are
tuned in order to use their perimeters as substrates for lateral heteroepitaxy
of the other material. The research develops a capability that enables
engineering of single-layer graphene/h-BN nanocomposites with controlled shapes,
sizes and interface structure (i.e., zigzag or armchair) and with desirable
properties. Graphene and h-BN are grown atop thin metal films deposited on
refractory metal supports that are heated to temperatures both below and above
the metal-film's melting temperature to assess the efficacy of CVD onto liquid
metals for growth of the target structures. A variety of thin metal and alloy
films are investigated to assess their effects on graphene, h-BN and
heterostructure morphology. Real-time imaging during the growth in an
environmental scanning electron microscope elucidates growth mechanisms. In
combination with systematic investigation of films and heterostructures grown
using cold-wall CVD, a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental science
underpinning graphene, h-BN and heterostructure growth on both solid and liquid
metal films is developed. Films and heterostructures are also characterized at
the atomic level using aberration-corrected (scanning) transmission electron
microscopy.