* 1409754
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Exploring the Initial Rise of Urbanization in an Ancient Preclassic Society
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Joel Palka, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 226,220.00

SBE Postdoctoral Research Fellow Santiago Juarez's archaeological research
(under the mentorship of PI Palka) is relevant to the analyses of complex
societies. This project investigates how the actions and activities of members
of an ancient community influenced the construction of an early urban society
during the Preclassic (2500 B.C.-A.D. 200) period at a recently discovered Maya
site in Chiapas, Mexico. During each field season, Juarez and other project
members present their latest findings through conference style papers (which
include illustrations, figures, and reconstructions) during community
gatherings. Additionally, this project integrates students from the University
of Illinois at Chicago during the survey, excavation and laboratory phases.
Broadening participation of a diverse group of people in the scientific
workforce is one the stated goals of this project; as such, the research
provides an opportunity to train students in archaeological methods to develop
relevant experience and provides undergraduates with data for theses. Both the
PI (Palka) and Fellow (Juarez) have demonstrated a strong commitment to
increasing the participation of minority students in scientific research. In
this project, students not only receive hands-on training in archaeological
research methods, especially in skills such as mapping and GIS technology that
are in high demand, but also in developing their own research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on models of social organization, this
research explores the relationships and interactions that sustained this ancient
community during a period of massive growth and change. This project is expected
to reconstruct how people of all levels were involved in the urban formation
processes; results of this work could add new depth to the study of state-
formation and the rise of civilization by focusing on the social and economic
practices of all residents of a community. Military force, royal marriage
alliances, and diplomacy are often seen as key catalysts in the development of
Preclassic Maya urbanization; although such processes were indeed important in
the expansion of ancient communities, Juarez proposes that the actions of common
people played an equally important role in the growth and expansion of trade
networks and economies. Overall, this project provides a holistic understanding
of one of the earliest urban societies in the Americas. Ultimately, such
knowledge not only advances the field of archaeology but also contributes to
understanding, protecting, and celebrating our rich and diverse cultural
heritage.