* 1409596
* ADVANCE IT-Catalyst: Institutional Self-Study on Women Faculty in STEM and SBS Disciplines at UTSA
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Valerie Sponsel, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 168,000.00

ADVANCE Institutional Transformation (IT) awards focus on transforming an entire
institutional setting to be a more equitable academic environment for women
scientists. Women in academic and leadership positions in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) are seriously underrepresented at The
University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). UTSA thus provides an excellent
context in which to study obstacles faced by women in these disciplines and to
identify possible solutions to gender inequity. Because of the institution's
status as a Hispanic-serving institution, it is an ideal place to develop
culturally appropriate solutions. The self-study will examine the scope and
sources of institutional barriers to representation and advancement of women in
STEM. The project will develop a methodology for creating an institutional
database, Gender Equity Monitoring (GEM), to monitor the progress of faculty,
especially women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The self-study will explore the
degree to which UTSA is gendered with respect to its institutional structure and
cultural climate while also examining how gender intersects with other social
forces to shape the recruitment, retention, and recognition of female faculty.
Both quantitative and qualitative data will be collected through surveys and in-
depth interviews to ascertain the perceptions and practices of male and female
faculty at UTSA with a focus on gender equity. In addition, a careful analysis
of institutional records will be conducted to gather data on gender
representation. To achieve the goal, the project has the following specific
aims: (1) conduct a comprehensive analysis of UTSA's workplace climate using
data to include (a) surveys and qualitative interviews of faculty and (b)
institutional records on compensation, faculty rank, administrative
representation, and related factors; (2) review current policies, practices, and
structures for faculty recruitment, retention, and recognition (e.g.,
search/hiring policies, tenure and promotion guidelines, mentoring practices,
and work-family policies); (3) identify existing and prospective resources
available for recruitment, mentoring, leadership training, research support, and
other means of promoting gender equity. This analysis will determine the degree
of consistency in key measures for both men and women faculty while gauging
gender equity with respect to those in administrative roles accountable for
ensuring the creation and maintenance of a diverse culture at UTSA. This
research will assess the current gender climate at UTSA and investigates how
perceptions and practices can obstruct or facilitate the recruitment, retention,
and recognition of female faculty members in STEM and SBS disciplines. As a
Hispanic-serving institution (HSI), UTSA will illuminate the intersection
between gender, race-ethnicity, and career opportunities for female faculty. The
Gender Equity Monitoring (GEM) database will be developed and maintained past
the lifetime of the grant to collect, analyze, and maintain institutional
records for both men and women faculty at UTSA. GEM may be adapted to other
institutional contexts deepening the impact of this research.