* 1409130
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Multi-dimensional Scheduling and Resource Allocation in Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Sungjin Im, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 397,007.00

Data centers and cluster computing platforms have become the dominant
computational paradigms of the past decade, becoming the de facto method of
executing Big Data workloads. Typically, the entire cluster is treated as a set
of resources shared by multiple clients who submit jobs requiring different
types of resources. To add to this heterogeneity (or dimensionality) in resource
requirements, machines in a cluster can be heterogeneous in terms of resources
they provide. In such settings, resources need to be allocated and priced
appropriately so as to balance performance with demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PIs seek to study job scheduling in data centers to optimize
temporal Quality of Service metrics such as response time along with fairness,
when jobs can have resource requirements that are multi-dimensional. The main
question studied can be phrased as: How does the temporal nature of job
scheduling interplay with the dimensionality of resource requirements, and how
do these two in turn interact with the classical economic desiderata of
incentives and fairness?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is differentiated
from previous work in aiming to develop appropriate models and algorithms
through the lens of theoretical computer science, particularly by a fusion of
the disparate fields of approximation and online algorithms, algorithmic game
theory, and stochastic optimization. The resulting insights will be used to also
develop new techniques to address classical scheduling and game theoretic
problems that have defied successful solutions. The project is
interdisciplinary, and the theoretical models and techniques developed will be
motivated by the application domain of new hardware architectures stemming from
emerging technologies, and the heterogeneity arising from provisioning them
within a data center. Further, empirical validations will be performed, both via
simulation on traces from data center executions, as well as deployment and
experiments on clusters. This will ultimately influence the design and
deployment of internet systems that use and generate massive
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of the project points to
not only the need for training a pipeline of students from high school students
to graduates and imparting to them the power of algorithmic thinking and its
broader relevance, but also the necessity for bringing scientists,
mathematicians, and system builders to the same platform for active exchange of
ideas. Towards this end, the PIs seek to equip the next generation of students,
including women and minorities, with the relevant algorithmic skills by an
education plan that includes effective teaching and mentorship, as well as to
broadly disseminate the proposed work by organizing workshops and by writing
books and surveys.