* 1409549
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Experience-Based Planning: A Framework for Lifelong Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Maxim Likhachev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2018
* USD 363,995.00

Robots need to improve their behavior over time, yet produce consistent behavior
in order to allow humans to predict their actions, which is necessary to develop
trust in their behavior or even cooperate with them. Furthermore, many tasks
repeat, such as opening drawers. This project develops technology that addresses
these issues by viewing planning as a lifelong process and exploiting the
structure of human environments for efficiency, for example that drawers
typically open in similar ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research collaboration
is developing a framework for lifelong planning based on experience graphs that
aims to improve performance of planning over time by exploiting past experiences
when solving similar planning tasks. The concept is novel because experiences
are used to guide the heuristic search as opposed to be used for mere replay or
adaptation. The idea that makes this possible is a novel heuristic search-based
framework that can take advantage of prior experiences and still provide
rigorous guarantees on completeness and path quality. The team studies how
experiences can be utilized effectively during planning, how planning should
gather experiences, how it should prune redundant experiences and how it can
obtain experiences from demonstrations. Applications include everyday household
tasks and low-volume manufacturing tasks. The software developed in this
collaborative research is being integrated into the SBPL library, one of the
core libraries in ROS. The project also incorporates educational activities as
well as activities that help to bridge the research communities in robotics and
artificial intelligence, two separate communities despite their common interest
in autonomous systems.