* 1409510
* Ab Initio Calculations in Correlated Electron Models and Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Shiwei Zhang, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education activities to advance our understanding of
and capabilities to compute materials properties. Accurate and predictive
calculations in quantum systems composed of many particles are a grand challenge
in science. In these systems the delicate balance of competing tendencies
creates rich possibilities of new phases of matter and collective phenomena,
which offer the potential for remarkable material properties of great
technological importance. This very richness and complexity, however, also means
that the usual tools for quantitative calculations will tend to break down. The
combination of methodological developments and the advent of high performance
computing present an unprecedented opportunity to make fundamental progress in
this problem now. The research will build on recent advances in a quantum many-
particle simulation approach to contribute a unique component for catalyzing
this progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to advance the study of
materials with strong electron-electron interactions, establish accurate
benchmark calculations, and enhance the capabilities of direct, many-particle
parameter-free computations in condensed matter systems. The theoretical
framework and techniques developed can also have cross-cutting impact in nuclear
physics, ultracold atom physics, and quantum chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will continue to integrate research with education and outreach activities,
by mentoring both undergraduate and graduate students in research, incorporating
materials from this project into courses, reaching out to minority students, and
fostering interdisciplinary collaboration in computational science education and
research. In the larger scientific community, the PI will continue to play an
active role in training students, post-docs, and senior researchers through
schools and workshops, and develop software packages and tutorials for hands-on
learning of new theoretical and computational approaches and the properties of
strongly interacting electron systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and educational
activities on the application and further development of the auxiliary-field
quantum Monte Carlo and related methods for calculations in correlated electron
systems. The long-term goal of this research program is the ability to perform
many-body simulations to address questions on structural phase transitions,
magnetic order, and superconductivity in a more accurate and predictive manner.
Both materials-specific calculations on real materials and the study of
simplified models will be conducted. New capabilities will be developed to
extend the system sizes that can be treated, further improve accuracy, compute
excited state and response properties, and treat spin-orbit
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The leading difficulty in computer simulations of
interacting many-fermion systems is the sign or phase problem. The constrained
path or phase-free auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo approach provides a
general framework for both ab initio materials simulations (as an approach to go
beyond standard density-functional calculations) and for calculations in lattice
models of strongly correlated systems. Success in the development can be
expected to impact beyond the specific systems being studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue to integrate research with education
and outreach activities, by mentoring both undergraduate and graduate students
in research, incorporating materials from this project into courses, reaching
out to minority students, and fostering interdisciplinary collaboration in
computational science education and research. In the larger scientific
community, the PI will continue to play an active role in training students,
post-docs, and senior researchers through schools and workshops, and develop
software packages and tutorials for hands-on learning of new theoretical and
computational approaches and the properties of strongly interacting electron
systems.