* 1409912
* Disentangling the structural and electronic phase transitions in ultrathin vanadium dioxide
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Louis Piper, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The project addresses the science that underpins the
reversible switch from insulating to metallic behavior in extremely thin
vanadium dioxide. The goal of this research is to determine what happens at the
nanometer scale during the thermally driven transition, and how to control it.
Understanding and controlling transitions between the various possible phases of
vanadium dioxide will enable advances to be made in the development of energy-
efficient computers, and smart windows that regulate the heating and cooling of
buildings. Extended international visits to Bremen University in Germany to
perform experiments complement the development of joint on-line courses between
universities in Binghamton and Bremen. Undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented minorities are involved with the research activities, including
dedicated field trips to national research facilities, such as Brookhaven
National Laboratory. A K-12 educational outreach to attract younger students to
science and engineering employs on-line video demonstrations and infographics.
TECHNICAL DETAILS: The abrupt metal insulator transition of vanadium dioxide is
an archetypal example of the complex interplay between the electrons and the
lattice. A structural phase transition accompanies the electronic transition,
which can be triggered by small thermal perturbations near room temperature.
Additional phases are expected to exist during the transition or may be
stabilized by strained thin films. However, the exact nature and presence of
these phases is a hot topic of debate. The advent of high quality ultrathin
films, newly developed nanoscale spectromicroscopy techniques, and recent
sophisticated computational studies present an ideal opportunity to explore
these phases. Nanoscale resolution spectromicroscopy techniques can determine
exactly and simultaneously the electronic and geometric configurations in phase-
separated regions that coexist through the phase transitions of vanadium
dioxide. The research objective is to determine whether the structural and
electronic phase transitions in nanoscale vanadium dioxide are intrinsically
decoupled, as suggested by the presence of intermediate states, or whether the
material can be tailored to be so by strain and doping. Measured parameters,
such as lattice constants, density of states, and vanadium coordination are used
as inputs and constraints for band structure calculations of vanadium dioxide.
Students, at both the graduate and undergraduate level, are being trained in
cutting-edge low-energy/photoelectron electron microscopy and small-spot X-ray
spectroscopy at national research facilities in the US and abroad.