* 1409587
* Research Initiation Award:  Understanding the diversity and evolution of flattended amoebas within "Discosea" using  phylogenomics and cytoskeletal architecture
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Yonas Tekle, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2017
* USD 239,909.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Spelman College has potential broader impact in a number of areas.
Members of the supergroup Amoebozoa, which are to be studied in this project,
are among the most abundant microorganisms globally. They play a major role in
maintaining ecosystems and cause significant health problems for humans. Yet,
their diversity and taxonomy are poorly known, which hinders applications in
ecological and medical studies.&lt;br/&gt;This project will also enhance the
research experience and training of undergraduate students a Spelman
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most microbial amoeboid lineages fall within two
major eukaryotic clades: Amoebozoa and Rhizaria. This project focuses on the
relationships among the lineages of Amoebozoa, which are poorly resolved. This
is mainly due to paucity and plasticity of morphological characters and limited
sampling of genetic data. The project seeks to understand the evolution of one
of the subgroups of Amoebozoa, Discosea, using large genetic data and refined
analyses of pseudopodia architecture employing a novel method. Discosea
encompasses flattened naked amoebas with the most diverse morphotypes. The
Discosea is loosely defined by morphological data and has never been recovered
in any molecular phylogenetic studies. Both increased genetic data and proteome
level pseudopodial characters will allow reconstruction of a robust phylogeny
and thorough morphological homology assessment within the group. Specific
objectives of this project are to generate transcriptomes from eight core
representatives of Discosea; obtain novel morphological data on cytoskeletal
structures using immunocytochemistry and confocal fluorescence microscopy; and
test specific phylogenetic hypotheses within the Discosea using large genetic
data and morphological characters. Beyond the Discosea phylogeny, the generated
genetic data and novel morphological characters will help to give cellular
biological insights into specialized cells such as cancer, immune and embryonic
cells.