* 1409693
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Recidivism and Cycles of Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Stephen Pfohl, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 11,683.00

Cycles of incarceration are typically investigated using large-scale,
quantitative studies to identify variables that predict reoffending across
thousands of people at a time. Recidivism research shows that histories of
imprisonment, unemployment and drug abuse are all strong predictors of return to
prison. This research will investigate the processes driving these statistical
patterns. The research contends that prisonization (being socialized into
prison-oriented behaviors), economic exclusion and drug use together create the
social logic of recidivism. Economic exclusion increases both the financial draw
of the drugs trade and the psychological rewards of drug use. Many people using
and trading illicit drugs in poor urban neighborhoods find themselves
imprisoned. At the same time, prisonization can involve learning skills and
knowledge that facilitate entry to the drugs trade, an accumulation of street
capital that promises status and income within street culture. I expect to see
former prisoners reproducing habits and routines learned in prison, finding
significant barriers to entering the labor market, and struggling with
constraints and opportunities that increase the logic of using and selling
drugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses ethnographic research living at a
halfway house and interviews with former prisoners to investigate why people
cycle in and out of prison. It focuses on three drivers of these cycles:
prisonization, economic exclusion and drug use and addiction. Leveraging an
existing network of connections with former prisoners developed through previous
fieldwork living at the house, it involves a further phase of ethnographic
immersion in the site, follow-up interviews with previous participants, and
thematic interviews examining processes of economic exclusion and drug use and
addiction. By living alongside people as they readjust to the world outside
prison, I am able to see up close the set of contingencies that play upon former
prisoners, and uncover processes underlying cycles of incarceration through
detailed examination of daily rounds and routine activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating why people cycle in and out of prison will
inform ongoing popular and policy-oriented discussions, at a time when lowering
recidivism is a central social interest. Ethnographic research based on living
at a halfway house - intuitively interesting to many potential readers - can
provide a "hook" for spreading the research findings to a broader audience, and
injecting methodically conducted social science research into public debate.