* 1409560
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Atomistic and Continuum Amorphous Solid Mechanics via Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Christopher Rycroft, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education on materials deformation. The objective of
this collaborative research project is to develop computational models to
predict the deformation and failure of a class of materials known as amorphous
solids, particularly focusing on structural metallic glasses. The atoms in
amorphous solids are arranged in a highly disordered structure unlike crystals
in which atoms are arranged into a regular repeating structure. The current
research seeks to go beyond directly simulating the atomic scale behavior using
techniques like molecular dynamics simulations. While molecular dynamics
simulation has been groundbreaking, this technique is computationally intensive
and cannot be scaled up to model structures on scales of typical practical
engineering interest. This research will focus on translating information from
molecular dynamics simulations to computationally efficient models at larger
scales. In doing so, comparisons will be made between atomic scale
representations and larger scale theories to ensure that the larger scale
theories are statistically consistent and adequately verified. Particular
attention will be paid to testing whether they capture the mechanisms governing
material behavior and the inherent variability that results from the disordered
atomic configurations. This verification will permit the use of these models for
testing theories of large-scale material behavior, particularly failure and
fracture; successful theories will help to enable the design of amorphous
materials wherein the structure of a material is chosen to meet certain
performance objectives, and permitting the assessment of the reliability of
engineering materials. The insights gained and methods employed in this research
have the potential to transform the way in which length-scales are spanned in
the study of the mechanics of materials beyond those with amorphous
structure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational
initiatives at both Johns Hopkins University and Harvard University. These will
address the critical need to integrate computational methods into the core
Materials Science and Engineering curriculum while also engaging elementary
school students in high-need urban schools through the NSF funded STEM
Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports computational and theoretical research, and education on nonequilibrium
properties of materials with a focus on deformation. Atomistic mechanisms govern
both a material's kinetics and the manner in which its structure evolves during
the inherently nonequilibrium process of deformation and failure. The need to
establish numerically tractable continuum descriptions of viscoplasticity that
incorporate atomistic mechanisms in ways that retain their essential aspects
presents a grand challenge at the intersection of physics and mechanics. The
strategy employed in this research for reducing the operative degrees of freedom
is to extend thermodynamic concepts beyond their common equilibrium application.
The configurational entropy will be deployed in the context of the shear
transformation zone theory to make quantitative predictions of deformation and
failure processes in amorphous solids. This study will utilize molecular
dynamics simulation to parameterize a highly optimized fully Eulerian
implementation of the shear transformation zone theory that permits
investigation of very large strains such as those that arise in failure
processes like strain localization and fracture. This will require development
and analysis of new numerical projection methods for viscoplasticity. The shear
transformation zone constitutive law differs from existing relations insofar as
it makes reference to a configurational effective temperature that quantifies
the structure. These structural parameters can be independently measured in
molecular dynamics to cross-validate the predictions of the numerical
implementations of the constitutive theory. Rigorous statistical comparisons
will be made through a novel stochastic framework that establishes a random
field representation of the atomic potential energy that is translated to a
continuum effective temperature. This work will validate predictions of the
mechanical response of metallic glasses, emerging structural materials, both
during homogeneous flow near the glass temperature and during the development of
plastic localization and fracture at lower temperatures in a manner that
accounts for inherent fluctuations and correlations associated with the
material's amorphous structure. This will lead to a greatly increased
understanding of deformation and failure in materials with varying degrees of
disorder and predictive numerical schemes suitable for large strains that can be
rigorously analyzed and deployed in engineering contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational initiatives at both
Johns Hopkins University and Harvard University. These will address the critical
need to integrate computational methods into the core Materials Science and
Engineering curriculum while also engaging elementary school students in high-
need urban schools through the NSF funded STEM Achievement in Baltimore
Elementary Schools project.&lt;br/&gt;