* 1409442
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Broker Leads for Privacy-Preserving Discovery in Health Information Exchange
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Vitaly Shmatikov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 12/31/2015
* USD 329,998.00

Support for research on distributed data sets is challenged by stakeholder
requirements limiting sharing. Researchers need early stage access to determine
whether data sets are likely to contain the data they need. The Broker Leads
project is developing privacy-enhancing technologies adapted to this discovery
phase of data-driven research. Its approach is inspired by health information
exchanges that are based on a broker system where data are held by healthcare
providers and collected in distributed queries managed by the broker. Such
systems have potential to support public health and biomedical research. The
project targets "similar patient queries" where the query is a patient medical
record and the response is information about similar patients. Such queries have
value for many applications, including developing cohorts for finding
institutions for further discussions about joint
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broker Leads uses the concept of a "lead" in
which data holders provide representative collections of non-identifiable real
or synthetic data meeting strong privacy guarantees, e.g., differential privacy.
Even though such data may be unsuitable for clinical decision making and
scientific discovery due to the transformations done for privacy protection,
they guide a user of a broker lead system to the data sets very likely to be
useful to addressing a given similar patient query. These data sets can then be
used with other privacy-protecting strategies, such as secure multiparty
computation or restrictive data use agreements ensuring adequate data
protection. In addition to providing practical and well-analyzed strategies for
early stages of research on healthcare data, this project will provide new
insights into practical issues with privacy technology in end-to-end
applications.