* 1409946
* SHF: Medium: Compute on Data Path: Combating Data Movement in High Performance Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Barbara Chapman, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,016,000.00

High performance computing enabled simulation has been widely considered a third
pillar of science along with theory and experimentation, and is a strategic tool
in many aspects of scientific discovery and innovation. High performance
computing simulations, however, have become highly data intensive in recent
years due to data acquisition and generation becoming much cheaper, newer high-
resolution multi-model scientific discovery producing and requiring more data,
and the insight that useful data can be mined out of large amounts of data being
substantially increased. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combats the
increasingly critical data movement challenge in high performance computing.
This project studies the feasibility of a new Compute on Data Path methodology
that expects to improve the performance and energy efficiency for high
performance computing. This new methodology models both computations and data as
objects with a data model that encapsulates and binds them. It fuses data motion
and computation leveraging programming model and compiler. It develops an
object-based store and runtime to enable computations along data path pipeline.
In recent years, a proliferation of advanced high performance computing
architectures including multi- and many-core systems, co-processors and
accelerators, and heterogeneous computing platforms have been observed. The
software solution that addresses the critical data movement challenge, however,
has significantly lagged behind. This project has the potential of advancing the
understandings and the software solution and further unleashing the power of
high performance computing enabled simulation.