* 1409178
* Understanding plasmon-enhanced electromagnetic hot spots for surface-enhanced spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,05/31/2015
* Katherine Willets, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2015
* USD 188,347.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is funding the
research of Katherine Willets at the University of Texas to develop new
techniques to study the detailed structure of surfaces. These techniques will
improve the functioning of a variety of chemical sensors, in particular a type
based on a phenomenon known as surface-enhanced Raman scattering, or SERS. While
SERS is an intensely promising sensing technology, its commercial utilization
has been limited by problems that appear to be due to non-uniform surfaces that
are not well-characterized or controlled. The current research seeks to improve
the functioning of devices based on SERS technology by studying the signals that
come from the surface when small particles of gold and silver are added. When
molecules come into contact with surfaces treated with these small bits of gold
and silver, the resulting SERS signal is enhanced, sometimes by more than a
million-fold. The investigators are bringing a variety of analysis techniques to
bear on this system in order to understand how this enhancement occurs and, more
importantly, how it can be controlled. The work is having a broad impact on the
development of new chemical sensing technologies. The long-term goal of the work
is to develop new SERS probes that will have greater commercialization
opportunities, thus exploiting the ease, portability and relative cheapness of
this type of sensor. It is having a further broad impact on the training of the
next generation of scientists through the involvement of students at all levels,
including high school, in the research investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is focused on understanding how molecules interact with gold and silver
nanoparticles that support localized surface plasmons in SERS. Excitation of
plasmons leads to strongly enhanced electromagnetic fields at the surface of the
nanoparticles, and by placing molecules into these enhanced fields at the
surface, optical signals from the molecules can be increased. In particular,
Raman scattering, which provides a molecular 'fingerprint' and is useful for a
variety of chemical sensing applications, is strongly enhanced by these
nanoparticles. Most work on understanding plasmons and SERS has focused on how
excitation fields are enhanced by the nanoparticles, but has neglected the role
of emission by the molecule, despite its importance in generating the measured
signals. This project probes the role of the molecule interacting with plasmonic
nanoparticles, in order to better understand the factors that lead to the
strongest possible signals from molecular targets of interest. To more precisely
understand how molecules couple to plasmonic nanoparticles, both spectral and
spatial overlap between the molecules and the nanoparticles are being
investigated. Electrogenerated chemiluminescence is used to probe plasmon-
coupled emission in the absence of plasmon-enhanced optical excitation. Super-
resolution optical imaging is also being used to probe how the location of
molecules on the surface of plasmonic nanoparticles influences how and where the
emission is coupled into the far-field with sub-10 nm resolution. A wavelength-
resolved version of super-resolution imaging is used to achieve simultaneous
spectral and spatial resolution in order to show how different Raman modes are
coupled into the far-field via wavelength-dependent plasmon coupling. These
studies will provide an improved understanding of how accounting for the
molecule can potentially redefine the conventional picture of a 'hot spot'
region of strongly enhanced local electromagnetic fields.