* 1409972
* Synthetic Alveoli for Enhanced Oxygen Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mark Borden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to the University of Colorado at Boulder is
to develop new oxygen delivery methods needed to treat patients with lung and
airway failure, and one promising approach is to use injectable oxygen
microbubbles that mimic the natural lung structure. The research will
investigate whether synthetic oxygen microbubbles can be engineered to imitate
the terminal sacks (alveoli) of the lung by providing the high rate of oxygen
and carbon dioxide gas exchange necessary for aerobic respiration and cellular
metabolism. In all mammals, the alveoli are stabilized against collapse by a
nanometer-thick membrane. This scientific investigation will experimentally
determine the key nanostructural features and transport properties of this
membrane as it encapsulates oxygen microbubbles. Owing to economical and
regulatory concerns, synthetic compounds are favored over animal-derived
materials. Therefore, this research will explore mixtures of synthetic compounds
that are likely to reproduce the structure and properties of the natural lung
membrane. Optimal formulations derived from this research will then be tested
for their stability and gas exchange characteristics to gauge their potential
biomedical performance. The project will train graduate students, undergraduates
and high school students in biomaterials science and cutting-edge experimental
research techniques. Additionally, an artificial lung module will be built and
used as an educational demonstration unit for student projects and recruitment
activities to illustrate the exciting new extrapulmonary oxygenation
technologies that are being developed, as well as the need for further
development of the biomaterials science field to engineer better technologies in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to develop synthetic alveoli for
extrapulmonary oxygen delivery through rational design of oxygen microbubble
suspensions. Synthetic microbubble encapsulations will be engineered to mimic
the lipid and peptide composition and nanostructure of natural pulmonary
surfactant by providing two key properties of the alveolar lining: 1) large gas
permeability; and 2) in-plane compressive rigidity. The approach taken here is
to model gas permeability and monolayer collapse as thermally activated
phenomena, each with a characteristic activation energy barrier. The research
will first establish the target properties by characterizing the nanostructure
and activation energies for oxygen permeation and collapse of natural lung
surfactant on oxygen microbubbles. The parameter space for microbubbles coated
with mixtures of synthetic, biomimetic compounds will be then explored by
determining these activation energies and mapping them to nanostructural
features. This will provide the necessary data to arrive at optimal synthetic
formulations. The optimized synthetic and natural oxygen microbubble
formulations will be tested for biological performance of oxygen delivery and
carbon dioxide removal in an in vitro gas exchange system that allows
determination of key mass transfer parameters. The research will engage graduate
students, undergraduates and high school students in an interdisciplinary
research program that spans chemistry, biochemistry, biomaterials, biomedical
engineering, colloid science and mechanical engineering. Additionally, an
artificial lung system will be built and used as an educational demonstration
module for student projects and recruitment activities to illustrate the
exciting biomaterials science of the lung and the urgent need for better methods
of extrapulmonary oxygenation.