* 1409523
* CSR: Medium: Mobile Distributed Computing in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Narain Gehani, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 599,999.00

This project investigates how cloud computing can support mobile distributed
computing, in which users' mobile devices interact with each other to provide a
large spectrum of collaborative applications for mobile computing and sensing. A
surrogate is a per-user software entity in the cloud that acts on behalf of the
user's mobile devices. Surrogates have larger storage capacity, higher compute
power, wider bandwidth, and better availability than mobile devices. They are
available 24x7, even when their mobile devices are offline because of poor
connectivity or simply turned off. The applications enabled by this project have
a substantial benefit for society in areas such as healthcare, safety, or social
interaction. For example, a mobile distributed application would allow users or
health agencies to monitor and stop, in early stages, the spread of epidemic
diseases. The user mobile devices and surrogates may collaborate regionally to
make localized decisions for improved scalability and privacy. In addition to
the larger societal benefits, this project benefits many traditionally under-
served student groups on campus which are involved in research, development, and
testing. The foundational results of this project are incorporated into a new
graduate course on Mobile Cloud Computing. A new course on Mobile Application
Programming is offered to high school students by leveraging an existing program
for educating high school students in science and technology.

The aim of this project is to design, build, and study a mobile-cloud system
architecture that enables effective and efficient collaborative applications for
mobile users. The novel research outcomes expected from this project are: (1) a
programming model and a middleware that enable effective execution of
distributed applications on a combination of mobile devices and surrogates; (2)
automatic and dynamic application partitioning techniques to divide the
application between the mobile devices and the surrogate; (3) cloud services
that perform surrogate management: scalable storage for surrogate virtual
machine images, surrogate request co-scheduling, and storage management for
mobile data; (4) privacy-preserving protocols that leverage additional cloud
providers to guarantee an enhanced level of user data privacy, while maintaining
most of the functionality achieved in the non-private protocols; (5) a prototype
using an surrogate cloud and Android phones/tablets; and (6) a set of
representative applications. The prototype and applications will be tested in a
large scale user study. To spur the dissemination of results, the surrogate
source code will be made publicly available. Furthermore, researchers from
industry labs are invited to workshops organized on campus to encourage
collaboration and seek technology transfer opportunities.