* 1409251
* Telomerase Evolution and Function in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Mark Beilstein, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 521,998.00

This project will reveal new insights into the evolution of telomerase in
plants. Telomerase is an essential enzyme responsible for making protective
caps, called telomeres, located at the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres are
important because they help preserve chromosomal integrity by preventing
chromosomal shortening associated with cellular aging or cancer. Previous
studies have revealed that telomerase in plants is quite different than
telomerase in ciliates, fungi, and animals, but the reasons for these
differences are poorly understood. Focusing on plants as the study system, this
research will uncover the processes that control telomerase evolution and thus
provide better understanding of how chromosome stability is maintained. The
project will provide research training for undergraduates, graduate students,
and a local high school biology teacher, and students in the teacher's AP
biology classes will benefit from new research-focused curricula developed
through participation of their teacher in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomerase is an essential eukaryotic
ribonucleoprotein responsible for maintaining the length of telomeres, thus
ensuring genomic stability. Mounting evidence from ciliates, fungi and animals
supports the idea that a core set of structural elements is required for the
interaction of the two critical components of telomerase: the telomerase RNA and
the telomerase reverse transcriptase protein. A wealth of structural and
functional data suggests that telomerase evolved early in the history of
eukaryotes and may therefore represent a key innovation precipitating the
evolution of linear chromosomes. As a result, telomerase is expected to be under
strong purifying selection to preserve function. However, while the reverse
transcriptase is well conserved among eukaryotes, the evolutionary history of
telomerase RNA is more complex. For example, the pace of telomerase RNA
evolution in plants is dramatically different than it is in ciliates, fungi and
animals. Thus, plants provide an unprecedented window into the processes that
drive telomerase RNA evolution. Using a biochemical and comparative genomic
approaches, plant telomerase RNAs will be studied to learn how changes in these
molecules affect genome stability in eukaryotes. This will provide a deeper
understanding of how long non-coding RNAs like telomerase RNA contribute to the
origin and maintenance of genome complexity in eukaryotes.