* 1409765
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Studies of Solid-State Diffusion and New Phase Formation in Bimetallic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tim Mueller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 102,745.00

Non-Technical Summary

The diffusive motions of atoms can lead to changes in the physical properties of
solids over time that range from simple composition variations to the formation
and growth of new structures. The effects of these changes (which can be
advantageous or disadvantageous) become significant at lower temperatures,
shorter time periods, and smaller length scales as the sample size is reduced.
As a result, a fundamental understanding of the origins and consequences of
these processes is particularly important in nanostructured materials.

The research component of this project consists of an experimental and
computational study of diffusive atomic motion in bimetallic samples at the
nano-scale. The analysis of the experimental and computational results will
provide a detailed microscopic picture of diffusive motion in these
nanostructures over a wide range of length and time scales, and ultimately will
contribute to the design, synthesis, and processing of new materials with useful
properties.

The educational and outreach component of the project consists of the
development of a new undergraduate/graduate level course in the practical
application of x-ray diffraction methods, providing meaningful research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and an outreach program
targeted at junior and senior level high school students by participating in the
Delaware Science Olympiad.

Technical Summary

While solid-state diffusion (SSD) and new phase formation (NPF) in
multicomponent bulk and two-dimensional (2D) thin film systems has been studied
for many years, much less is known about SSD and NPF in zero-dimensional (0D)
and one-dimensional (1D) diffusion couples. The research component of this
project has been designed to address this issue through a systematic
experimental and computational study of the structural evolution in 0D
core/shell nanoparticles and 1D multilayered nanowires. In particular, the
structural evolution of chemically prepared 0D and electrochemically prepared 1D
diffusion couples will be experimentally studied using both optical pump/x-ray
probe ultrafast time-resolved x-ray diffraction (TRXRD) and conventional high
temperature x-ray powder diffraction (cXRD) measurement techniques. These
experimental studies will be complemented by computational studies of SSD and
NPF in model 0D and 1D diffusion couples.

The experimental component of the research project will consist of pump/probe
TRXRD measurements carried out using in-house facilities and facilities
available at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. In both
cases a Ti:sapphire laser will be used to pump the sample with an approximately
50 femtosecond optical pulse followed by an x-ray probe pulse. The optical pump
leads to a very rapid increase in the same temperature, and by delaying the
arrival of the x-ray pulse relative to the pump pulse temperature depend x-ray
diffraction patterns can be acquired with a time resolution of 10's - 100's of
femtoseconds over time periods from 10's to 100's of nanoseconds. Conventional
high temperature powder x-ray diffraction measurements (cXRD) will allow
complementary structural measurements to be carried out over much longer time
periods (although with limited time resolution). The computational component of
the research project will consist of modeling SSD and NPF in 0D and 1D diffusion
couples by combining density functional theory calculations with cluster
expansion methods and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. Computational studies of
this kind are of particular importance because they are applicable at the short
length scales over which continuum models break down. These experimental and
computational studies will provide a detailed microscopic picture of SSD and NPF
in 0D and 1D nanostructures over both very short and very long time scales, and
ultimately will contribute to the design, synthesis, and processing of new
materials with useful properties.