* 1409294
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Sparse Polynomials, Complexity, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Qi Cheng, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 223,168.00

Solving equations quickly is what gets modern technology off the ground:
Transmitting conversations between cellphones, sending data from space-craft
back to earth, navigating aircraft, and making robots move correctly, all rely
on solving equations quickly. In each setting, the equations have their own
personality -- a special structure that we try to take advantage of, in order to
find solutions more quickly. In this project, the principle investigators will
study equations involving sparse polynomials -- polynomials that have few terms
but very high degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But solving equations is more than
just calculating quickly -- it also means understanding, and using,
computational hardness. For example, classical results in Number Theory and
Algebraic Geometry give us specially structured equations that, after centuries
of research, still can not be solved quickly. These are the equations that are
actually the most useful in Cryptography and complexity theory: Computational
hardness can be used to secure sensitive data by forcing an adversary to spend a
prohibitively large effort before successfully stealing anything. However, truly
understanding hardness is subtle: Every day, codes and cryptosystems are broken
because of a missed theoretical detail or a newly discovered
backdoor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators on this project are
world experts in Algebraic Geometry, Number Theory, Complexity Theory, and
specially structured equations. They bring sophisticated new tools, never used
before in Complexity Theory, in order to better classify what kinds of algebraic
circuits define intractable equations. Their interdisciplinary approach is well-
suited toward attracting mathematically talented students to theoretical
Computer Science, Cryptography, and Number Theory.