* 1409849
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research:Digital SubCarrier Multiplexing  (DSCM) Networks: from the Core to the Access
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2021
* Andrea Fumagalli, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,948.00

Internet traffic is experiencing a rapid growth driven by massive video
streaming, cloud computing and the Internet of Things. Green networking is more
important than ever to keep energy consumption under control while still
guaranteeing good service quality. Packet switching is the standard practice in
high speed Internet, enabled by routers and switches that perform electronic
packet store-and-forward at every intermediate node. In a typical router, up to
60 percent of its energy is used for packet forwarding. Circuit switching, on
the other hand, does not require per-packet store-and-forward and can
potentially be more energy efficient. Current practice places optical circuits
on a fixed grid of optical frequences. This fixed grid may waste valuable
optical spectrum if an optical circuit is carrying less than the maximum
capacity. Thus both the research community and industry are investigating grid-
less approaches. In particular, Digital Subcarrier Multiplexing (DSCM)is a
circuit-oriented approach with high spectral efficiency and robustness against
signal quality corruption and which enables flexible spectrum and grid-less
transmission in optical networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages
DSCM to extend the circuit-oriented practice from the optical network core all
the way to the network periphery (including metro, access and campus segments)
ultimately offering dedicated broadband DSCM circuits to end-users. DSCM traffic
bypasses both Ethernet switches and Internet Protocol routers, and eliminates
the energy consumption associated with their packet store-and-forward
requirements. The project also explores a Hybrid-DSCM-Ethernet network
architecture in which DSCM circuits and Ethernet frames coexist in the
access/campus networks. The transmission and network cross-layer nature of this
research effort promotes partnerships among different institutions and research
areas, and provides graduate and undergraduate students the opportunity to do
research solving real-world scientific problems.