* 1409102
* Electrochemical Intercalation in Defective Oxide Nanosheets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Scott Misture, Alfred University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 588,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: New and improved approaches to storing electrical
energy are critical for hand-held electronics and for integrating new renewable
energy sources into our electrical power grid. The research focus is on finding
new ways of improving the amount of energy stored in a battery or capacitor by
intentionally introducing atomic-scale defects into ceramic nanosheets that form
the electrodes. The ceramic nanosheets of interest are remarkably thin - only
5-10 atoms - and they display unusual properties for storing energy, resulting
in better capacitors (called supercapacitors that bridge the gap between
conventional capacitors and rechargeable batteries). Using new methods to
measure the structural defects in the thin ceramic nanosheets and combining that
knowledge with the measured electrical storage behavior provides a path to
engineering new supercapacitors that may transform the way we use traditional
and renewable energy sources. The project includes a team of two graduate
students and two undergraduate students and reaches campus visitors of all ages
who participate in the Kyocera Museum programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The overall technical objective is to provide the first quantitative
assessment of the electrochemical effects of intentional cation defects on
proton intercalation in model single-layer nanosheet systems for Faradaic
supercapacitors. Model systems include nanosheets of MnO6 and VO6 octahedra,
where large fractions of octahedral defects, up to 20%, may be introduced during
synthesis. The cation defects include charged metal ion vacancies and MO6
octahedra that are displaced from the otherwise atomically-flat nanosheet. The
defects form new proton adsorption and intercalation sites that may markedly
increase the energy storage capacity. New X-ray scattering methods enable direct
study of the defects in nanosheets, and the model single-layer nanosheet
structure provides a platform to determine the unknown roles of defects in
pseudocapacitive charge storage. The latter may be transformational by defining
the ideal nano- and meso-scale structures to facilitate commercialization of
supercapacitors.