* 1409841
* ADVANCE CCNY: Blueprint for Increased Representation and Advancement of Women in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Gilda Barabino, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 188,000.00

This project will create a blueprint to foster an equitable and supportive
environment for all faculty members, especially women at City College (CCNY) in
the City University of New York system. City College is the flagship science and
engineering school in the system and a minority-serving institution. Change at
CCNY is likely to impact the other colleges and lead to advancing women in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields throughout the
system. CCNY will conduct a self-assessment of faculty perceptions,
institutional policies and practices, and of the representation and advancement
of women in STEM as a means towards developing the blueprint. Advancing women
and minority faculty at CCNY will provide visible role models for more than half
of the student population that is female, many of whom are from minority or
disadvantaged backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As City College moves into its
next phase in transforming itself into a research-intensive university, it faces
the challenge of remaining true to its mission of access and inclusive
excellence, while upgrading its research profile and reputation. The goals of
this proposal are to identify the cultural and environmental factors that
promote or hinder the advancement of STEM women at City College. This
information will be used to implement new policies to ensure that advancement is
gender neutral and to provide a blueprint for effective career advancement of
women. The specific objectives of the project are as follows: (a) to locate and
identify obstacles to the representation and advancement of women STEM faculty;
(b) to determine perceptual differences among faculty and administrators of
different genders, races/ethnicities, ranks and disciplines; (c) to better
understand cultural and environmental influences on these obstacles and
perceptual differences; (d) to effect institutional transformation through
targeted initiatives to remove barriers and remedy current inequities. A mixed
methods approach will be used to obtain information from faculty that will be
used alongside the policy review to develop the blueprint for institutional
transformation. The data collection portion will be used to create a systematic
data set that may be used in the future to monitor change.