* 1409798
* SHF: Medium: ASKS - Architecture Support for darK Silicon
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Mary Irwin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 12/31/2014
* USD 899,996.00

The proposed ASKS (Architecture Support for darK Silicon) project proposes
architectural support for future many-core microprocessors designed with and
around emerging technologies to address the challenges of the coming dark
silicon revolution. Future many-cores, to stay on the historical performance
curve, will contain more transistors than can all be sustainably powered at the
same time. Thus, we face the prospect of ?dark silicon,? wherein some of a
chip?s components must be powered-off (darkened) in order to stay within the
chip?s power/thermal budget. Ensuring peak performance under these circumstances
is a challenging task. In particular, in an architecture with different types of
components (cores, caches, network on chip (NoC, or on-chip interconnet), memory
controllers, etc.), there can be many different on-dim-dark configurations
within the power budget. However, these can exhibit significantly varying
performances. Additionally, the power consumption of uncore components (shared
caches, on-chip interconnect, memory architecture) is significant, thus the
uncore components play an important role in joint performance/power/thermal
optimization. Therefore, a more inclusive approach is needed. Our architectural
design space exploration will mainly focus on the uncore space (shared caches,
on-chip interconnect structures, memory architecture), targeting future NoC-
based many-core microprocessors that exploit the emerging technologies of 3D
die-stacking (3D IC) and non-volatile memories (NVM). This project will advance
the state of the art in preparing for the dark silicon revolution in two main
aspects. 1) Cross-layer holistic optimization with a focus on uncore components:
The uncore components play important roles in joint performance/power/thermal
optimization. This project proposes an integrated approach in which the cores
and uncore components collaborate to maximize performance under power and
thermal constraints as well as under dynamically changing program behavior and
execution parameters. 2) Investigating dark silicon in the context of emerging
technologies: Emerging 3D ICs and NVM technologies are envisioned as promising
ways to design future many-core architectures. The adoption of such emerging
technologies poses new challenges for dark silicon (such as aggravated thermal
profiles in 3D stacked chips), but also brings new opportunities for
architectural innovations such as novel power management techniques and greater
exploitation of memory system heterogeneity. The broader impact of this project
includes the contribution to the increased performance for future
microprocessors even in the face of the coming dark silicon revolution. Through
close collaboration with several industry partners, the PIs envision direct
transfer of many ideas to industry. The tools and techniques developed in this
project will be used in teaching existing courses and developing new courses,
and will be made available through the web for use by other educators,
researchers, and industry practitioners. Dissemination of research findings will
also be carried out through conference tutorials, panel discussions, and
workshops. A concerted effort will be made to involve under-represented groups
and undergraduate students in this research.