* 1409897
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the PETRA 2014 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2014
* USD 25,415.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 13
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with
distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction with the Seventh
International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (PETRA 2014), which will take place May 27-30 on the island of
Rhodes, Greece. The PETRA mission is to promote interdisciplinary research on
ways to use pervasive ambient intelligent environments to improve the quality of
life and enhance human performance with greater capabilities; it is the only
annual conference that brings together theoreticians and practitioners from a
wide variety of disciplines to focus on the application of pervasive
technologies to assistive environments. Innovations to be presented at PETRA
2014 include smart tools for human sensing, devices to empower persons with
disabilities, algorithms for data fusion, new computer aided rehabilitation
methods, therapy game environments that can be personalized, gesture recognition
tools, medication management, remote secure communications and data sharing, and
remote health monitoring, among others. The PETRA proceedings are published by
the ACM digital library, and the authors of the best papers are invited to
submit to special journal issues after the end of the conference. More
information about the conference may be found online at http://www.petrae.org.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the day-long Doctoral Consortium are to
increase the exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the
community, to help establish a sense of community among this next generation of
researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by providing substantive
feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive environment from a group
of senior researchers. Student participants will be drawn from diverse
communities including computer science, engineering, psychology, social science,
neuroscience, human-computer interaction, cognitive science and communication.
They will make formal 20-minute presentations of their work and will receive
feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The workshop faculty
members will bring a wide spectrum of expertise, and provide student mentoring
and coordination. Doctoral Consortium attendees will be asked to create and
maintain a "digital workbook" where along with their work they include feedback
on papers they attended and observations that they gathered (e.g., through
meetings and discussions with conference speakers and other participants) that
will apply to and impact their work. Short papers on the participants' work will
be published in the conference proceedings, and a summary report on the event
will be posted on the conference website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The PETRA 2014 Doctoral Consortium will bring together some of the best
students, researchers and practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby
afford the younger participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for
their innovative ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and
value of conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will allow the
junior participants to create a social network both among themselves and with
senior colleagues. The organizing committee will make a concerted effort to
attract participants who are women, members of under-represented minorities, and
persons with disabilities. To further assure diversity, NSF funds will be used
to support no more than 2 student participants from any one institution. And
this year, for the first time, NSF funds will also be used to support attendance
at the conference of 2 select undergraduate students, in the hope of exciting
them about possible career choices in science.