* 1409097
* RI: Medium: Deep Annotation: Measuring Human Vision to Improve Machine Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Ken Nakayama, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 674,099.00

Machine learning is the science of designing computational systems that can
learn from data, much as humans do. However, while many machine learning
approaches rely on humans to provide labels for training examples that are used
for learning, human-provided labels represent just a tiny fraction of the
information that can be gleaned from humans. This project brings together a
multidisciplinary team with expertise spanning computer science, neuroscience
and psychology to pioneer a new paradigm in machine learning that seeks to
better mimic human performance by incorporating new kinds of information about
human behavior.

Specifically, this project brings the disciplines of psychophysics and
psychometrics, which seek to quantitatively describe human performance --
patterns of errors, reaction times, and variations across populations of humans
-- together with machine learning to develop systems that learn both from human
successes and failures, to generate artificial systems that perform better and
generalize better to data outside of their training sets. The project team has
already shown initial proof of concept in applying these ideas to the problem of
face detection in difficult, cluttered real-world images. During the project
period, the team will greatly expand these ideas, developing new applications
(including face and object recognition tasks), a broader range of machine
learning settings (including regression and feature selection), and methods for
incorporating new kinds of data (such as fMRI brain scans) for guiding machine
learning algorithms. This research represents a new direction in machine
learning research, which increasingly has important and broad impact in our
modern, data-driven world. In addition, it is anticipated that the theoretical
gains in machine learning derived from this work will feed back into psychology,
enabling rapid screening of candidate hypotheses about how the brain works by
artificial systems which can then be tested on humans using an advanced
crowdsourcing platform for quantifying human behavior.