* 1409420
* Thermochemistry of Noncovalent Interactions and Metal-Ligand Bonds of Biological Relevance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mary Rodgers, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

Professor Mary T. Rodgers of Wayne State University is supported by the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to use mass
spectrometry-based methodologies to conduct fundamental studies on noncovalently
bound complexes between metal ions, or protonated organic bases, and ligands.
The work will focus on acquiring structural and thermochemical data on complexes
that play important roles in biological systems and display different strengths
and selectivities in their binding interactions. The availability of reliable
thermochemical data on noncovalent interactions will allow periodic properties
and trends to be assessed such that rational interpretation of the data will
provide an improved understanding of the biochemical processes in which they are
involved. In this context, the project will provide new fundamental information
on important biochemical processes and hence advance our understanding of life
processes. The project will also facilitate the development of practical
applications based upon noncovalent interactions and improve the sensitivity of
the technique and hence broaden its applicability to more complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, experimental measurements will be
combined with theoretical calculations to arrive at quantitative thermochemical
data and dynamical and structural information regarding noncovalent interactions
and metal-ligand bonds of biological relevance. Guided ion beam tandem mass
spectrometry (GIBMS) experiments will be conducted to probe the energy-resolved
collision-induced dissociation (CID) behavior of the species of interest.
Electronic structure calculations will be undertaken to characterize the
structures and energetics of the species of interest and their CID pathways.
Thermochemical analysis of the experimental data is performed to extract
energetic and structural information on the noncovalent interactions or metal-
ligand bonds that are cleaved upon CID and on the mechanisms and energetic
barrier(s) for the activated dissociation pathways observed. Furthermore the
research team will continue to develop the GIBMS instrument and associated data
analysis procedures to enable the study of more complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;During the course of conducting this research, graduate and
undergraduate students will gain valuable experience in a multidisciplinary
research environment encompassing chemistry, biochemistry, chemical physics and
mass spectrometry. The resulting thermochemical data will be compiled into a
web-based thermochemical database and will be made available to NIST Webbook and
the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics.