* 1409364
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Market Logic in Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2015
* Josipa Roksa, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,996.00

In the past decade, significant attention has been afforded to the market-based
behavior of for-profit universities. This project considers which organizations
choose to pursue this logic. This study poses questions at both the
organizational and individual level. First, the macro query of "How and why did
particular organizations give greater attention to a market-based strategy of
higher education?" is considered. Then, at the individual level, "What effects
or consequences did changes in attention to market pressures have on individuals
within the organizations and how did they navigate the organizational change?"
This dissertation makes significant intellectual contributions. Higher education
researchers have primarily given attention to revenue streams available to large
state or elite universities with the research or philanthropic means to secure
market types of funding. In contrast, this study examines the college or
university that has one dominant source of revenue: student enrollments. More
specifically, the project shifts the focus of the study of colleges from belief
systems to behavior and highlights how the institutional logic of belief
interacts with other organizational logics, such as the market, state, or
professions.

To answer these questions, this research employs a comparative case study design
that examines data across eight institutions. This project relies on publicly
available data such as course catalogs, alumni magazines, and IPEDS financial
data, as well as employee interviews. This project focuses on important
developments that continue to unfold in American education and American society
- the rapid expansion of market logic. It contributes to the understanding of
organizational responses to market pressures, a phenomenon that applies to
almost every organization. Given that this study focuses on the dependence of
broad access schools and their reliance on tuition revenue, it will offer
important insights into financing of higher education, including investment of
individual resources as well as the financial aid programs.