* 1409620
* CDS&amp;E:  Fast, scalable GPU-enabled software for predictive materials design &amp; discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2018
* USD 595,880.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Computational and Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering award supports computational materials research and the
development of computational tools for materials research. Designing novel
materials requires new computational tools capable of performing simulations
that reveal unexpected insights that, in turn, inform the way we think about
materials and materials processes. These tools must be scientifically valid,
robust, accessible and easy to use, and should exploit the fastest available
hardware. Today this hardware involves graphics processing units, known as GPUS,
whose architecture exploits massive parallelism, allowing many more calculations
to be done simultaneously per second on a single chip than on current, more
traditional CPUs. To use GPUs for the study of materials systems and chemical
processes, the workhorse algorithms and codes used by that community of
researchers must be redesigned and rewritten specifically for that architecture.
This project will develop those tools, share them broadly with an existing and
rapidly growing user base, and apply them, as an exemplar area, to the
outstanding and computationally demanding problem of colloidal crystallization.
In colloidal crystallization, micron-sized particles suspended in solution self-
assemble into ordered structures, giving rise to properties and behavior with
wide-ranging application. Predicting these structures requires considerable
computation, especially for complex crystal structures. This project will also
train students in software engineering, algorithm design, and open source
software development for materials simulation. The enhancements to HOOMD-Blue,
DEM-HOOMD-Blue and HPMC developed under this award will be made available to the
broader community through the HOOMD-Blue website on University of Michigan
Codeblue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering award supports computational materials research and the development
of computational tools for materials research. This project will develop
simulation software for materials and chemical systems. Building on the open
source software platform known as highly optimized object oriented many particle
dynamics-blue, the PI will expand the capabilities of HOOMD-Blue to include
discrete-element molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo algorithms optimized for
Graphics Processor Units. A workhorse tool for granular matter, DEM will be
adopted for hard particle collisions in the absence of friction, allowing high
fidelity studies of the dynamics and thermodynamics of colloidal systems. Monte
Carlo - a traditionally serial algorithm for sampling phase space stochastically
- will leverage the HOOMD infrastructure to achieve a high degree of parallelism
using a checkerboarding strategy. Both additions, DEM-HOOMD-blue and HPMC, will
allow the simulation of particle-based systems and materials processes of
considerable complexity. The PI will demonstrate the efficacy of the codes by
applying them to the problem of crystal nucleation and growth in hard particle
systems driven to order by entropy maximization. Combined with rare event
sampling tools, DEM-HOOMD-blue and HPMC will enable the study of thermodynamic
and kinetic pathways by which hard-particle fluids assemble into quasicrystals
and open, chiral, or hierarchical crystals characterized by large or complex
unit cells. Given that the current state of the art in nucleation and growth
simulation studies of nanoparticles and colloids is limited to simple Bravais
lattices, this project will expand the knowledge base needed to design new
crystalline materials. Following current HOOMD-blue strategy, the new
computational tools will run efficiently on laptops, desktops, and massive GPU
clusters, thereby serving multiple user types. The PI's findings will be of
immediate interest to the nanoparticle and colloidal assembly communities. The
PI's approaches and tools are transferable and will be of immediate and even
broader interest to the materials, engineering, and chemistry communities
interested in crystallization of appropriate atomic, molecular, or nanoscale
building blocks. This project will also train students in software engineering,
algorithm design, and open source software development for materials simulation.
The enhancements to HOOMD-Blue, DEM-HOOMD-Blue and HPMC developed under this
award will be made available to the broader community through the HOOMD-Blue
website on University of Michigan Codeblue.