* 1409336
* NeTS: Medium: Energy Efficient Operation and Control of Green Base Stations with Renewable Energy: Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,016,000.00

The annual global expenditure of electricity consumed is more than $10 billion
dollars, with cellular base-stations contributing to 60-80% of the energy
consumption. In order to reduce the energy requirements of cellular networks, a
promising new approach is to connect base-stations with energy harvesting and
storage devices. The key benefits of such base-stations are threefold: (i) Green
base-stations are suited for deploying off-power-grid base-stations, or where
reliable power does not exist; (ii) they will reduce the operational cost for
cellular providers, which could translate to lower costs for end-customers;
(iii) they will reduce the carbon emission footprint of cellular infrastructure.
A major challenge pursued in this project is to design a cost-effective green
base-station based system that can adequately exploit these new harvesting and
storage devices. Hence, the overarching goal of this project is to develop the
mathematical foundations for the design and operation of cellular base-stations
equipped with energy harvesting devices, and to develop practical solutions that
can be implemented in real cellular systems. This project combines techniques
from networking, algorithmic design, controls, optimization, and game theory to
address critical issues in this important emerging area. Hence, graduate
students trained on this project will be exposed to a variety of different
disciplines, which in turn will be beneficial to them as they enter the global
workforce. Further, the project will offer undergraduate students opportunities
to be involved in the more practical aspects of the project. The PIs will also
work closely with the industry to help impact real systems. In order to achieve
the aforementioned goal, research on the project will focus on the following
three critical inter-related thrust areas: (i) Dynamic Energy Control:
Developing control strategies for minimizing the energy costs of base-stations
in cellular networks governed by a single operator. Some of the key difficulties
that will be addressed here are: how to dynamically control the battery levels
at each base-station taking into account energy harvesting and user-load profile
dynamics; how to form associations between users and base-stations based on
energy reserves; how to ensure both energy efficiency and user experiences are
satisfied. (ii) Base-Station Availability Control: Developing energy management
strategies that carefully balance the energy savings and the cost incurred in
ON/OFF operations by jointly considering the traffic demand and renewable energy
supply. (iii) Multi-operator Base-station Management: Cooperation and
Competition: Designing mechanisms to allow energy cost reductions by resource-
pooling between multiple operators taking into account the practical realities
of the marketplace and incentives/penalties. The analytical models and
algorithms developed during the course of this project will be validated via
experiments on a testbed at OSU, and trace-driven emulations.