* 1409738
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Automated Reverse Engineering of Commodity Software
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Engin Kirda, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Software, including common examples such as commercial applications or embedded
device firmware, is often delivered as closed-source binaries. While prior
academic work has examined how to automatically discover vulnerabilities in
binary software, and even how to automatically craft exploits for these
vulnerabilities, the ability to answer basic security-relevant questions about
closed-source software remains elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to provide algorithms and tools for answering these questions. Leveraging prior
work on emulator-based dynamic analyses, we propose techniques for scaling this
high-fidelity analysis to capture and extract whole-system behavior in the
context of embedded device firmware and closed-source applications. Using a
combination of dynamic execution traces collected from this analysis platform
and binary code analysis techniques, we propose techniques for automated
structural analysis of binary program artifacts, decomposing system and user-
level programs into logical modules through inference of high-level semantic
behavior. This decomposition provides as output an automatically learned
description of the interfaces and information flows between each module at a
sub-program granularity. Specific activities include: (a) developing software-
guided whole-system emulator for supporting sophisticated dynamic analyses for
real embedded systems; (b) developing advanced, automated techniques for
structurally decomposing closed-source software into its constituent modules;
(c) developing automated techniques for producing high-level summaries of whole
system executions and software components; and (d) developing techniques for
automating the reverse engineering and fuzz testing of encrypted network
protocols. The research proposed herein will have a significant impact outside
of the security research community. We will incorporate the research findings of
our program into our undergraduate and graduate teaching curricula, as well as
in extracurricular educational efforts such as Capture-the-Flag that have broad
outreach in the greater Boston and Atlanta metropolitan areas.&lt;br/&gt;The
close ties to industry that the collective PIs possess will facilitate
transitioning the research into practical defensive tools that can be deployed
into real-world systems and networks.