* 1409593
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Social Clustering and Division via Patterns of Purchasing and Reviewing
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Yongren Shi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,938.00

The growing polarization of opinions in America on a wide range of topics has
attracted attention in both public discourse and academia. Widespread adoption
of personalized recommender systems has transformed the way that opinions are
formed, expressed, changed and disseminated. As a consequence, opinions tend to
be reinforced by exposure to cultural and ideological grouping even when
individuals within those niches are not explicitly tied by social relations.
This project will use data from Amazon book reviews and purchases to construct a
book co-purchase and co-reviewer network with which to study opinion clustering
and polarization of options. Particular attention will be directed to four key
questions: Are there dense clusters of books, with few ties between the
clusters? What genres of books produce clustering? Are there sorts of books that
bridge between the clusters, and do these books then cluster into a smaller
number of topics that correspond to crosscutting cultural dimensions? Do books
that bridge between clusters enjoy greater sales, given the broader market,
fewer sales, given their deviation from the core in each cluster, or similar
sales but with a higher standard deviation? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will make use of advanced computational methods to collect and process
book co-purchasing data and time-stamped book reviews from Amazon.com. Books
will be hand-coded into categories and network analysis will be used to locate
the structural positions of those topics in the co-purchase and co-review. This
dissertation makes three principal contributions to research on opinion
dynamics: 1) a better understanding of how online recommender and review systems
both reflect and promote opinion polarization, 2) the extension of theories and
models of homophily to clustering within bipartite networks of people and
cultural objects; 3) the development of novel research methods that use digital
traces of consumer purchases and reviews to study opinion dynamics and
polarization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has practical implications for
understanding and addressing social divisions in America. It provides a unique
but complementary perspective on the causes and dynamics of polarization and may
yield practical suggestions for ways to bridge divisions. This project is also
one of the first to use "big data" to study polarization, and will provide the
research community with new datasets and tools. In addition, the results may be
helpful for authors who want to target their books to a more diverse audience.
The project will also advance the training of undergraduate and graduate
students who work on the project.