* 1409018
* Computational and Analytical Challenges in Nonlinear Dispersive Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gideon Simpson, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 151,118.00

Nonlinear dispersive wave equations model a variety of phenomena in fluid
mechanics, plasma physics, turbulence, and optics. Analyzing and simulating such
equations numerically allows us to make predictions pertaining to the
corresponding application. For example, it would be desirable to address the
following questions arising in applications: Will signals in optical devices,
used for the transmission and storage of data, be stable, or how is energy
transferred in turbulent systems? This project will advance our knowledge in two
ways. First, it will seek to prove, in a mathematically rigorous sense,
properties of the equations, an example of which is the stability of optical
pulses. Second, it will develop and justify numerical algorithms for simulating
the equations on computers. Systematic analysis of the algorithms ensures that
the computer simulations truly reflect the equations. Finally, both the analysis
and simulation of the equations will determine the regime of validity of these
equations as models for the physical applications. A supplemental benefit of
this research is that the numerical algorithms it develops will be applicable to
a broad class of equations and physical problems. The equations under
investigation in this project are of the nonlinear Schrödinger type, including
the derivative nonlinear Schrödinger equation and the Gross-Pitaevskii equation.
Major analytical questions this work will address include the existence and
stability of singular solutions and nonlinear bound states. These problems will
be addressed through asymptotic analysis, variational methods, and spectral
theory. Singularity formation will also be investigated through simulation,
using adaptive meshing methodology, such as iterative grid redistribution.
Numerical algorithms for simulating the time dependent problems will be
implemented by operator splitting methods, treating the nonlinear and linear
dispersive parts of the equation separately. This numerical analysis will be
pursued with the intention of constructing efficient energy preserving methods
suitable for long time simulation. An algorithm for computing nonlinear bound
states will be studied in a semi-discrete form, so as to be insensitive to
spatial discretization. The bound state algorithms will assist in the
construction of initial conditions, which can then be studied using the time
dependent algorithms.