* 1409473
* Exploring Two-dimensional Electron Gases at Extreme Magnetic Fields with Optical and Terahertz 2DFT spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Denis Karaiskaj, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project elucidates the fundamental
properties of solid matter at extreme conditions, such as low dimensions and
extremely high magnetic fields. The scientific understanding of the fundamental
properties of these materials is crucial for the next generation of electronic
devices and a 21st century economy. The project also leads to efficient training
of undergraduate and graduate students who will be future leaders in scientific
discovery in academia, national labs, and industry. In particular, students are
trained on electronic materials, laser science and applications, and high
magnetic fields. Minority middle school students in Florida and Alabama are
exposed to cutting edge scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will focus on the joint
investigation by researchers at the USF and the UAB to elucidate the coherence
lifetimes in high mobility modulation doped GaAs\AlGaAs systems. The USF team
will perform two-dimensional Fourier transform (2DFT) experiments, which are an
enhanced form of coherent four-wave mixing measurements that are similar to the
extension of nuclear magnetic resonance to two dimensions. The UAB team will
develop a new terahertz frequency spectrometer that will employ well-established
techniques to generate high peak power terahertz pulses using nonlinear
difference frequency generation in the tilted wavefront configuration and a
multiple pulse technique similar to the near infrared 2DFT techniques. Both
experiments will use the new Split Helix magnet to perform measurements at 25 T,
which was custom-designed by National High Magnetic Field Lab researchers to
enable next generation optical measurements. This new magnet will enable the
USF-UAB collaboration to study quantum coherence in high mobility electron gases
in field ranges that were inaccessible to ultrafast-laser source based
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our understanding of
decoherence mechanisms and both inter- and intra-Landau level coherence, which
is critical to their utilization in next generation electronics. The research
team is committed to the broad dissemination of the results of this research
project through presentations, internationally-attended research conferences,
and publication of our results in high impact, peer-reviewed journals. Both USF
and UAB researchers are strongly committed to fostering the education of the
next generation of condensed matter and high magnetic field researchers. To
contribute to these NSF goals, we will directly involve undergraduate, summer
REU students, and our graduate students in the design, planning, experiments,
data analysis and the from traditionally underrepresented groups from our
diverse student bodies.