* 1409504
* CAREER: An integrated probabilistic approach to discrete and continuous extremal problems via information theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2021
* Mokshay Madiman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2021
* USD 392,865.00

Mathematics abounds with extremal problems problems where the goal is to
minimize some functional applied to a class of objects under some constraint,
identify the extremal objects, and investigate the stability of extrema.
Relevant examples range from some in the continuous world (isoperimetric
phenomena in convex geometry, functional analytic inequalities), to some in
the&lt;br/&gt;discrete world (structural phenomena in additive combinatorics),
and some in both (maximum entropy problems in statistics, limit theorems in
probability). A natural language for all of these problem classes is
probability, and, although not obvious, information theory. The project will
develop new formulations of extremal problems from each of these fields in terms
of information-theoretic inequalities, and then use a variety of tools from
analysis, probability, convex geometry, combinatorics, and information theory,
to make progress on them. The unifying nature of the perspective adopted will
bridge discrete and continuous problems using a common set of tools, and enable
significant cross-fertilization. Furthermore, some of the information-theoretic
inequalities developed, combined with statistical decision theory, will be
applied to novel statistical challenges involving multiple players that arise in
engineering, economics, and biology (specifically, theoretical foundations for
the problems of data pricing and distributed inference). The project will use
information-theoretic thinking to make advances on challenging mathematical
problems from the three seemingly disparate fields of convex geometry,
arithmetic combinatorics, and probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from the
intrinsic significance of these areas within mathematics, they have much
practical significance - convex geometry finds applications in medical
tomography, arithmetic combinatorics in computer science, and probability is
ubiquitous as the foundation of statistical inference. The interpretability and
unifying nature of the proposed research, and the diversity of tools it uses,
create wonderful opportunities for student motivation. Newly developed courses
and a resource website on information theoretic approaches to extremal problems
will exploit these opportunities. The investigator will disseminate key findings
through survey articles, organize an interdisciplinary workshop, and communicate
the excitement of research through non-academic public lectures to attract
promising students to the mathematical sciences. The applied component of the
research would also have broad impact, by contributing to how data collectors
and vendors come up with pricing mechanisms (e.g., for pricing of advertisements
by search engines), and by improving the way networks of sensors collect and use
data for various applications (e.g., for disaster recovery coordination or smart
kindergartens).