* 1409114
* Sub-Picosecond Stress-Induced Conductivity Transitions, Mechanical Transitions and Ferroelectric Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: This project investigates material behavior under a
fast stress pulse. When a solid object is hit by a very fast force under ambient
temperature, one could simulate the condition under absolute zero temperature,
which is the coldest state any substance can attain. This is because, with the
force lasting less than one period of atomic vibration, atoms in the solid stay
so still that they behave as if they were at the coldest state! To probe this
possibility, this project utilizes a recent invention of the team to generate an
ultrafast long-range force from an ultrafast electron bunch, and then study the
response of materials hit by such force, at ambient temperature. The results
observed may hold the key to some fundamental materials science questions as
well as certain technological ones, such as how fast an electronic device can
turn on-and-off. An education plan is also integrated into the research to
provide laboratory and distal learning, community outreach and new graduate
textbooks.

Technical Description: This project investigates stress-induced transitions of
conductivity, mechanical properties and ferroelectricity of solid materials at
the sub-picosecond, sub-atomic-vibration limit when atomic migration is frozen
and dislocation and domain wall movement is less than one atomic spacing. It
provides the perfect setting for revealing (a) the real-time action of electron-
phonon interaction, which can cause electron de-trapping, and (b) coherent
crystal rotation/shear, which can cause twinning plasticity and nanodomain
ferroelasticity. The experiments utilize a recent invention of the team: the
relativistic magnetic field of a 20 GeV electron/positron bunch can induce, in a
metal-insulator-metal structure, a 0.1 ps transient current that generates a 0.1
ps self-force. Much faster than the prior record of ~1 ns stressing, sub-ps
stressing challenges our fundamental understanding of mechanical behavior at the
atomic level, probes the fundamental limit of ferroic switching, and manifests
electron-phonon interactions in condensed matter in real time. As such
interactions are often involved in charge trapping and de-trapping, these
experiments can establish the fundamental speed limit for charge-trapping
devices.