* 1409467
* Micellar, Lyotropic and Interfacial Assembly of Amphiphilic Block Copolymers Having Bottlebrush Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Javid Rzayev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 351,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Molecules that contain both water-friendly and water-unfriendly segments play a
central role in a variety of biological and artificial processes, and are in
widespread use as emulsifiers, detergents, drug delivery vehicles, templates for
nanomaterials and oil recovery agents. The research in this award will develop
and explore a new class of giant surfactant molecules with a highly adjustable
brush-like structure. Spontaneous assembly of these molecular building blocks in
water will be pursued as a means of rapidly generating materials with a diverse
set of properties. The proposed research activities will advance the current
understanding of molecular self-assembly, and provide access to high-value
nanomaterials for potential utilization in energy- and health-related
applications. The scientific goals of this research project will be integrated
with broader outreach and educational initiatives, aimed at improving pre-K-12
and undergraduate STEM education, and developing a globally competitive STEM
workforce. A newly organized Western New York STEM Forum will be used as a
platform for teacher professional development, while undergraduate chemistry
curricula will be enhanced via polymer-based laboratory modules.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project aims to develop new bottlebrush-based macromolecular surfactants
and understand their aqueous phase behavior. The research supported by this
grant will focus on (1) preparation of amphiphilic bottlebrush block copolymers,
(2) micelle formation in dilute solutions, (3) lyotropic assembly, and (4)
fabrication of nanostructured interfaces and materials by utilizing shape-
persistent bottlebrush copolymers as molecular building blocks. The polymers
will be synthesized by grafting-from and grafting-through methods to provide
surfactants with precise structural and functional control. Ring-opening and
controlled radical polymerization techniques will be employed for the synthesis
of well-defined copolymers. Self-assembly of bottlebrush surfactants with
varying backbone and side chain asymmetries will be investigated in dilute and
concentrated aqueous solutions by means of small angle x-ray scattering and
cryogenic transmission electron microscopy. Interfacial assembly of the
compartmentalized amphiphilic bottlebrush copolymers will be utilized for the
preparation of mesoporous particles and membranes. The successful outcome of the
proposed research activities will result in phenomenological understanding of
the shape-dependent assembly of giant bottlebrush surfactants and the
fabrication of previously unattainable nanostructured materials for a variety of
applications. The experimental results will be augmented by collaborative
computational and modeling efforts.