* 1409105
* Block Copolymer Directed Hybrid Nano Structures: From Equilibrium to Non-Equilibrium Structure Formation Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Ulrich Wiesner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The PI will investigate the preparation and characterization of advanced
nanostructured materials whose structures are formed from polymers using novel
non-equilibrium conditions. Such non-equilibrium processes allow access e.g. to
new materials that have graded or asymmetric structures required in water-
filtration membranes, which are not accessible via equilibrium routes. These new
materials may have major impact in areas of separation, catalysis, and energy
conversion and storage. This interdisciplinary research program includes
chemical synthesis, characterization of the materials using various microscopic
and scattering techniques, and membrane-performance tests. It will also promote
interdisciplinary teaching, training, and learning for students of all levels.
The program will involve other components of training and development of human
resources, including the participation of underrepresented groups, enhancement
of the infrastructure for research and education, and industrial outreach. To
this end, the PI will also utilize the platform provided by the NSF-funded
Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR). Efforts will include promotion of
materials science and engineering to high school teachers and outreach aimed at
broadening participation of underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

With a program on block-copolymer-directed hybrid nanostructures, the PI will
investigate the synthesis/preparation and characterization of polymer-directed
nanostructured materials using formation principles which move away from
equilibrium towards non-equilibrium conditions. Three distinct bottom-up-type
self-assembly approaches will be pursued, all employing various ABC triblock
terpolymers as structure-directing agents of metals, oxides, and organic
additives. The aim of this program is to understand the underlying fundamental
chemical, physical, and kinetic formation principles enabling general and
relatively inexpensive wet-polymer chemistry methodologies for the efficient
creation of multiscale functional materials with novel property profiles. The
proposed research includes synthesis of all components, characterization of
assembly structures using various scattering and electron microscopy techniques,
as well as study of specific properties including membrane performance tests.
Interdisciplinarity will be a central feature of the effort. It will be promoted
by various collaborations as well as by the use of national facilities such as
the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and the Nanofabrication
Facility (CNF).