* 1409577
* Free Energy Landscaping for Single-Molecule Biophysics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Derek Stein, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to Brown University is cofunded by the Instrument
Development for Biological Research program in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (BIO). This award will study "Lab-on-a-chip" technology in
improving healthcare by making biomedical tests smaller, cheaper, and faster.
The ultimate limit would be tests on single molecules. This project aims to take
an important step in that direction by developing powerful ways of controlling
the shape and the motion of single DNA molecules. With this award, techniques
will be developed that require nanofluidic device "channels with dimensions only
tens to hundreds of nanometers across" because they can exploit physical
concepts that only apply at that scale. For instance, a fluidic device with
nanoscale topographic features inside it, like nanotrenches, harnesses the
entropy of a DNA molecule to guide its motion or even contort it into
predetermined shapes. Entropy is a measure of the multitude of microscopically
different shapes a polymer can adopt. It is also possible to manipulate a DNA
molecule electrostatically, using a nanofluidic version of the field effect upon
which transistors are based. The experiments in this project will advance our
fundamental understanding of nanofluidics and polymer physics. This project will
also apply control over single DNA molecules to obtain overlapping restriction
maps of a single molecule, which can increase the throughput of long-range
sequence information that complements next-generation genomic sequencing data.
This interdisciplinary project will prepare graduate and undergraduate students
for careers in a rapidly growing area of the high-technology economy.
Furthermore, the videos collected of single DNA molecules being controlled one
by one will be used in the classroom at Brown University and in the nearby
public elementary schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;This award is to develop new methods in controlling the
configurations and the transport of single DNA molecules inside nanofluidic
devices. The proposed methods rely on influencing the free energy landscape for
a nanoconfined polyelectrolyte. This researcher will investigate how a series of
trenches embedded within a nanoslit governs the configurational entropy of a
polymer through the reduction of the number of configurations available in
shallow regions as compared with deeper regions. The investigator will also
explore how the charged inner surfaces of a device influence the enthalpy of a
confined molecule through Coulomb forces, which can be locally tuned using
electrodes. These new modalities of control should enable fundamental studies on
single DNA molecules and new bio-analytical applications. Stochastic resonance
and noise-assisted transport of DNA will be studied in a synthetic, bumpy free
energy landscape. A similar device will be used to create overlapping
restriction maps of the same DNA molecule by performing multiple restriction
digests, sequentially, on the molecule as it is trapped and stretched in a long
nanotrench. This project will advance "lab-on-a-chip" applications, provide
excellent training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and
will support outreach activities to local public schools.