* 1409089
* Mesoscopic and many-body effects in topological phases of matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Dmytro Pesin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on topological phases of electrons in materials. Electrons have an
intrinsic property called spin where it appears as if the electron spins like a
tiny top. The spin of the electron is also connected to its intrinsic magnetic
properties; it behaves as though it was a tiny bar magnet. As an electron moves
through a material it will experience a magnetic field from the atomic cores in
the lattice as a consequence of the theory of relativity. The interaction of the
electron with this magnetic field gives rise to the spin-orbit
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;Topological insulators are a consequence of strong spin-
orbit interaction which leads to material that is insulating in the bulk but has
metallic states that cover the surface and edges and robust to defects and
imperfections. The PI will investigate the conduction of electricity and the
dynamics of electrons, including when a high magnetic field is applied to
topological insulators and Weyl semimetals which are three dimensional materials
that have electronic states analogous to those in atomically thin sheets of
graphene. The PI will study new phenomena related to strong spin-orbit
interaction. The main objective of the research is to provide theoretical
insights into how electrons move through topological phases, how they interact
with the atomic lattice and how they interact with other in topological phases.
The main focus is on the electron-atomic lattice interaction and collective
modes in Weyl semimetals, transport of interacting electrons on disordered
surfaces of topological insulators, and thermodynamic and transport properties
in low-dimensional systems. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education and
outreach activities. A special focus will be given to ensuring that equal
research and education opportunities exist for women and minorities, and
encouraging students from underrepresented groups to participate in research.
The PI aims to develop a student Olympiad program on physics. Further
integration of research and educational activities will be reached through
providing training and supervision to graduate and undergraduate students, and
developing a graduate course sequence on modern condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education with the aim to understand many-body and
mesoscopic phenomena in topological phases of matter. The primary objective of
the study is to consider new phenomena related to topological insulators and
Weyl semimetals, as well as Mott insulators with strong spin-orbit coupling and
advance the basic physics of phases with nontrivial topology, beyond
noninteracting electrons in ideal crystalline lattices. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims
to pursue research directions in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt; 1.) Collective
modes and their interaction in gapless topological phases: Cooperative behavior
of particles is often a defining property of an electronic phase. The PI will
consider electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions in Weyl semimetals,
and extract the experimental signatures provided by the resultant collective
modes to facilitate the experimental discoveries of Weyl systems.&lt;br/&gt; 2.)
Signatures of topological transitions in gapless systems, in particular, the
theory of the magnetic breakdown - tunneling of electrons between electron
orbits in momentum space in strong magnetic fields - in a system with non-
trivial Fermi surface topology. This line of research will promote magneto-
oscillation phenomena into a spectroscopic tool capable of discovering
topological transitions in various band structures.&lt;br/&gt; 3.) Physics of
topological surfaces: nonlinear transport, electron-electron interaction and
mesoscopic physics. This direction involves considering magnetoelectric,
mesoscopic and nonlinear phenomena unique to two-dimensional electron gases on
topological surfaces. &lt;br/&gt; 4.) Mott insulators with strong spin-orbit
interaction. This PI will address the question of how the physics of the Mott
metal-insulator transition is modified by strong spin-orbit interaction. It will
be argued that the heterostructures based on the Topological Mott insulators are
useful model system for the realistic transition metal oxide
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods of the project will include
standard tools of many-body theory, including the Keldysh diagrammatic
technique, and quantum kinetic equation approach to quantum transport. The
results of the program will be used to provide guidance for materials research,
paying particular attention to realistic aspects of systems with nontrivial
topology.