* 1410242
* Elucidating the Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of High Temperature Materials with First-Principles Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Remarkable levels of sophistication have been reached in linking properties of a
given material to its microstructure, crystal structure and electronic
structure. A substantially bigger challenge, though, is predicting the dynamic
evolution of a material taken out of equilibrium and determining what external
stimuli must be imposed to shepherd the material into a desired end state. The
desirable properties from a particular chemistry are usually manifested in
metastable crystal structures and microstructures rather than in the true
equilibrium state of that chemistry. In many applications it is necessary to
know how a material in a particular state will evolve over time either because
it is metastable or unstable, such as in high temperature applications, or due
to changing boundary conditions, as in electrochemical energy storage
applications.

This award supports computational research and education to develop highly
automated statistical mechanical software tools that will be used to predict
materials properties and greatly enhance the ability to design materials for
high temperature and non-equilibrium applications from first principles. Areas
where such tools will prove invaluable include the design of new (i) structural
materials for aerospace applications and large-scale power generation plants,
(ii) electrode and electrolyte materials for electrochemical energy storage,
(iii) materials for thermoelectric applications and (iv) materials for shape
memory applications. The project will also involve the education and training of
graduate students in computational materials science, a field that is
increasingly recognized as invaluable in the design and rapid implementation of
new materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and educational activities aimed at extending the
existing thermodynamic and kinetic foundations that underpin phenomenological
descriptions of non-equilibrium processes in the solid state. This will be
realized by two activities: (i) the development of statistical mechanical
computational tools to automate the calculation of a wide variety of
thermodynamic and kinetic properties that are essential in the description of
materials evolving out of equilibrium and (ii) the development and application
of new statistical mechanical theoretical methods to enable the prediction of
high temperature properties of multi-component crystalline solids. A deep
understanding of many high temperature materials and non-equilibrium processes
is hampered by a lack of not only quantitative thermodynamic, kinetic and
mechanical data, but also a lack of knowledge about qualitative trends in this
data. Furthermore, a large class of technologically important high temperature
materials cannot be adequately described and understood with current statistical
mechanical methods. This research activity will result in highly automated
computational statistical mechanical tools to predict free energies and
transport coefficients as a function of concentration. Such tools will provide
new knowledge about the dependence of a wide variety of materials properties on
chemistry and crystal structure. The theoretical focus on high temperature
phases will generate fundamental new insights about the vibrational
stabilization mechanisms, atomic hop mechanisms and mechanical properties of a
large and important class of poorly understood materials used in high
temperature applications. The project will also involve the education and
training of graduate students in computational materials science, a field that
is increasingly recognized as invaluable in the design and rapid implementation
of new materials.