* 1410282
* Tailoring the Properties of Dilute Nitride Bismide Semiconductor Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Rachel Goldman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 820,000.00

Non-technical Description: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science with technological relevance in
optoelectronics and electronics, including temperature-insensitive lasers, high-
selectivity spin valves, and high performance transistors for
telecommunications, radar, and automotive industries. The research program
involves synthesis of GaAs-based thin films with dilute nitride-bismide
incorporation. The ultimate goal is to understand the film growth mechanisms and
correlate them with materials properties. Graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students benefit from working together in an interdisciplinary scientific
learning environment across disciplines of chemistry, physics, and engineering.
The established collaboration constitutes an advantageous approach, benefitting
from the complementary expertise of investigators covering experiment and
theory. The new knowledge gained is broadly disseminated through publications
and presentations, and curriculum development. Outreach activities emphasize the
mentoring of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project aims for
greater understanding and better control of the incorporation of N and Bi into
GaAs-based superlattices and heterostructures, over length-scales ranging from
sub-nanometer, to tens of nanometers to micrometers. A primary goal of the
project is to develop new understanding of epitaxial growth, solute
incorporation, carrier compensation, and thermal stability of GaAsNBi alloys and
heterostructures. Specifically, strain-balanced GaAsN/GaAsBi heterostructures
and superlattices, and GaAsNBi alloys are synthesized using plasma-assisted
molecular-beam epitaxy, with various dopants, group V sources, and vicinal
substrates. The nanoscale structural characteristics are determined using state-
of-the-art microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. The composition-dependence
of band offsets in GaAsN/GaAsBi heterojunctions and superlattices is explored.
The experimental work is complemented by a set of computational studies,
including continuum and effective-mass based calculations. The project at the
University of Michigan involves collaborations with scientists at the University
of Notre Dame, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Wroclaw University (Poland), the
University of College Cork, and the Tyndall Institute (Ireland).