* 1410674
* Fundamental studies of liquid crystal nanodroplets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2017
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals consist of elongated
molecules that can pack into ordered structures, reminiscent of those assumed by
atoms in solid crystals, while remaining fluid. Such ordered structures can be
used to manipulate light - a property that is exploited in liquid crystal
displays. An interesting feature of liquid crystals is that their structure can
be altered through small perturbations at an interface; the liquid crystal can
therefore serve as an amplifier, capable of transmitting molecular events over
relatively long distances. This property has been used to develop sensors for
specific molecules, including toxins, in which adsorption at a liquid interface
triggers a series of molecular transformations that result in macroscopic color
changes, which can be detected reliably and inexpensively. In this project, the
PI will use theory and computation to advance understanding of the series of
events, from the moment a molecule or a nanoscopic particle is adsorbed at a
liquid crystal-water or at a liquid crystal-vapor interface, to the ensuing
structural changes that lead to measurable optical responses. The knowledge
gained from this project will contribute to the development of liquid crystal
sensing technologies that could augment or surpass those available today,
particularly in the realm of biological toxins, thereby leading to important
societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to integrate science and computational
aspects of this project in part into a summer workshop for high school students
and an outreach activity aimed to introduce computation to minority students in
inner city Chicago public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance the fundamental understanding of liquid
crystal interfaces. The PI aims to develop predictive molecular models capable
of describing atomistic, mesoscale, and macroscopic length scales. The primary
physical geometry considered here will consist of liquid crystal droplets, whose
interfaces will be in contact with water or air. At the atomistic level,
molecular simulations will be used to predict material properties, such as
molecular conformation at an interface, that are difficult to measure
experimentally and are often unavailable. At slightly longer length scales,
coarse-grained models of the molecules will be used to predict and examine the
defects that arise in nanoparticle-laden LC systems, thereby providing a direct
description of how different morphologies respond to foreign bodies and external
stimuli. At even longer length scales, continuum models will be used to
understand the arrangement or segregation of surface-active molecules or
nanoscopic particles in distinct regions of the droplets and their interfaces,
and the formation of ordered structures within such systems. Such models will
rely on the material properties and insights generated on the basis of finer,
atomistic and coarse-grained levels of description. The theoretical and
computational formalism for study of LC systems that will emerge from this
project will offer a number of attractive features, including the ability to
describe large, fully three-dimensional realizations of the inhomogeneous
materials of interest and their structural and thermodynamic properties. That
formalism will serve to identify new physical phenomena governed by the coupling
of a three-dimensional LC system to a two-dimensional, decorated interface, and
will serve as a screening tool for promising materials combinations and for
demonstration of the concepts put forth in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims
to integrate science and computational aspects of this project in part into a
summer workshop for high school students and an outreach activity aimed to
introduce computation to minority students in inner city Chicago public schools.