* 1410665
* Emergent Quantum Phenomena in Topological Kondo Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
program of the Division of Materials Research supports research on the
electronic properties of a new class of material known as Topological
Insulators. A topological insulator is an unusual quantum state in which the
bulk of the material is an electrical insulator, while the surface is a
conductor that is stable against various external perturbations. Topological
insulators have generated great scientific excitement over the past few years
because of the novel electrical properties and their potential application as
advanced electronic devices in areas such as quantum computation and spin
transport. However, all of the materials discovered to date have a non-
insulating bulk transport behavior because of unavoidable defects in the
material; therefore, they do not exhibit ideal or useful topological properties.
A recent theory has suggested that a special class of material, known as a Kondo
insulator, would be a topological insulator with a true bulk insulating state.
Researchers at the University of Maryland conduct measurements of the electronic
properties of known Kondo insulators to investigate their possible topological
behavior and to test their suitability for new and novel electronic
applications. This research project involves the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in advanced measurement techniques and in cutting edge
scientific knowledge of materials physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of Maryland are undertaking
experimental studies of electronic transport phenomena in different Kondo
insulator systems that are theoretically suggested to harbor topological surface
states. Understanding the novel properties of topological insulators and the
role of strong electron correlations on topological properties is a major basic
science problem in condensed matter physics. The recent discovery of a surface
metallic state in the Kondo insulator SmB6 suggests that strongly correlated TIs
may exist. However, despite many unconventional transport phenomena recently
found in SmB6, the "smoking gun" evidence for a nontrivial topological surface
state has yet to been established. This study emphasizes the transport
properties of thin films and single crystals at low temperatures (down to 20
mK), where novel emergent quantum phenomena are expected to be prominent. The
project uses point contact spectroscopy, static electric field effect studies,
and high magnetic field transport measurements and microwave and optical
measurements on promising KI materials. An important thrust of this project is
the study of the proximity effect, since it has been predicted that
incorporating topological insulators with ferromagnetic insulators and/or
conventional superconductors may lead to exotic properties such as Majorana
fermion excitations. All the materials required for these measurements are being
synthesized and characterized in-house. This research project involves the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in advanced measurement
techniques and in cutting edge scientific knowledge of materials physics.