* 1410593
* Collaborative Research: Multicellular Communication in Gradient Sensing
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Andrew Ewald, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2018
* USD 145,800.00

Epidermal growth factor gradient sensing by epithelial cells is a crucial
process in development and many disease processes such as cancer metastasis.
Understanding the basic principles of this sensing would enable us to intervene
in disease processes that involve directional cell motion by pharmacologically
targeting the communication rather than the within-cell regulation, and it can
stimulate a novel direction for therapeutics. Through a combination of novel
experimental and theoretical approaches, this project will characterize
advantages and limitations of multicellular gradient sensing in breast
epithelial tissue in a mouse model. It will explore the fundamental physical
limits on collective gradient sensing and will establish to which extent the
size of multicellular ensembles aids their sensory precision. The project will
also support synergistic curriculum development efforts on the interface of
physics and biology at three research universities, on levels from introductory
undergraduate to advanced graduate. It will provide research and broader career
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs,
including minority students. The PIs will engage elementary school students in
science projects and they will reach out to the general public disseminating
their research findings at the Atlanta Science Festival.

Cells in multicellular organisms rarely act alone in responding to external
signals, but little is known about behaviors that emerge from their
multicellular, collective communication and action. In particular it is unknown
if multicellular ensembles can collectively sense chemical gradients in ways
that take advantage of such ensembles spanning substantial ranges of the chemo-
attractant concentration. The PIs' experiments with multicellular ensembles of
breast epithelial cells exposed to gradients of epidermal growth factor suggest
that these cells can sense gradients collectively and that collectively cells
respond to gradients that are far smaller than those sensed by individual cells.
This multicellular information processing is fundamentally distinct from, and
not simply reducible to, sensory processes in isolated cells. The PIs will
establish theoretically and verify experimentally the fundamental physical
limits on the precision of gradient sensing by multicellular ensembles. These
limits containing contributions from the extrinsic ligand stochasticity and from
the intrinsic noise in communicating the measurements made by distant cells in a
multicellular group to individual cells within the group will be characterized.
The PIs will develop computational methods to analyze precision of biological
information processing in collective, nonlinear phenomena, such as epithelial
tissue rearrangement, which will be applicable broadly in other biophysical
contexts.