* 1410839
* Science and Schema for Directed Self-Assembly of Heteroepitaxial Quantum Dot Crystals Near the Intrinsic Length Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 324,894.00

Non-technical Description: Synthetic quantum dot mesocrystals, i.e., three-
dimensional (3D) periodic arrays of quantum dots (QDs) embedded in a matrix
material, represent one strategy pertinent to designing new materials for
nanoelectronics, thermoelectrics, optoelectronics, and magnetics, all areas that
are critical to our technology-based economy. The project aims at establishing a
deeper scientific basis for a specific approach to directed self-assembly
relevant to various 3D periodic QDs systems that are often at the heart of
electronic materials research and development. This type of synthesis has a
great potential to reach unprecedented length scales. The effects of the highly-
regimented nanostructure control on the resulting materials properties are
explored. The outreach activities including curriculum development and the
NanoDays are integrated with the research program.

Technical Description: This research project focuses on the growth of synthetic
quantum dot mesocrystals. These artificial materials are expected to have novel
and improved properties. This research effort builds on the principal
investigator's recent accomplishments in creating two-dimensional arrays of
epitaxial Ge quantum dots on Si substrates. These highly uniform arrays formed
by directed self-assembly on nanoscale surface templates. The templates are
either periodic surface topography, or nanoscale "stressors," created by direct-
write techniques. The two-dimensional quantum dot arrays serve as "seed
crystals" for the formation of the three-dimensional mesocrystal by additional
growth of Ge dot layers separated by Si interlayer spacers. No additional
templating is required. The ultimate goal is to control self-assembly processes
close to the intrinsic, limiting length scales associated with strain-driven
quantum dot self-assembly. The resulting materials are structurally
characterized, and their potential for novel electronic and thermal transport is
explored.