* 1410118
* SusChEM: Sustainable Synthesis of Bismuth-Based Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Alternative Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,785.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Despite decades of promise regarding renewable,
environmentally safe, and highly efficient power generation, the practical
realization of hydrogen and alcohol-powered fuel cells remains elusive. The main
reason that the few fuel cell powered vehicles on the road today are heavily
subsidized by manufacturers is that a suitable replacement for expensive metal
Pt bulk catalyst has yet to be identified. The research effort seeks to minimize
the use of Pt by confining it to only the topmost atomic layers where it is
actually needed. To achieve this; understanding of how matter transitions from
an initial state consisting of clusters of individual metal atoms to the final
nanocrystalline state of which catalytically active metals are composed will be
developed. New physical properties manifested at this small size range can be
harnessed not only for fuel cell electrocatalysis, but for emergent technologies
such as redox flow batteries (RFBs) and thermoelectric power generation (TPGs).
The educational aspect of this project aims to: (i) Enhance pre-college
education and minority outreach via initiatives with local high schools. (ii)
Upgrade chemical engineering curriculum with new laboratory modules that
integrate recent progress in sustainable energy technology. (iii) Introduce
undergraduate cross-disciplinary activities within professional societies
(AIChE, ACS).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The primary objective of this research is to develop safe, sustainable, and
scalable chemical syntheses that produce metal nanoparticles (NPs) having
bismuth as their core component. Bi is an earth-abundant element with low
toxicity and water-stability that has yet to be exploited to enhance material
durability in clean, efficient power generation. The noble character of Bi makes
it an attractive support for precious metal electrocatalysts required for both
the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and fuel oxidation (hydrogen, alcohol, etc.)
in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs). The most efficient use of
precious metals in catalysis is achieved by their surface segregation on
dispersed NP cores of base metals so as to maximize their surface to volume
ratio. Prior attempts in the field to implement this strategy with metals other
than Bi (e.g., Ni, Co, and Fe) have failed due to their dissolution in the fuel
cell environment. In addition, Bi NP formation has proven difficult due to the
use of toxic organic solvents, difficult-to-synthesize organic precursors, and
dangerous hydrazine or lithium reducing agents.

In direct contrast to prior results in the field; this research will examine
all-aqueous, all-inorganic synthesis processes for the growth of NPs in which
SnCl2 is used as a simultaneous surfactant and reducing agent. Bi is well known
to be unstable in the high salt, low pH environment required for SnCl3-
surfactant formation and therefore, these colloidal synthesis routes are
unexpected. Previously, the potential for SnCl3- ligand attachment to Bi has not
been recognized. Consequently, our initial successes with Bi-Pt NP synthesis
using this unique inorganic ligand approach were very surprising. To more fully
understand these phenomena, detailed experimental characterization of the NPs
will be conducted using time-resolved, in-situ X-ray and 119Sn MÃ¶ssbauer
spectroscopies to study the kinetics of pure Bi and Bi-alloy NP formation and
SnCl3- ligand shell evolution from the initial complex.

