* 1410636
* Collaborative Research: Design of Low-Hysteresis High-Susceptibility Materials by Nanodomain Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research aimed to develop new design concepts and principles for shape memory
alloys, and ferroelectric and ferromagnetic materials to achieve improved
functionality for various applications. In these materials structural domains
can switch from one to another by the application of an external field, such as
stress, electric or magnetic fields, allowing sensing and actuation to be
realized simultaneously. These smart materials have found critical applications
in many fields, including medical devices, satellites, robots, navigation
systems, data storage and retrieving, electromechanical and electro-optic
systems, to name a few. However, typical domain structures formed in these
materials are too large leading to properties that are not optimal for
applications. Another common problem is that functional fatigue that leads to
premature failure. The PIs will use advanced computational and theoretical
methods to investigate new design concepts and principles that connect crystal
structure, defects, domain structure and functional properties. These design
concepts and principles are aimed to guide experimental efforts and accelerate
the discovery of new smart as well as structural materials with optimal
properties. This is in alignment with the Materials Genome Initiative. This
project will directly prepare graduate students to immediately contribute to the
success of integrated computational materials science and engineering.
Additionally, the training of researchers involved in materials development will
afford a rapid uptake of new design concepts and methodology, resulting in
increased effectiveness of materials technologists. The educational outreach of
the project is designed to have a significant influence on encouraging high
school students who are members of underrepresented groups to enter science and
engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research that focuses on ferroic-
based functional materials including shape memory alloys, and ferroelectric and
ferromagnetic materials. The main objective of this project is to accelerate the
discovery of novel low-hysteresis high-susceptibility ferroic-based functional
materials with strong fatigue resistance via the design of (a) transformation
pathway networks, and (b) structural and chemical heterogeneities. The former
explores the means to achieve high susceptibility by identifying systems with
isolated circular transformation pathways, while the latter explores how to
transform conventional micron-sized, long-range ordered, self-accommodating
strain, polarization and magnetization domains into nanodomains by suppressing
autocatalysis and regulating the spatial extent of domain growth and coarsening
during ferroic phase transitions. A rigorous theoretical framework will be
developed based on group theory, phase transformation crystallography and graph
methods to analyze transformation pathway networks (TPNs). Through investigating
the symmetry and topology of TPN graphs, a new classification of structural
phase transformations will be introduced. The PIs aim to distinguish three
distinct TPN types: ones that could provide high susceptibility, ones that are
reversible and exhibit shape memory effect, and ones that could generate
dislocations through transformations causing functional fatigue. The PI will
perform systematic first principles and atomistic calculations for specific
systems to assist in constructing and classifying TPN graphs, to quantify the
energy landscapes, and to investigate the effects of various crystalline
defects. Finally phase field simulations will be carried out to examine possible
continuous phase separations and other mechanisms to generate nanoscale
structural and chemical non-uniformities in the parent phase and to study their
effects on subsequent ferroic phase transitions and ferroic nanodomain
formation. The responses of these ferroic nanodomains to temperature and
external fields will be documented. Drastically different properties from those
of their microdomain counterparts are expected, in particular ultra-low-modulus
quasi-linear pseudoelasticity, low hysteresis, high susceptibility such as giant
piezoelectricity, giant magnetostriction and giant non-hysteretic strain
response, and strong fatigue resistance. The educational outreach of the project
is designed to have a significant influence on encouraging high school students
who are members of underrepresented groups to enter science and engineering
disciplines.