* 1410798
* Physics of Bacteria Living in Gels: Host-Bacteria Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rama Bansil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 560,942.00

This proposal addresses the fundamental puzzle of how Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori) breaches the protective mucus barrier to reach the epithelial cell
surface and colonize in the extreme acidic environment of the stomach. The
studies proposed here will advance the fundamental physics underlying bacterial
motion and aggregation in a viscoelastic gel, and elucidate the influence of
shape on motility and colonization. Chemotactic measurements of bacteria moving
in microfluidic devices with multiple chemical gradients across mucin/mucus
layers on gastric cells will contribute to the development of a useful ex vivo,
biomimetic model.

Many bacteria, like those in the gastrointestinal tract, have to negotiate
mucosal barriers to establish colonies. In particular, Helicobacter pylori, the
bacterium that causes ulcers, gastritis and gastric cancer faces the additional
challenge of overcoming the acidic environment. Previous work from the PI's
group established that H. pylori uses the same biochemical strategy of urea
hydrolysis to neutralize the acid and elevate the pH for both survival in the
stomach and to swim across by triggering a gel-solution transition. Recent
studies with mutants having cell shape alterations have shown that the helical
shape is advantageous in establishing colonies in agar gels. Preliminary
bacteria tracking microscopy and resistive force theory based modeling show that
the distribution of swimming speeds is due to polydispersity of shape and size,
along with a biphasic temporal variation of speed, and that the helical shape
provides added propulsion in a viscous mucin solution leading to a faster
swimming speed. Innovative imaging techniques will be used to investigate
bacterial motility and the changes that the bacterium causes in the host gel by
quantitative measurements of pH changes and alterations in local micro-rheology
of its environment. The rheological studies of bacteria infected gels will be
characterized using oscillatory shear rheology. Microfluidic geometries will be
designed to mimic the gastric mucus environment under ex-vivo conditions,
layering substrates with epithelial cells covered with mucus or purified mucin
or gelatin or agar and establish pH or ionic gradients to examine the bacteria
motility and the extent and pattern of colonization. The influence of the
bacterium on the surrounding mucus /mucin will be probed by fluorescent dye
binding and Atomic Force Microscopy. Comparative studies of the wild-type H.
pylori with mutants with altered cell shapes or deficient in specific receptors
or flagella, will make it possible to assess the effect of the many variables at
play in this complex living system. The experimental studies will be
complemented by computational and theoretical modeling of bacterial motility,
body and flagella dynamics, chemotaxis, and pattern formation in gels to provide
a quantitative understanding of the underlying physics. High school students
will participate via the Summer research internship, RISE program at Boston
University. Videos on bacterial motility and simple analysis tools will be
developed for use in undergraduate courses and for demonstration purposes. The
PI will take advantage of the diversity of the team, and the broad appeal of the
research topic, to do outreach activities involving presentations to a broader
audience, including local high schools, and minority and other community groups
and to recruit women and minority graduate, undergraduate and high school
students to participate in this research.