* 1410389
* Northern New Jersey Bridges to the Baccalaureate (NNJ-B2B)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Jacqueline Kineavy, Passaic County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,499,919.00

The Bridge to the Baccalaureate (B2B) track in the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program provides support for alliances of
community colleges (2-year institutions) to accelerate the transfer of students
historically underrepresented in STEM to four-year institutions in pursuit of
STEM baccalaureate degrees. It is expected that B2B alliances provide a bridge
to the baccalaureate degree for STEM students from underrepresented populations
who begin their instruction at a community college. The Northern New Jersey
Bridges to the Baccalaureate (NNJ-B2B) Alliance is a partnership of five,
public, associate-degree granting, Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) in
northern New Jersey: Passaic County Community College (lead institution), Bergen
Community College, Hudson County Community College, Middlesex County College,
and Union County College. NNJ-B2B will work synergistically with the Garden
State LSAMP (GS-LSAMP) Program to increase the number of students
underrepresented in STEM who successfully transfer from the five partner
community colleges to STEM programs at four-year institutions in New Jersey. By
assisting more than 900 students from underrepresented populations transition
into baccalaureate STEM degree programs at institutions in the GS-LSAMP, the
partner colleges in NNJ-B2B will provide their students with access to more
employment opportunities thereby resulting in a more diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to A Matter of
Degrees, a recent study conducted by the Center for Community College Student
Engagement, "community college students who participate in multiple high impact
practices are more engaged in their learning and experience better outcomes than
students who do not participate in these activities." In collaboration GS-LSAMP,
NNJ-B2B partners will require that students participate in a powerful set of
STEM learning experiences that will instill in them the motivation, skills, and
experiences needed to succeed in their STEM coursework and transfer to the
universities. The STEM learning experiences will include the following five high
impact practices: undergraduate research, peer led team learning (PLTL), Math
Bridge programs, peer mentoring, and career/transfer seminars. Each of the
NNJ-B2B Alliance partners will serve as the lead in developing, refining, and
sharing one of five best practices modules and will then commit to replicating
all five high impact practices on their respective campuses. The activities of
the NNJ-B2B Alliance will result in improved STEM education on the partner
campuses and an increased transfer rate into STEM baccalaureate degree programs.