* 1410928
* Curvature-dependent polymer hydration in biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Elena Dormidontova, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance understanding of biomaterials, which are an
increasingly important and expanding class of novel materials. Synthetic
polymers, large molecules made of many repeating molecular units, are commonly
used in biomaterials. The main requirements of the polymers are
biocompatibility, often biodegradability and resistance to proteins. For many
polymers these properties correlate with the level of hydration, the presence of
bound water molecules around the polymers, which is a common feature shared by
biocompatible synthetic polymers and large molecules produced by living
organisms. Understanding the hydration of polymers is important for developing
new biomaterials and optimizing their performance. The PI will investigate the
mechanism of polymer hydration and the factors influencing its level. Through
advanced computer modeling that includes processes across many scales of length
and time combined with theoretical analysis, the research will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of the geometrical structure of polymers and hydration
in curved layers, which are commonly encountered in assemblies of nanoparticles
and polymers that are used in biomedical applications. The presence of water
inside the soft nanoparticles will have a strong impact on drug encapsulation,
stability and release, as well as the rate of biodegradation of the
nanoparticle, which is important for the development of drug-delivery carriers.
The research will yield experimentally testable predictions and guidance for
future experimental academic and industrial research. The project will
contribute to the technological development of new biomaterials, which can make
important contributions to biomedical nanotechnology. Education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students as well as a postdoctoral researcher is an
important part of the project, which contributes to training a diverse next
generation workforce in the area of modern materials modeling and simulation,
and analytical methods to enable future technological advances in the design and
manufacture of new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to advance understanding of biomaterials. Macromolecular hydration is
one of the important factors determining the behavior and properties of
biomacromolecules and most water-soluble polymers. Despite the recognition of
the importance of hydration for the bulk behavior of macromolecules, the
mechanisms and factors influencing the hydration, especially on surfaces and
self-assembled macromolecular structures where accessibility of water is
limited, remain unknown so far. This project is aimed to achieve fundamental
understanding of hydration of water-soluble biocompatible polymers in curved
layers and self-assembled structures by using advanced theoretical and
computational tools. Hydration of polymers protecting nanoparticles can have a
profound effect on surface-protein interactions or biocompatibility, water
penetration to the underlying layer and diffusion of hydrophobic molecules
through the protective polymer layer of a surface or nanoparticle. In the first
part of the project the research team will investigate using a combination of
atomistic and coarse-grained molecular dynamic simulations how surface
curvature, grafting density of chains, polymer length and temperature affect
conformation and hydration of polyethylene oxide chains grafted to gold surfaces
and nanoparticles. In the second part of the project using a combination of
different simulation techniques the research team will systematically study a
series of polymer micelles with polyethylene oxide as corona block and different
core blocks and analyze the role of the chemical nature and length of core block
as well as the temperature on micelle structure, extent of hydrogen bonding as
well as water and polymer distribution throughout the micelle. Based on the
obtained computer modeling results a simplified simulation approach and
analytical model accounting for polymer-water hydrogen bonding in competition
with water-water hydrogen bonding will be developed. The implication of the
obtained results for important biomaterial applications, such as drug
encapsulation will be investigated as well. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the fundamental understanding of the biomaterial properties that
are essential for their technological development and applications. Results
obtained in the project will also contribute to improved understanding of
properties and functions of biopolymers where hydration plays an important role.
The simulation model and analytical approach that will be developed in the
course of the research project will be useful in further academic research and
technological developments in a range of areas employing water-soluble polymers.
Training of postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students in the
area of modern simulation methods and bio/nanotechnology will be one of the
important outcomes of the project.