* 1410417
* Tuning the Band Structure of Silicene by Surface and Interface Control
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Pengpeng Zhang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 12/31/2017
* USD 218,668.00

The project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Programs, both in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The
exotic physical phenomena discovered in graphene have spurred great scientific
interest in various two-dimensional (2D) materials. 2D materials with only one
or a few atomic layers in thickness are favorable over bulk materials in terms
of device scalability and the extension of Moore's law. This project focuses on
the exploration and band structure tuning of silicene, a monolayer of Si atoms
arranged in a honeycomb pattern, which has the potential to be adapted to the
mainstream silicon-based electronics and applications in spintronics. The
educational component includes training graduate students in an
interdisciplinary academic environment, integrating research with undergraduate
education and with the Research Experience for Undergraduates program at
Michigan State University, recruiting minority students, and disseminating
research to an even broader audience through outreach activities such as Science
Theatre that has been established at the
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Silicene is an emerging
2D material with the promise of exhibiting Dirac physics like graphene but of a
larger spin-orbit coupling. To date most of the silicene growth has been carried
out on Ag(111) substrate, with marginal success on zirconium diboride and
iridium. However, the strong interaction with the substrate renders it difficult
to isolate silicene and to measure its electrical transport properties. This
project aims to address these critical issues by 1) exploring growth of silicene
on insulating substrates such as boron nitride in order to probe its intrinsic
properties; and 2) tuning the band gap and carrier concentration of silicene via
surface chemical functionalization. A wide and continuous tuning of the band
structure is important for exploring properties of silicene and its potential
applications in switching devices. A comprehensive experimental approach
including scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, non-contact atomic force
microscopy, ultraviolet and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is taken to
characterize the surface and to measure the electronic structures of silicene.