* 1410462
* Collaborative Research: Supramolecular Materials by Nucleic Acid Block Copolymer Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Yaroslava Yingling, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Nontechnical: These Collaborative awards by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Duke University (Lead) and North Carolina
State University (Nonlead) are cofunded by the Biomedical Engineering program in
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(ENG). These awards are for the enzymatic synthesis of long DNA chains and the
systematic scientific approaches for exploring their assembly into aggregates
(micelles) and networks, and are expected to advance the field of DNA-based
materials. The proposed research is transformative because it will provide
design rules for the synthesis of multi-functional DNA chains that can self-
assemble into morphologies with potential for drug delivery applications. The
proposed research will also yield methods and strategies to fabricate oriented
DNA nanowire networks over large areas. These polynucleotide networks can be
metallized and thus contribute to an essential need in the rapidly growing
number of nanoscale devices with applications ranging from flexible electronics
to photovoltaics. The proposed projects are also emblematic for a research and
training paradigm termed Reverse Engineering Biology (REBio), where students
will integrate biological sciences within the engineering paradigm of design to
forward engineer new products and processes. Under the REBio paradigm, the PIs
are committed to: (i) providing an integrated educational and research training
program for undergraduate and graduate students involved with the project; and
(ii) increasing public awareness and engagement with some of the scientific
concepts underlying the proposed research through hands-on, informal education
opportunities for K-12 students and general
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Polyelectrolyte block-co-polymers
show rich micellization behavior in solution and hold promise for novel
functional materials in nano- and biotechnological applications. To date,
however, the synthesis of polynucleotides with high molecular weight, and of
oligonucleotide hybrid block-copolymers is still a challenge. Moreover, little
is known about the design rules for micellar morphologies formed by block-co-
polynucleotides. Despite the astounding successes in the field of DNA
nanotechnology, the alignment, patterning and large scale ordering of
polynucleotide assemblies on surfaces are still challenging problems that
prevent use of these materials in functional devices. The research activities in
this interdisciplinary, collaborative research proposal address these
shortcomings. The research team will combine theory, experiment and simulations
to answer questions in three specific aims: (1) to provide guidelines for
synthesis and self-assembly of block-co-polynucleotides into a range of micellar
structures in aqueous solutions; (2) to develop fundamental understanding and
control over the assembly of functional nucleic acid networks on surfaces and
the use of the networks as scaffolds for metallization; and (3) to provide cost-
effective access to terminal deoxynucleotidyl Transferase needed for the scale-
up of polynucleotide materials synthesis.