* 1410169
* Synthesis and Properties of Complex Crystalline and Glassy Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 495,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;New materials impact not only the physical
sciences but also economic growth. At a grassroots level, the solid state and
materials chemistry community recognizes the grand challenge of developing
rational materials discovery strategies and identifying materials that are
transformative in our understanding of physicochemical properties and in
technological progress. With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, this project help
address this challenge by developing the chemistry of metal chalcogenides. In
this context, the research team is building a rational, science-driven
foundation to extract maximum scientific and technological benefit. The primary
goals of this projecct are to discover and characterize new types of metal
chalcogenide compounds, and to understand their structures, chemical bonding and
physical properties. If successful, new materials enabling new applications or
enhancing the effectiveness of existing technological applications will emerge.
The project employs molten salts as powerful reaction media in which to seek
formation of new materials with unusual physical properties. The project
contributes significantly to the training and teaching of graduate students in
the field of solid state and materials chemistry and helps to create a future
workforce that understands the importance of new materials as drivers for new
phenomena and technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this research are to discover and
characterize new types of metal chalcogenide compounds, and to understand their
structures, chemical bonding and physical properties. The project employs salt
flux syntheses to seek new materials with novel structure and compositions.
Well-defined building blocks are present in the flux reactions and their
formation is guided by tuning the flux composition and temperature, which
controls Lewis basicity and redox potential. An important question in this
synthesis program is whether, using intermediate temperatures, one can guide the
fundamental reaction chemistry occurring in molten salts to suppress the
formation of undesirable compounds and favor crystallization of new ones. The
project is based on the general theme of structure-composition-property
relationships with the following question being central: How does one develop
the tools and concepts, both intellectual and experimental, to discover new
functional materials. Focusing on the chalcogenide class the project has the
following directions: (a) synthesis in polychalcogenide fluxes focusing on early
transition and main group metals, mixed metal systems and also on thio and
telluro-arsenate and antimonate chemistry; (b) synthesis using mixed
chalcogenide fluxes incorporating oxide salts; (c) creation of novel glasses
from the crystalline compounds and their phase change behavior and (d)
dissolution studies of selected promising chalcogenide phases to assess their
potential for processing into more useful forms. The project is expected to
enrich the knowledge of unusual and diverse chalcometallate building blocks and
role they play in creating new compounds. Experimental characterization tools to
be employed include X-ray crystallography optical, infrared and Raman
spectroscopy, scanning and transmission electron microscopy, differential
thermal analysis and scanning calorimetry, and measurements of electrical
conductivity as well as optical second harmonic generation.