* 1410009
* NeTS: Medium: A Sparse Decomposition Framework for Complex System Design and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 825,669.00

Large scale, pervasive communication systems are an important part of everyday
life and, with the emergence of the Internet of Everything technology, are
becoming an essential part of our infrastructure. Future communication systems
necessitate significantly new design paradigms because they are large scale and
involve a complex interaction of communications, "natural" (environmental)
networks as well as control. The seamless management of a system of this
complexity, interconnection, and scale is daunting. A fundamentally new approach
is needed to tackle the issues of scale and complexity. The investigators are
studying novel mathematical models for network design and optimization for
systems of much larger size than those that are tractable with current methods.
They are planning to demonstrate their utility on applications such as cognitive
radio, wireless body area sensing networks and potentially models for bacterial
populations. The new methods have the potential to impact the design and control
of very general, large-scale networks such as biological, social networks and
the SmartGrid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a novel theoretical
framework to address the challenges of large scale system design by analyzing,
tracking, and controlling Markov processes over graphs associated with complex
systems. The correlation induced in these large Markov chains is exploited via
sparse approximation theory employing graph wavelets for representation. Typical
complex systems induce an underlying sparsity that enables dimensionality
reduction via compressed sensing-like schemes. This research develops new sparse
techniques for formal modeling, analysis and optimization of large-scale systems
that evolve temporally, by designing novel graph wavelets for directed graphs,
in combination with new sparse approximation algorithms and control methods
tailored to the complex systems for estimation, communication and control.