* 1410718
* Shape Persistent, Dynamic, and Liquid Crystalline Materials for Sensor and Electronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 525,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Organic electronic materials have many
applications and will be an increasing element of the innovation economy of the
United States. Realizing the full potential of these materials requires new
research, such as will be undertaken in this proposal to develop novel
functional materials and organizational principles. Under this NSF funding new
methods at the interface of liquid crystal science and organic electronic
materials will be developed. Technologies to come from this work have the
potential to find commercial applications in the formation of chemical sensors
and high performance organic electronics. This proposal will also support the
education of graduate students and undergraduates following an educational model
that provides students with a broad, self-reliant technical background as well
as education in leadership, management, and entrepreneurship. The lead
researcher has a deep commitment to increasing diversity in science and
engineering and continues to organize the Future Faculty Workshop, which
prepares underrepresented groups to compete for academic careers. This workshop
is in its 7th year and is highly successful. The lead researcher is also deeply
involved in MIT's diversity efforts and led efforts for the creation of
fellowships, organizes an annual workshop to inspire/facilitate underrepresented
groups to attend graduate school, and hosts underrepresented undergraduate
students for summer research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research, this research is directed at the
exploration of concepts of liquid crystal science applied to electroactive
materials. New molecular scaffolds and interactions are proposed to create
interactions between receptor molecules and small molecules for the creation of
chemical sensors. New designs include the use of C-H...pi interactions to create
receptors for benzene and methane. Electroactive shape changing molecules based
upon thianthrene are proposed as prospects for organic semiconductors as well as
sensory applications. Their interactions with small molecules, metal ions, and
carbon nanotubes will be explored. The dynamic behavior of thianthrenes is also
proposed as a mechanism to reduce the melting point of rigid board-like
molecules. This approach is directed at creating new generations of organic
semiconductors that display liquid crystalline order and melt processability.
Sensory devices will be produced for toxic metals and the plant hormone
ethylene. New generations of chemiresisitve sensors will make use of the self-
assembly of rigid molecules having long alkyl sidechains on graphene and carbon
nanotube surfaces. A combined analysis of the chemical dynamics and structures
formed by scanning tunneling microscope (STM) imaging of self-assembled
monolayers on graphite is proposed.