* 1410273
* Polynomial inclusions: open problems and potential applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Liping Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 190,980.00

The goal of this project is to study a new geometric concept, polynomial
inclusions, and their applications. It was first discovered by Newton that an
interior point in a hollow ellipsoid feels no gravitational force, and that for
a filled ellipsoid the gravity inside is a quadratic function of the position.
Polynomial inclusions are a generalization of ellipsoids in terms of Newtonian
potential. An interior point in a hollow polynomial inclusion feels a
gravitational force that is a polynomial of the position. Polynomial inclusions
have proven to be useful for many modeling and design problems. Specifically,
the following applications pertaining to polynomial inclusions will be
investigated: (i) predictive models for design of synthetic complex materials,
(ii) optimal structures for fusion reactors and minimum field concentration, and
(iii) inverse source problem for medical and geological imaging. This research
project will be integrated with educational and outreach activities such as one-
to-one mentoring, educational module development, training graduate students,
and fostering interdisciplinary collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Newtonian potential induced by a polynomial inclusion of degree k is precisely a
polynomial of degree k inside the body. The interest in polynomial inclusions
arises from that partial differential equations admit closed-form simple
solutions for polynomial inclusions as for ellipsoids. The following fundamental
technical problems concerning polynomial inclusions will be addressed in the
project: (i) proving the existence and uniqueness of polynomial inclusions, (ii)
numerically computing polynomial inclusions, (iii) explicit parametrization of
polynomial inclusions and (iv) employing polynomial inclusions to solve
aforementioned engineering problems. The outcomes of this project may have an
impact on the classic Hilbert's sixteenth problem as well as industrial problems
ranging from structural engineering, fusion designs and to imaging. The project
will also strengthen the connection between the Department of Mathematics and
the Department of Mechanical Aerospace Engineering at Rutgers University by
means of recruiting students of diverse backgrounds into the research team.