* 1410415
* Experimental and Modeling Study of the Optical Properties, Heat and Cold Tolerance, and UV-Resistance of the Eye Lens Crystallins
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Rachel Martin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to University of California Irvine is for
developing a scientific understanding of how nature produces transparent,
durable biomaterials, as exemplified by the proteins making up the eye lens.
Although the molecular details of these proteins vary among different organisms,
they are functionally similar in their high stability and resistance to
temperature extremes and UV-light damage. Understanding the structural factors
diverse lens proteins have in common will help guide the design of future
temperature and UV-resistant biomimetic materials. The educational plan includes
training of students at the Ph.D. and undergraduate levels. These students will
be trained not only in the specific skills needed to complete the research, but
also in thinking and problem-solving across disciplinary boundaries. Another
important component is outreach to middle school and high school students. The
goal of the outreach program is to increase interest in science as a career
among middle school students and includes a variety of activities and visits to
the PI's labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand the molecular basis of protein stability, in
particular resistance to extreme temperatures and UV light exposure. Studies of
extremely stable structural proteins that are not homologous but play the same
functional role will provide insight into sequence determinants of stability
without interference from effects that are conserved due to enzymatic activity
in thermostable enzymes. The particular proteins chosen for this effort are eye
lens crystallins from three organisms adapted to extreme environments. The box
jellyfish (Tripedalia cystophora) J2-crystallin has a high thermal stability,
while the gamma-S1- and gamma-S2-crystallins from the Antarctic toothfish
(Dissostichus mawsoni) help confer unusual cold tolerance on the eye lens of
this organism. The iota-crystallin of the diurnal gecko Lygodactylus picturatus,
has an unusual UV protection mechanism involving binding of a retinol
derivative. NMR and optical spectroscopic studies coupled with molecular
dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations will elucidate the important structural
factors and intermolecular interactions that confer high stability on these
proteins, guiding the future design of biomimetic materials. The educational
plan includes training of students at the Ph.D. and undergraduate levels, who
will be exposed to a broad range of experimental and computational techniques,
as well as the continuation of a successful outreach program aimed at middle
school students.