* 1410394
* Models of the Photosynthetic Oxygen-Evolving Complex
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,002.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor George Christou of the University of Florida synthesizes and
studies compounds related to the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC). The OEC is found
in plants and certain bacteria, and for over 2Â½ billion years has been
converting water to oxygen gas using sunlight as an energy source. Hence the OEC
is responsible for the production and maintenance of the atmospheric oxygen on
which all respiring life depends. The OEC is too fragile to be isolated from
natural sources; therefore researchers are seeking to synthesize the OEC in the
laboratory to study its properties and how it makes oxygen. The Christou lab
will synthesize model compounds for OEC and study their ability to catalyze
conversion of water to oxygen. This research has broader impacts on current
efforts to harness and store solar energy. It also creates opportunities for
graduate students to acquire advanced training in synthesis and specialized
techniques such as magnetochemistry and electrocatalysis of water oxidation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to synthesize and study
Mn4Ca/oxo clusters as models of the OEC, using recently developed methodologies
to make mixed Mn/Ca cubane compounds. Derivatives with chelate-induced,
structural perturbations that mimic the effect of the peptide scaffold on the
OEC will be synthesized, as will be derivatives with manganese in different
oxidation states and with strontium instead of calcium, Sr being the only metal
that can replace Ca in OEC with retention of significant activity. The
characterization of the compounds by magnetic measurements, and by EPR and X-ray
spectroscopy will provide benchmarks useful in the study of OEC. The proposed
work will enable the testing of current hypotheses about the precise level of
structural distortion of the OEC and its influence on the properties of OEC,
about whether the Sr-substituted OEC is isostructural with the Ca form, and
about the origin of the distinctly different, electronic properties of the OEC
at a given oxidation level and depending on generation conditions. The OEC
models and other synthetic Mn compounds will also be explored as functional
models, namely as electrocatalysts for water oxidation to oxygen, building on
the discovery of such activity with low overpotential by certain Mn carboxylate
clusters.