* 1410557
* SusChEM: Environmentally sustainable concretes enabled by multiscale investigation of ancient Roman concretes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Paulo Jose Monteiro, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 497,709.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Production of concrete based on Portland cement
hydration is an energy intensive process responsible for a staggering 5-8% of
the annual global CO2 emissions. The concretes of ancient Roman monuments and
seawater harbors, produced from volcanic rocks and hydrated lime, have a far
smaller CO2 footprint than conventional Portland cement concretes, far greater
chemical and mechanical resistance to decay, and take a smaller energy budget to
produce. The secret to the environmental sustainability of the 2000-year old
concretes is traced to the chemical nature of the mortar binder. The goal of the
project is to gain a fundamental understanding of this chemistry. The broader
impact of this work lies in its positive contributions to interdisciplinary
science, society, and educational and outreach activities. The research will
provide guideposts for greater sustainability of our resources (both energy and
clean water) and future applications to high performance concretes, as well as
to increased durability of Portland cement concretes blended with
environmentally-friendly supplemental materials, and including seawater, which
conserves fresh water resources. From a societal perspective, the research has
the potential to transform traditional concepts of the concrete industry based
on Portland cement hydration, to binding mechanisms inherent in naturally-
occurring volcanic ash deposits. The results may also be of value in developing
improved methods for conservation of ancient structures and more recent concrete
structures. From an economic perspective, it will contribute to "green"
construction, an important growth sector of the national economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project aims to gain a
fundamental understanding of the hydration mechanisms, binding mechanisms,
cation exchange properties, and nanoscale mechanical properties of 2000-year old
cementitious components of Roman concretes. The research is based on a
nanostructural approach that focusses on thin, intact slices of mortars, already
prepared from the Baianus Sinus breakwater (first century BC) in Pozzuoli Bay
near Naples, Italy, and reproductions of these materials prepared with Campi
Flegrei volcanic ash. The primary analytical techniques include X-ray
microdiffraction (to identify crystalline phases), Raman spectroscopy (for
structural and vibrational properties and bonding environment characterization),
nuclear magnetic resonance (for Si-O and Al-O bonding environments), high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy (for detailed nanostructural
studies), nanoindentation to assess mechanical properties of these phases
(modulus, hardness, strength) with nanoscale resolution, and engineering
strength and durability testing for the mortar reproductions. It is anticipated
that this research will result in new formulations of high performance concretes
with a lifetime improvement of over one order of magnitude, and in new processes
designed specifically for reduced waste product, especially CO2 emissions, and
for much higher energy efficiency than current processes. A significant impact
of this project is in education, in particular by training graduate and
undergraduate students in several disciplinary areas: materials science, earth
science, archaeological science, and civil engineering.