* 1410439
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: The Key to the Cabinets: Building and Sustaining a Research Database for a Global Biodiversity Hotspot
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Windham, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 343,596.00

The southeastern USA is botanically rich, with areas of high global biodiversity
in both the Appalachians and the coastal plain. Millions of plant specimens have
been collected from this region over the past four centuries, and these
specimens and the information they contain currently reside in museums, or
herbaria, at universities across the area. Scientists study these specimens
intently; however, it is difficult to retrieve information at broad geographic
and taxonomic scales without pipelines to move the information electronically
from the specimen to an accessible pool of data. SERNEC, or the SouthEast
Regional Network of Expertise and Collections, is a large regional network of
botanical experts and collections that has, through an NSF-sponsored research
coordination network (RCN) project, developed critical skills in biodiversity
informatics. The current project will allow the SERNEC group to make data
available for over 3 million specimens using the latest photography and
information capture tools and to engage citizen scientists and students to
assist in transcribing and georeferencing this large dataset. The research
generated through this project can help regional planners, land managers and
communities to manage their natural resources in our ever-changing environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of scientists, citizen scientists, and
students will provide a synergy to build a research tool of an unparalleled
scale and scope. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop an imaged and
databased set of over 3 million specimens from over 100 herbaria in one of the
most floristically diverse regions in North America and a global hotspot of
plant diversity. This will represent a valuable data source for research on the
response of vegetation to climate change, human development, and rapid
migrations of introduced species. This region has been a biodiversity hotspot
for 100 million years and this project should encourage research on changes over
time to develop better predictive models as areas of biodiversity change. By
partnering with Symbiota, Notes from Nature, GEOLocate, Adler Planetarium,
iPlant/TACC, and Specify, the project will develop ways to best integrate
various efforts for data accessibility. This award is made as part of the
National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program, and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).