* 1410888
* Defect-Managed, High-Mobility Oxide Thin Films and Heterostructures for Fundamental Study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Bharat Jalan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 366,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on the development of an
advanced state-of-the-art thin film deposition technique for the synthesis of a
new class of complex oxides that are highly perfect. These materials possess
multi-functional properties that are of great interest for next generation
devices of power electronics and energy conversion. The exploration of these
materials with unprecedented structure quality and low defects provides valuable
input for experimental testing of theoretical models, in addition to
facilitating the fundamental study of materials physics at reduced size and
dimensionality. The research activities contribute to the professional
development experience for students from local high schools, minority
organizations and community colleges through training and "science awareness"
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Through the establishment of
molecular beam epitaxy growth approaches, this project is studying the
fundamental physics of highly stoichiometric, precisely doped, defect-managed
complex oxides with outstanding potential for room temperature electronics. The
project is seeking to exploit these structures by conducting detailed structural
and electronic transport studies in order to understand, and eventually control,
specific defects, local structure, and electronic mobility. In particular, the
work is seeking a fundamental understanding of factors, which control room
temperature electron mobility in perovskite oxides using a "model" material
system (BaSnO3) that presents opportunities to enhance electron mobility at room
temperature via defect-management and remote doping approaches. The project is
providing opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students to
obtain training in the interdisciplinary areas of materials science and
engineering, electrical engineering, materials chemistry, and materials physics.
Students are gaining experience with cutting-edge thin film deposition
approaches, advanced characterization techniques, and theoretical calculations.
The project also contributes to the education outreach by training students
enrolled in a vacuum and thin film technology program at local community
colleges in Minneapolis. These students are often find employment as technicians
after completing this program.