* 1410438
* Thermopower in Organic Molecular Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michael Chabinyc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 364,446.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are carbon-
based materials, similar to dyes, that conduct electricity. They can be
dissolved in solvents and printed using inkjet-printing on flexible substrates
for use in low-cost electronics such as displays and sensors. Light emitting
diodes based on organic semiconductors are already commercially available in
mobile phones. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, this research project expands their use
through the study of their fundamental physical properties such as their
electrical conductivity, and explores possibilities for converting excess
thermal energy to electrical power. The project has significant impact on the
future scientific workforce because graduate student researchers carrying out
the research gain significant training in multidisciplinary materials science
and engineering. The research team also performs outreach to the public through
educational activities in local K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in molecular organic electronic
materials is the control of their electronic properties through solid state
ordering. Electrical doping of organic semiconductors is important for electrode
layers in organic light emitting diodes and solar cells and in emerging
thermoelectric applications. The research in this project examines how the
crystalline order in solution processed organic semiconductors, both in neat
films and in blends with acceptors, affects their electrical conductivity and
electronic structure. The intrinsic properties of electrical conduction are
compared in samples doped by molecular acceptors in model bilayer structures and
in the bulk. Thermopower measurements and advanced x-ray structural
characterization are carried out to determine how the microstructure and
electronic structure of organic molecular solids evolve upon electrical doping.
Gated thermopower measurements are used to determine the electronic structure of
undoped materials to gain insight into their electronic structure. This research
provides insight into new means to control the electrical conductivity of
organic semiconductors in order to determine the limits of the electrical
properties of these important materials systems.