* 1410983
* Linking Fundamental Structural and Physical Properties of the MAX Phases at Finite Temperatures through Synergetic Experimental and Computational Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Miladin Radovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 440,104.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Recently, a new class of nanolayered carbides and
nitrides, commonly referred to as MAX phases, has attracted considerable
attention as potential multi-functional/structural materials for harsh
environments since they combine some of the best attributes of ceramics (high-
temperature stability and strength) and metals (high thermal conductivity and
resistance to fracture). MAX phases are an exciting, and technologically
important class of high-temperature materials but much remains to be understood,
especially about the influence of chemistry on their properties, and their
transition from brittle to ductile behavior (at elevated temperatures). This
project addresses this challenge by synergistically combining experiments and
computer simulations. A better understanding of the relationship between
chemistry and mechanical stability may enable the faster deployment of MAX
phases in technologies that benefit from higher operating temperatures, making
it possible to develop more reliable and efficient power generation (and
propulsion) systems. In addition to contributions to the science and technology
of MAX phases, the project supports activities related to curriculum
development, K-12 outreach, high school teacher training, mentoring and
contributing to the professional training and development of undergraduate and
graduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHINCAL DETAILS: The
overall goal of this project is to investigate the finite-temperature structural
and thermo-mechanical properties of MAX phases (comprised of an early transition
metal (M), an A-group element and X which is either carbon and/or nitrogen) and
their solid solutions through high-throughput experimental and computational
approaches. Computations are being used for the rapid screening of materials
while high-throughput synthesis allows the fine exploration of alloying effects
on the thermal, mechanical and structural properties of a wide range of MAX
structures. The project's major scientific goal is to elucidate the microscopic
mechanisms responsible for the ductile-to-brittle transition in these materials
under the hypothesis that the anharmonic nature of the motion of the M and A
layers in the structures drives the onset of mechanical instability.
Conventional electronic structure calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics
will be used to investigate the ground state and anharmonic properties of MAX
phases while spark plasma sintering will be used for the high-throughput
synthesis of compositional variants of MAX compounds pre-screened by
computations. The project addresses fundamental questions related to the
compositional stability of MAX phases, the effect of composition and structure
on their finite-temperature mechanical properties as well as the microscopic
basis for the brittle-to-ductile transition. Understanding of the influence of
chemistry on thermo-mechanical stability of these materials will enable their
faster deployment in important technologies.