* 1410387
* RUI: Development of Multifunctional Fluorine MRI Contrast Agents Based on Porous Silica Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jeremy Steinbacher, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 136,500.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to Canisius College is to develop novel
fluorine-containing MRI contrast agents based on the use of porous silica
nanoparticles. The toxicity of many drugs limits the amount of drug that can be
administered, especially for many chemotherapies used to treat cancer. Drug-
delivery agents are materials that encapsulate drugs and protect healthy tissue
from these potentially negative side-effects. Most drug-delivery agents include
modifications that allow the drug-delivery agent, and therefore the drug, to
accumulate preferentially at only the diseased tissue, allowing an even greater
local dose at the target. State-of-the-art drug-delivery agents also contain
imaging agents, such as a dye or contrast agent, that allows for the
simultaneous pinpointing of diseased tissue and delivery to it. One imaging
agent that has seen minimal use in combined drug-delivery applications is
fluorine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), due to limitations in the delivery
vehicle. This project aims to create a new class of multifunctional fluorine MRI
contrast agents based on a well known drug-delivery system, porous silica
nanoparticles. These materials are like microscopic sponges (made out of the
same material as sand) that can be modified with the fluorine agent while
simultaneously being loaded with a drug, creating a combined drug-delivery and
imaging agent. This research will predominantly be carried out by undergraduate
researchers at Canisius College, providing an important training opportunity for
young chemists. In addition, this research will also enable collaborations with
the nearby Roswell Park Cancer Institute and SUNY University at Buffalo.
Finally, this project will impact the broader Buffalo community because of the
creation and integration of an activity involving nanoscience with the Summer
Science Camp at Canisius College, enhancing STEM education in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Targeted
drug-delivery using multifunctional particles, combining choice of therapeutic
payload, molecular targeting, biocompatibility, and an imaging agent, has become
a major research focus as a means to overcome the limitations of low therapeutic
efficacy and toxicity caused by systemic administration of chemotherapeutic
drugs for treating cancer. There is currently no drug-delivery agent
incorporating a fluorine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent that
provides all of these characteristics. The objective of this project is to
synthesize fluorine MRI contrast agents based on silica nanoparticles and to
identify the factors that maximize the fluorine MR signal using this platform.
The PI hypothesizes that fluorine atoms immobilized to porous silica particles
using linkers that maximize hydration either through charged groups or short
hydrophilic polymers will have sufficient molecular flexibility in aqueous
systems to be observable by MRI. If successful, these materials will, for the
first time, combine the advantages of porous silica nanoparticles with those of
fluorine MRI. This project will support undergraduate researchers who will
prepare the materials via organic and inorganic synthesis, providing an
important training opportunity for young chemists. These students will also use
modern equipment to fully characterize the materials, including electron
microscopy and fluorine MR imaging at extramural locations, further enhancing
the educational impact. Finally, this project will impact the broader Buffalo
community because of the creation and integration of an activity involving
nanoscience (colloidal gold nanoparticles) with the Summer Science Camp at
Canisius College.