* 1410596
* Nanocrystal Surface and Interfacial Free Energies on Vicinal Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the
fundamental challenge in the study of nanostructured materials: how to determine
their interfacial structure and their thermodynamic properties. A combined
synthesis, characterization and modeling effort is proposed to address this
challenge. Surface and interfacial properties will be measured and computed for
supported nanoparticles and correlated with structure. Results are expected to
have a direct impact on materials that are critical to substantial parts of
technology, major components of the chemical industry, and exciting new
developments in medical diagnostics. The research will be integrated with
outreach efforts, including high school visits and undergraduate education.
Results from this research project will be incorporated in the web-based
educational materials for teaching students about structure and diffraction,
infrastructure for which is already in place (see http://emaps.mrl.uiuc.edu/ or
google webemaps). This particular website is now listed as one of the best web
resources for learning electron diffraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined experimental and theoretical study is
proposed for the determination of surface and interface energies and correlation
with atomic structure. Epitaxial Au nanocrystals supported on oxides will be
synthesized using techniques developed in the PI's group. Aberration corrected
scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) will be used to characterize the equilibrium shapes of Au
nanocrystals and as well as their interfacial structure. The structural data
will be used to compute interface and step energies from first principles, which
will be compared with experimental measurements based on the equilibrium shapes
of supported nanocrystals. The experimental part takes the advantage of recent
developments in electron microscopy, which promise imaging of oxygen atoms at
the interface as well as 3D imaging of interfacial structure by depth
sectioning. For theory, an energy density method will be used to compute energy
distribution at surfaces and interfaces. The program builds upon the progress
that has been made on Au nanocrystals supported on flat rutile (110) surfaces,
and extends the study to vicinal surfaces to enable a measurement of step
energies.