* 1410845
* Catalysis of Microstructure Evolution in Block Copolymer Blend Materials Through Dynamic Modulation of Filler/Matrix Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Michael Bockstaller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are materials that
are capable of self-organizing into a hierarchy of functional nanostructures
that are of technological relevance in applications ranging from polymer
membranes for next-generation lithium ion batteries to high-performance polymer
photovoltaics. The goal of this project is to develop processes to control the
formation of defects in these nanostructures, a key requirement for the future
technological exploitation of block copolymer based materials. The ultimate goal
is to establish procedures that will allow the efficient and economically viable
fabrication of block copolymer materials with precisely controlled nanostructure
and properties. The program will enhance the teaching of two polymer classes and
provide training for one graduate and several undergraduate researchers in the
critical area of polymer and nanoscale materials. Ongoing collaborations with
educators at Florida A&amp;M University as well as Carnegie Mellon will be
leveraged to support the participation of minority students and to engage high
school students in materials engineering. Finally, a novel educational interface
will be developed for 'hands-on' exploration of materials physics concepts as a
means to engage and attract middle and high school students to the study of
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research program is to
understand the implications of filler-matrix interactions on the microstructure
evolution in bulk block copolymers and to test the hypothesis that the dynamic
modulation of filler-matrix interactions provides a means to increase the rate
of grain coarsening. In a first part the project will be focused on the
synthesis of a range of homopolymer and polymer-grafted nanoparticle model
systems that will facilitate the elucidation of the effect of filler-matrix
interactions on the microstructure evolution process in block copolymer blend
materials. In a second part, the project will establish the coarsening kinetics
and evolution of grain boundary structures in block copolymer/homopolymer blend
systems in which the homopolymer favorably interacts with the host copolymer
domain. A parallel series of corresponding block copolymer/nanoparticle blend
systems will be pursued to identify the role of filler-matrix interaction on the
segregation of fillers within boundary regions. In a third part, the program
will explore the effect of temperature-cycling to dynamically (and reversibly)
'switch' the interaction between filler and copolymer host domain from
'athermal' to 'miscible'. The objective is to test whether the dynamic
modulation of filler-matrix interactions provides a means to energetically
destabilize grain boundary defects and hence raise the driving pressure for
grain growth. The research plan will be enhanced by collaboration with expert
groups in the areas of polymer synthesis and simulation who will provide access
to model material systems and support the interpretation of data.