* 1410290
* Bond Tension, Surface Structure and Adsorption on Bottle-Brush Tethered Polymer Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2018
* USD 271,749.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at a fundamental understanding of
surfaces coated with bottle-brush polymers to add new function to the surface,
for example bottle-brush polymers on the cartilage surface covering bone adds
lubrication. Bottle-brush polymers have found important applications in coatings
and surface treatments, especially for coatings that are resistant to particular
proteins or selective to specific proteins, such as for applications requiring
selectivity toward certain proteins in biomedical applications and for the
filtering or remediation of water by removing such impurities. Polymers are made
of molecules that are strung together to form long chain molecules. Bottle-brush
molecules feature side chains grafted to a linear backbone at such density that
there is a high degree of repulsion between side chains. This repulsion results
in tension along the side chain which is transmitted to the backbone which may
be harnessed to break bonds within the molecule to create self-modifying
behavior. Experimental evaluation of the properties of such structures can be
prohibitive in cost and time and the interactions that make such molecules
interesting often occur at the molecular level, barely in range of experimental
investigation. Computer simulation enables investigations of bottle-brush
molecules at different length and time scales to evaluate the properties of
given classes of polymers for a specified application. The PI will use computer
simulation to advance understanding of the properties of bottle-brush tethered
layers and their relationship to the architecture of bottle-brush
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will fundamentally advance the theory
of physical properties of bottle-brush polymers and specifically bottle-brush
polymers tethered to surfaces to add new functionality. It will also provide a
framework for the development of future theory regarding the physical properties
of novel polymer architectures and the effects of architecture in the surface
properties of polymer-based coatings, surfaces and surface treatments based on
alternative polymer structures. It will aid in the design of new polymer-based
materials, systems, and devices based on alternative polymer architectures. As
such, this research contributes to the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative.
The knowledge gained from the research contributes to the discovery and
understanding of emergent effects that result as a consequence of novel
architectures, such as tension accumulation and adsorption resistance in bottle-
brush polymers. In addition to training and mentoring of undergraduate and
graduate students using this award, the new knowledge acquired will be
incorporated in graduate level
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research aimed to advance fundamental understanding of polymer-functionalized
surfaces such as polymer bottle-brushes. The concept of self-modification
through the use of intermolecular or intramolecular tension within bottle-brush
tethered layers is a relatively new one, having been investigated experimentally
only in recent years. It has been most often applied to cases in which the
detached chains do not remain with the backbone, such as in coatings for drug-
delivery applications. In a dense surface layer, however, the detachment and
diffusion of side chains or of bottle-brush fragments within the surface layer
has not, to our knowledge, been extensively studied either by simulation or
experiment. Depending on the density of the brush layer, as well as any present
intermolecular interactions between brush components, detachment of side chains
may lead to local effects, such as reorientation into small-scale domains or may
have global effects, such as plasticization of the brush layer that directly
affects the adsorption characteristics and surface structure. Computer
simulation enables the investigation of bottle-brush polymers and related
systems, at scales ranging from the atomic to the coarse-grained or continuum,
to evaluate the properties of given classes of polymers for a specified
application. The PI will use coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulation to
characterize bottle-brush tethered layers to study the effects of variation in
side-chain grafting density, relative backbone/side-chain length, and chemical
nature of brush components, for example copolymerization and noncovalent
interaction. The PI will use simulation to characterize the surface adsorption
characteristics for intact brush layers and layers which allow component
detachment (side chains, brush segments), to investigate detachment dynamics and
the effect of detached components on the structure and surface characteristics
of the brush layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will fundamentally advance
the theory of physical properties of bottle-brush polymers and specifically
bottle-brush polymers tethered to surfaces to add new functionality. It will
also provide a framework for the development of future theory regarding the
physical properties of novel polymer architectures and the effects of
architecture in the surface properties of polymer-based coatings, surfaces and
surface treatments based on alternative polymer structures. It will aid in the
design of new polymer-based materials, systems, and devices based on alternative
polymer architectures. As such, this research contributes to the goals of the
Materials Genome Initiative. The knowledge gained from the research contributes
to the discovery and understanding of emergent effects that result as a
consequence of novel architectures, such as tension accumulation and adsorption
resistance in bottle-brush polymers. In addition to training and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students using this award, the new knowledge acquired
will be incorporated in graduate level courses.