* 1410480
* Nanoscale Imaging of Topological Superconductivity in Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Hoffman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,835.00

Non technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In addition to their well-known negative
electric charge, electrons carry a second property called "spin", akin to an
axis of rotation which may point in any direction. An ideal topological
insulator (TI) is a material whose interior is electrically insulating, but
whose surface is a special metal where electron spins are prevented from
backscattering, removing the primary source of unwanted heating in today's
microelectronics. These surface properties make TIs promising candidates to
enable two transformative future technologies: "spintronics," a very low power
replacement for conventional electronics, and "quantum computing," a completely
new method for rapidly solving computationally intensive problems. However, the
first generation of topological materials, discovered over the last 5 years, has
suffered from unwanted "leakage" of electrons through their interiors, which
undermines their promising surface properties. This award supports two parallel
sets of experiments aimed at discovering perfect topological insulators and at
engineering the interfaces between topological and other materials which are
predicted to enable quantum computing applications. The experiments combine two
advanced atomic-scale material synthesis and characterization techniques:
molecular beam epitaxy and scanning tunneling microscopy. A fundamental
advancement of the understanding and utility of topological insulators towards
spintronics and quantum computing would be expected from this project. This
award also supports the education and training of one postdoctoral fellow and
one graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ideal topological insulator (TI) is a material
with an insulating bulk, but a topologically protected conducting surface state
on which spin-polarized electrons are prevented from backscattering. These
properties make TIs promising candidates to enable two transformative future
technologies: "spintronics," which may circumvent the severe power dissipation
problems now limiting conventional electronics, and "topological quantum
computing," which provides an alternative to the short decoherence times in the
best present-day qubits. However, the highly-studied first-generation Bi2X3
topological "insulators" suffer from unwanted bulk conduction due to apparently
unavoidable self-doping. This award supports two parallel experimental
approaches to circumvent these challenges. One is to use scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) to search for topological surface states on true bulk
insulators, such as topological Kondo insulators. The parallel approach is to
engineer topological semimetal antimony-superconductor heterostructures using a
combined molecular beam epitaxy and STM system, with guidance from density
functional theory calculations. The significance of this approach lies in the
first achievement and study of topological p-wave superconductivity, which would
have high impact on the field of unconventional superconductors more broadly and
also provide a playground for the eventual search for the Majorana fermion at
the heart of topological quantum computing applications. The award also supports
the education and training of one postdoctoral fellow and one graduate student
in advanced material synthesis and characterization techniques.