* 1410047
* Collaborative Research:  A Molecular-to-Continuum, Data-Driven Strategy for Mucus Transport Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Paula Vasquez, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

The project develops predictive mathematical theory and computational tools for
both the flow of lung airway liquids and the diffusion of inhaled particles
(pathogens, particulates, drug carrier particles) that are deposited in human
airways. The predictive mathematical modeling and computational tools are
developed on the basis of experimental data. The experimental data on particle
diffusion in mucus and the physical properties that govern mucus flow transport
are collected on human bronchial epithelial mucus from lung cultures and
clinical patients. This experimental-theoretical-computational strategy has the
promise for direct applications in clinical treatment of humans with diverse
lung diseases and disorders, both for assessment of disease and for design of
physical therapy and drug treatment strategies. Mathematically, these models and
simulation tools promise to provide insight into mean mucus flow properties from
physiological forcing (cilia and air drag from breathing and cough) and also to
resolve microstructural changes in the mucus molecular network. These tools can
offer insight into the biophysical differences in mucus during disease and
disease progression, which are keys to a predictive design of physical and drug
therapies. When integrated with clinical knowledge, this modeling will provide
the capability to infer flow and diffusive transport properties of mucus samples
and healthy and disease conditions, and the capability to test therapies to
reinstate mucus clearance on an individualized patient
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a data-driven strategy for the
modeling of lung mucus transport, linking stochastic molecular kinetic
processes, evolution equations for microstructure-based stresses, and momentum
equations for flow. The experimental data consists of stochastic (entropic
fluctuations) and deterministic (controlled forcing) probes of mucus
microstructure, together with high-resolution microscopy of mucus transport in
cell cultures derived from human lung tissue. These rich data sets provide
unprecedented probes of the broad mucus relaxation spectrum arising from single
mucin molecules, their entanglement network in mucus gels, transient mucin
crosslinking, and chain scission kinetics. Cell cultures afford insights into
cilia-driven flow transport of mucus, and provide a laboratory setting to
explore molecular-to-macroscopic consequences of imposed physical stresses and
chemical dosing. To translate this remarkable data into a predictive
understanding of mucus transport, a modeling platform is studied that resolves
molecular-to-continuum processes of mucus, both near and far from equilibrium.
Our strategy begins with stochastic time series of passive microbead probes in
mucus gels of various concentrations, to solve the inverse and direct problems
for linear (near equilibrium) viscoelastic characterization. Next, active
microbead data for the same set of concentrations is used over a range of
controlled magnetic forces to determine nonlinear thresholds and the signatures
of non-equilibrium behavior at the microscale. These data directly feed into the
main objective of this project, which is the formulation of a new microscopic-
macroscopic constitutive law for mucus. This formulation is proposed to
interpret the linear and nonlinear data, and to integrate molecular-to-continuum
processes into a new mucus transport model. A numerical strategy is under study
for direct numerical simulations and comparison with data from each type of
experiment.