* 1410335
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Experimentally verified nano-oxidation simulations of Cu surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a great deal of knowledge
about the oxidation of metal surfaces on macroscopic scales, but very little is
known about how the process starts at the smallest molecular scales.
Understanding the oxidation phenomena that occur at such nanometer (one
billionth the size of a meter) length scales is of both scientific and
technological importance, since more and more materials are being engineered at
nanometer scales for practical applications. The stability of such nanoscale
materials cannot necessarily be inferred directly from the knowledge about their
bulk counterparts, and new theories are needed to predict material properties at
such small scales. This collaborative project brings together a theoretical
chemist who will model the individual reaction mechanisms of the oxidation of a
copper surface, a theoretical physicist who will combine these mechanisms in a
statistical model of the oxide growth kinetics, and finally an experimental
microscopist who can watch the growth of nanometer scale oxide islands with an
electron microscope. This research team will work together to understand the
initial oxidation of a copper surface, from the atomic scale on and up. New
simulation methodologies will be developed as part of this effort. The software
that will be developed and used to model the oxidation will be released freely
to other researchers and to the public. The techniques will also be incorporated
into graduate-level courses and as part of high-school outreach programs both in
Austin, TX and Pittsburgh, PA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a collaborative research and
education effort between the University of Pittsburgh and the University of
Texas at Austin for developing materials computational tools that can be used to
model nano-oxidation, and to correlate computational predictions with
experimental observations. The PIs will integrate versatile codes for modeling
dynamics at surfaces and address three key challenges in the proposed research,
which are (i) to use accelerated dynamics methods and off-lattice adaptive
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) with empirical potentials and density functional
theory to extract the reaction mechanisms of surface oxidation, (ii) to continue
the development of the Thin Film Oxidation KMC approach, particularly taking it
from 2 to 3 dimensions, and (iii) to develop a method for coarse graining the
representations of reaction mechanisms found with adaptive KMC to provide the
event tables for the three-dimensional Thin Film Oxidation code. These studies
will provide realistic input parameters for the Thin Film Oxidation simulations,
allow for critical insights to be made into the nucleation behavior,
morphological evolution of oxide islands during nano-oxidation and coalescence,
and provide the surface and interface energies required to understand island
stability. This collaboration builds on existing infrastructure, including the
experimental electron microscopy effort in Pittsburgh and the theoretical and
software efforts in Austin and Pittsburgh. This research team will work together
to understand the initial oxidation of copper surface, from the atomic scale on
and up. The software that will be used to model the oxidation will be released
freely to other researchers and to the public. The techniques will also be
incorporated into graduate-level courses and as part of high-school outreach
programs both in Austin and Pittsburgh.