* 1410428
* Building New Spintronic Materials with Layered Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* David Mandrus, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 410,839.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter
Physics Program of the Division of Materials Research supports the University of
Tennessee at Knoxville with a project focused on the design, discovery, and
characterization of new materials for spintronics. Spintronics is the field that
makes use of the electric charge and the spin (magnetic moment of the
electron)of the electron to create new energy efficient device functionalities.
Spintronics is a fast-developing field and it is expected to be further
transformed by exploiting the properties of a class of material known as
chalcogenides. Atomically thin layers of chalcogenides are true semiconductors
and can lead to next generation of high performance electronic devices such as
field-effect and photo- transistors. The fusion of spintronics with two
dimensional chalcogenide semiconductors is expected to lead to revolutionary
advances in nanoelectronics. As synthesis and crystal growth are excellent tools
to reach undergraduate students, the research program is designed to actively
involve undergraduates and kindle their interest in science. The hands-on
experience of the students is complemented by a new course entitled
"Nanomagnetism and Spintronics" to be taught at the advanced undergraduate
level. In addition, the program supports the P.I.'s outreach activities,
allowing the development of new demonstrations for middle school students based
on superconductivity and magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to design,
discover, and characterize new spintronic materials based on the remarkable
electronic and magnetic properties of layered chalcogenides. The project is
focused on two classes of spintronic materials. One class involves the formation
of a chiral soliton lattice (CSL) in layered, metallic helical magnets. The CSL
is a lattice of solitons (domain wall boundaries) separated by ferromagnetic
regions. The CSL periodicity is tunable using modest applied fields and this
effect is predicted to lead to unique spintronic functionalities, such as spin
current induction, soliton transport, and current-driven collective transport.
The second class of materials involves stoichiometric quasi-2D magnetic
semiconductors with high mobility. These materials order magnetically and
potentially can be used in single-layer devices that may be useful as spin
injectors, sensors, or transducers. One of the goals of this project is to
elucidate design principles for CSL materials and quasi-2D magnetic
semiconductors. Single crystals of targeted materials are grown using both flux
and vapor transport techniques. The anisotropic properties of the materials are
characterized using SQUID magnetometry and electrical transport. Small angle
neutron diffraction is performed to characterize the helical order of the CSL
materials and probe their response to magnetic fields. Single-layer field-effect
devices made from semiconducting 2D ferromagnets are fabricated and their
electrical properties characterized. As synthesis and crystal growth are
excellent tools to reach undergraduate students, the research program is
designed to actively involve undergraduates and kindle their interest in
science. The hands-on experience of the students is complemented by a new course
entitled "Nanomagnetism and Spintronics" to be taught at the advanced
undergraduate level. In addition, the program supports the P.I.'s outreach
activities, allowing the development of new demonstrations for middle school
students based on superconductivity and magnetism.