* 1410232
* Bioinspired Glycomaterials from Lipid and Polymer Tehalose Conjugates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Dennis Bong, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Ohio State University is focused on a fundamental surface
science question, yet has the potential to produce new bioinspired materials for
therapeutic delivery, cryogenic preservation of tissues and organs and
stabilization of sensitive bioactive molecules. The discovery of an efficient
tissue and organ cryoprotectant would serve a major medical need, allowing
longer term storage of organs for transplant. Furthermore, while considerable
biomedical research to develop new therapeutics, many of these reagents
(biologics, liposomes) must be administered intravenously and can't be stored as
a powder or at room temperature. This greatly limits their application in
developing countries where modern cold storage facilities are not widely
available or reliable. The production of a trehalose biomaterial that could
stabilize sensitive pharmaceuticals to a wide range of environmental conditions
(heat, low hydration, freeze-dried state) would be of tremendous benefit to
communities in developing countries. This expansion of the reach of modern
therapeutics could have a deep and lasting impact on many societies outside the
first world.

Technical: A long term goal of the proposed research program is the elucidation
of assembly and biophysical properties of trehalose-derived amphiphiles. The
objective of this application is to ascertain the structural determinants of
trehalose anhydrobiotic protection. Assemblies will be synthesized and
characterized that use trehalose as the hydrophilic component of lipid and
polymer amphiphilic systems. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that
synthetic assemblies that surface display trehalose will exhibit remarkable
stability under anhydrobiotic conditions. The rationale for this hypothesis is
based on the finding that synthetic trehalose-functionalized lipids and lipid-
polymers can protect lipid bilayers against air-drying and freeze-drying in the
context of supported lipid bilayers (SLBs) and vesicular bilayers. These new
trehalose materials are predicted to exhibit function beyond simple amphiphilic
assembly, conferring the anhydrobiotic and cryogenic protective properties of
trehalose to the synthetic material. In the course of this project, students at
the undergraduate and graduate levels will be trained in chemical synthesis and
materials characterization, and preparing them to enter the workforce in
chemical and engineering sciences with experience working with novel materials.