* 1410854
* Macromolecular crowding in vitro and in cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2020
* Matthew Redinbo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,286,390.00

Cells contain a complex and crowded collection of macromolecules whose
concentration can exceed 300 g/L. Thus, the most relevant environment for
studying a biological macromolecule is a crowded one. Most of what is known
about biological macromolecules, however, comes from solutions where the
concentration of macromolecules is less than 10 g/L. Furthermore, many theories
predict that crowding will have large affects on the properties of biological
macromolecules. This project will investigate how crowding affects the physical
properties of proteins. The goal of moving quantitative biophysics from simple
solutions to crowded environments, including the inside of living cells, is a
major challenge with important outcomes. The work will facilitate the training
of undergraduate and graduate students in the practice of cutting-edge research.
In addition, the knowledge gained will both add to the fundamental understanding
of biology and inform efforts to produce designer enzymes and stabilize protein-
based reagents. These efforts are key to building the US
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of the proposed
research is to understand the molecular biophysics of proteins in living cells
and under crowded conditions in vitro. The principal investigator and his
laboratory have developed nuclear magnetic resonance-based tools to make these
measurements. The protein properties to be assessed include equilibrium
thermodynamic stability and solvation. This work has already resulted in the
discovery that chemical interactions between macromolecules play a much larger
role in crowding than previously thought. The principal investigator and his
student colleagues will now identify the source of these chemical interactions,
examine the impact of the intracellular environment on disordered proteins and
enhance the biological and biotechnological relevance of their efforts by
studying the multidomain protein enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase.