* 1410355
* Protein Filament Formation in Activating and Modulating Enzymatic DNA Cleavage Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Nancy Horton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 762,332.00

In this research project, the PI will investigate complex regulatory mechanisms
employed by unique biological systems. These investigations will build a
foundation for understanding such mechanisms that are only just becoming widely
appreciated, and for prediction and manipulation of their behavior for
biotechnological applications. The research and associated training activities
in this project will benefit both the academic research community and as well as
the biotechnology industry. The program will train junior scientists to develop
and implement biophysical and biochemical based conceptual approaches to
understand complex enzyme regulatory mechanisms, to become leaders in this
multidisciplinary field. As a result of this project, new experimental
measurements will be made available to be incorporated into the biological
physics curriculum to allow direct "hands-on" analyses by junior scientists in
training. The PI will continue to expand upon her outreach initiatives in an
effort to encourage and train scientists from a diverse range of academic and
social backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phage-host systems are under intense
evolutionary pressure, consequently they have developed remarkably ingenious
mechanisms of attack and defense. This project investigates one such remarkable
system: that found in Streptomyces griseus. Based on its biochemical activities,
SgrAI, a nuclease from S. griseus, is postulated to be activated by binding to
invading phage DNA, simultaneously expanding its DNA sequence cleavage
specificity and forming polymers that may act to protect the host DNA from its
resulting off-target cleavage activity. Enzyme mechanisms involving polymer or
filament formation are exceedingly rare, although recent screens suggest this
may be more common than previously thought. Being a potentially new paradigm for
enzyme regulation, several fundamental questions arise that will be investigated
in this research project, including the structure, kinetics, and biological role
of the polymer. Biochemical data suggests that the polymer formed from activated
SgrAI is a run-on oligomer, which has now been confirmed by the 8.6 Ã… cryo-
electron microscopy structure. Although this structure shows how the SgrAI
dimers bound to activating DNA associate in a repeating helical arrangement,
fundamental questions such as how DNA cleavage is activated, how DNA sequence
specificity is altered, and whether or not domain swapping (found in a crystal
structure of two DNA bound SgrAI dimers) is present require higher resolution
and therefore remain to be answered. Also important to understanding the
function of the run-on oligomer is determining how formation of such an
assembly, where the bound DNA appears critical for oligomer stability,
accelerates rather than impedes multiple DNA cleavages. Finally, the biological
role for run-on oligomer formation has been hypothesized to function in
protecting the host DNA from dangerous off-target cleavages made possible via
activation of SgrAI, by sequestering SgrAI on the invading phage DNA. This
project will investigate the structure of the run-on oligomer using biochemical
and x-ray crystallographic methods, measure kinetic steps involving polymer
formation and dissociation in the reaction pathway using pre-steady state
fluorescence methods, and test the postulated biological role of the polymer
using in vitro and in vivo assays including phage infection challenges.