* 1410678
* Mechanism and Design of Elastomeric Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Richard Wittebort, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 489,861.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elastin is nature's most abundant
elastomer. It is the durable, self-assembling protein that is responsible for
the elasticity of skin, veins, arteries and lungs. It has stimulated the design
of proteins that perform a variety of functions that include protein
purification, targeted drug delivery, matrices for tissue engineering and
hydrogels with strain-dependent conductivities. The goal of this project is to
understand the principles that account for elastin's mechanical properties and
to use this knowledge to design new elastomeric materials with properties that
can be optimized for a particular use. To achieve this, this project spans three
academic disciplines (chemistry, physics and mechanical engineering) and uses a
range of contemporary methodologies including spectroscopy, structural biology
and materials characterization. This provides a multidisciplinary training
environment for three graduate and four high school students at the University
of Louisville and the City College of New York. Both institutions draw on
students from urban locations with significant percentages of minority
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to understand the
principles that account for elastin's essential property, recoil, and to design
new elastomers. We will apply a combination of NMR and thermo-mechanics to
natural elastin and to expressed polyproteins that mimic elastin's modular
structure, (HX)n, where H and X are hydrophobic and cross-link modules. To
simplify NMR and mutational studies, expressed proteins have modules with repeat
sequences based on naturally occurring quasi-repeats. To study stretch induced
solvent ordering at the protein surface, we use MQ NMR, and to study stretch
induced ordering of the protein, we measure NMR relaxation times and residual
shielding anisotropies at labeled sites in the protein backbone. To characterize
macroscopic properties, the Young's modulus and the free energy or entropy of
stretch will be measured thermo-mechanically and these are related to the NMR
studies with statistical mechanical modeling to guide the design of new
elastomers with altered sequences. Three graduate and four high school students
will be trained and introduced to contemporary techniques that span physics,
chemistry and engineering.