* 1410736
* RUI: CDS&E: Organic Molecular Crystal Properties Database for the Discovery of Unique Organic Conductors, Small Band-gap Semiconductors, and Chemical Trends
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Bohdan Schatschneider, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2016
* USD 320,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry contribute funds to this
award. It supports theoretical research and education concerning the electronic
and structural properties of organic molecular crystals. In this project, high-
throughput computational methods will be utilized to establish a database for
such crystals comprised of experimental and computational results. The ultimate
aim of the database is to establish chemical trends within various groups, and
to uncover useful conducting and semi-conducting organic molecular crystals that
are lighter, more flexible, and cheaper than their inorganic counterparts.

To enable the formation of the database, the PI and his group will develop
practical methods for data selection and generation, storage and retrieval, and
data analysis. Parameterization will begin on a small subset of organic
molecular crystals and continue on increasingly diverse groups of materials.
This stepwise methodology will allow for incremental improvements of the
parameter set for different structure types. Next, the structural and electronic
properties will be examined within the database to establish chemical trends and
to predict new materials with useful transport properties. Preliminary high-
throughput tests show structural correlation of over 600 structures within 5% of
experiment, as well as optical, energetic, and phase transition properties. In
total, this award takes aim at calculating over 6,000 organic molecular crystal
structures and band gaps, with a long term outlook of calculating every
structure within the Cambridge Structural Database.

Organic molecular crystals have shown great promise as active materials in
organic-based electronic devices such as transistors, light emitting diodes, and
solar cells. The fundamental understanding established in this research project
will help enable the rapid fabrication and engineering of new electronic devices
such as lightweight and cheap flexible displays, electronic labels and solid-
state lighting. The establishment of the database is expected to help decrease
the bench-to-industry time of soft electronic devices by taking the guesswork
out of the material's viabilities for use in such devices. In terms of
educational impact, several undergraduate students from the poorest county in
the Pennsylvania commonwealth and one postdoc will be employed. This will allow
them to achieve an appreciation for fundamental research and product development
by working directly with academic and industry specialists.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry contribute funds to this
award. It supports theoretical research and education concerning the electronic
and structural properties of organic molecular crystals. In this project, high-
throughput computational methods will be utilized to establish a database for
such crystals comprised of experimental and computational results. The ultimate
aim of the database is to establish chemical trends within various groups, and
to uncover useful conducting and semi-conducting organic molecular crystals that
are lighter, more flexible, and cheaper than their inorganic counterparts.

Consistent, accurate prediction of molecular crystalline properties has been a
coveted goal of the computational physics and chemistry communities for decades.
With recent developments of several dispersion correction schemes within the
density functional theory framework, reliable calculations of weakly interacting
systems are quickly becoming a reality. Presently, prediction of morphology,
band structure, band gap, surface absorption and reactivity, thermodynamic
quantities, and solubility properties of molecular crystals remains cutting
edge, but is rapidly becoming common place. With the advancements in methodology
and hardware comes the next evolutionary step, the development of a high-
throughput density-functional-theory derived molecular crystal properties
database for the discovery of useful new materials and chemical trends. The PI
and his group plan to bring about a paradigm shift in soft-solid materials
research and development by establishing a freely accessible web-based organic
molecular crystal properties database. The particular objectives will be to:

1) Establish data selection protocols for organic molecular crystal groups of
interest, 2) Implement a practical data generation method: This involves the
determination of chemical accuracy within a given density functional theory
method, 3) Develop an interface for data storage and retrieval, 4) Identify
properties trends within crystal groups and establish new organic conducting and
small band gap semi-conducting materials through data analysis.

The development of an organic molecular crystal properties database will have a
short-term goal of enabling rapid identification of chemical trends and
prediction of new materials with useful transport properties, with an extended
goal of freely providing the organized physical- and meta-data to other
researchers in pharmaceutical, supramolecular, crystallographic, and electronics
fields; in line with the Research Data Alliance initiatives.

Organic molecular crystals have shown great promise as active materials in
organic-based electronic devices such as transistors, light emitting diodes, and
solar cells. The fundamental understanding established in this research project
will help enable the rapid fabrication and engineering of new electronic devices
such as lightweight and cheap flexible displays, electronic labels and solid-
state lighting. The establishment of the database is expected to help decrease
the bench-to-industry time of soft electronic devices by taking the guesswork
out of the material's viabilities for use in such devices. In terms of
educational impact, several undergraduate students from the poorest county in
the Pennsylvania commonwealth and one postdoc will be employed. This will allow
them to achieve an appreciation for fundamental research and product development
by working directly with academic and industry specialists.