* 1410175
* SusChEM: Strained Core/Shell Nanoparticles with Non-precious Metal Core and Precious Metal Shell
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Chao Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

This project will develop a novel type of nanoparticle composed of an abundant
non-precious metal core and a precious metal shell. Novel approaches will be
will be developed to prepare these nano- particles, and a combination of state
of the art methods will be used to characterize them. The project will also
contribute fundamental understanding of the properties of these structures and
contribute to predicting the performance of these particles for catalysis
applications. The ultimate goal of this research is to decrease the use of
critical precious metals materials by novel design and fabrication of materials
at the nanoscale. Considering the growing need for precious metal catalysts and
their high cost and limited availability, this project will have great
significance for the economy and for environmental sustainability. These novel
materials will significantly reduce the use of scarce precious metals for these
applications. The project also includes broad outreach to K-12 schools in the
Baltimore area. Underrepresented students will be exposed to and engaged in the
research frontiers of materials and energy research.

Technical Summary

This project will develop a novel type of core/shell nanoparticles composed of a
non-precious metal (core and a precious metal shell). A novel synthetic approach
will be developed to prepare these composite nanostructures, and a combination
of microscopic and spectroscopic methods will be used to characterize these
materials. Insights into the structure-property relationship of strained
surfaces and fundamental understanding of the impact of strain on heterogeneous
catalytic processes will be developed, and this understanding will be further
demonstrated to be capable of predicting the catalytic performance of strained
core/shell catalysts for given chemical reactions. The ultimate goal of this
research is to improve the using efficiency of rare and critical materials by
novel design and fabrication of material architecture at the nanoscale.

The various NPM/PM core/shell nanoparticles developed in this project will have
broad applications in chemical industry, manufacturing, and renewable energy
technologies. The replacement of precious metals in the core by low-cost non-
precious metals will not only substantially reduce the cost of precious metal
catalysts, but also enhance the catalytic performance by finely tuning the
surface properties through the strain effect. Considering the growing need for
precious metal catalysts and their high cost and limited availability, the
development of NPM/PM core/shell catalysts in this project will have great
significance for the economy and for environmental sustainability. This research
will also advance our fundamental understanding of strained nanostructures and
in particular, the strain effect in heterogeneous catalysis. The combination of
experimental and theoretical studies represents a persuasive approach towards
rational design and synthesis of advanced functional nanomaterials. This project
will also serve as a platform for graduate, undergraduate and high-school
students to develop interests, and more important, participate in cutting-edge
scientific research. High school students will be recruited to work on
nanomaterial synthesis, characterization and catalytic studies at JHU, and be
inspired to continue their studies in related areas in colleges or universities.
Undergraduates participating in this project will be introduced to the creative
and intuitive nature of scientific research, and encouraged to develop careers
in science or engineering. Through the outreach programs at JHU's Center for
Educational Outreach to K-12 schools in the Baltimore area, underrepresented
students will be exposed to and engaged in the research frontiers of materials
and energy research.