* 1410971
* Physical Aspects of Superorganism Physiology: Construction, Circulation, and Homeostasis in Fire Ant Colonies
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 670,555.00

Major transitions in the history of life occurred when individual biological
entities came together to form interdependent groups with emergent properties
that differed from the individuals. The most recent of these transitions
occurred when solitary organisms joined together to form cooperative societies.
This transition to sociality has been particularly remarkable because many
distinct individuals are able to behave as a single organism through the
coordinated actions of society members. The best examples of such
"superorganisms" are colonies of social insects. Social insect super-organisms
breathe, feed, grow, breed and modify their environments. Although each life
system is important on its own, the balance at the colony level arises from
coordinated action of all systems. The purpose of this research program is to
discover physical principles that play important roles in super-organism
physiology. Super-organism regulatory principles will be of use in systems where
information and physical networks coexist, such as in pedestrian and vehicle
traffic, urban and disaster landscapes, and neural and artificial networks. The
proposed studies could also help explain why the biological transition to
sociality has been so successful.

The proposed studies will probe physical aspects of super-organism physiology
from a "top-down" approach to discover emergent behavioral, biomechanical, and
social features. This will be complemented by a "bottom-up" approach that will
discover how aspects of super-organism physiology (exoskeleton, organization of
circulatory system, healing mechanisms) depend on soil properties, ant
morphology, grain manipulation biomechanics, and genetics. This research will be
conducted using the red imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, as a model super-
organism system. Fire ants possess highly developed social systems and work
together to complete complex tasks. The goal of this research is to elucidate
principles governing the functioning of the super-organism and the processes
responsible for super-organism stability and success. Specifically, this program
will study super-organism features that are analogous to those in single
organisms including: (1) Super-organism exoskeleton construction: this research
will investigate processes by which the super-organism constructs a robust
exoskeleton, its nest, from cohesive granular media. Such processes will include
biomechanics of excavation in different media, social interactions upon nest
formation (like communication, recruitment, workload distribution) and
intelligent construction methods (e.g. can ants probe grain level stresses). (2)
Super-organism circulation: This research will deduce traffic optimization
strategies in confined spaces. Such strategies may include separation of work
tasks in space and time, localization of movement in nest space, organization of
information hubs, and modification of the carrier's behavior in response to
heavy traffic. (3) Super-organism nervous system: This research will discover
how information is transmitted through a patterned environment through tactile
interactions of individuals. The approaches used will lead to an understanding
of how the superorganism nervous and circulatory systems co-exist. (4) Super-
organism homeostasis of physical properties of the nest: This research will
determine the response of the super-organism to perturbations arising from
flooding, mechanical insults to nest networks, invasion of competitive species,
and genetic variation derived from hybridization of fire ant species. The
research team will leverage the representation of female group members to
attract female students to study of the interface between biology and physics,
which should attract students who might be discouraged by the barriers in more
established fields. The research team will also explore strategies of public
involvement through hands-on and DIY initiatives, collaboration with public
education clubs and integration of science with the entertainment industry.