* 1410061
* Total Synthesis Toolkit for Constructing Ternary Hybrid Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Raymond E. Schaak of the Pennsylvania State
University will study the formation of nanoparticles (particles on the scale of
a few billionths of a meter) that contain three distinct material components in
contact. Such nanoparticles offer important and unique properties for
applications in energy, optics, medicine, and catalysis. However, these
nanoparticles can be difficult to make in a way that is both predictable and
controllable. This project will reveal important new insights into how three-
component nanoparticles form, as well as generate new chemical tools for making
them in a way that meets specific design criteria for their target applications.
A diverse group of students will participate in this project, and the research
results will also feed into the development of new laboratory and classroom
learning modules.

Hybrid inorganic nanoparticles that incorporate multiple distinct materials into
a single particle offer multi-functionality and synergistic properties that
underpin emerging applications in solar energy conversion, nanophotonics,
biomedicine, and catalysis. Most examples of hybrid nanoparticles involve two-
component systems, or heterodimers. Heterotrimers, which are three-component
hybrid nanoparticles, offer greater complexity and functional diversity, as well
as unique materials characteristics that are required by these applications.
However, different materials configurations within a heterotrimer system (A-B-C
vs. C-A-B) can lead to different properties, and therefore precise control over
the relative locations of each material component is required. This project will
provide significant new knowledge and understanding about the formation,
stability, and chemical reactivity of hybrid nanoparticles. These results are
anticipated to enable the predictable synthesis of nanoparticle heterotrimers
with precisely controlled configurations and spatial arrangements. This project
will provide multi-disciplinary training for both undergraduate and graduate
students, and also serve as a platform for the new laboratory and classroom
learning modules.