* 1410646
* Role of Defects and Stacking-Fault Energy in Deformation and Fracture of Nanotwinned Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Frederic Sansoz, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 285,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coherent twin boundaries are defects
in materials, widely described as perfect interfaces theoretically and
experimentally, playing a significant role in a variety of materials. The
ability of coherent twin boundaries in strengthening, maintaining the ductility,
and retaining high electrical conductivity is well documented. The integration
of advanced computational and experimental techniques in this research will lead
to a fundamentally new understanding of plasticity and fracture in metallic
metals containing these defects because of newly-developed imaging tools and
computational models. The multidisciplinary research team will allow new
understanding and may accelerate the deployment of the next-generation
structural materials with tolerance to extreme environments such as high
radiation exposure and high temperature. The education and outreach components
of this project will also include research training and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students, organization of an international symposium,
and activities for attraction and retention of freshman and sophomore college
students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This combined computational and experimental study
aims to understand the fundamental role of newly-observed kink-like twin
boundary defects in the deformation and fracture of nanotwinned metals, with a
particular focus on face-centered cubic metals with low and intermediate
stacking-fault energies. The objectives of this project are three-fold. First,
we will study new kink-dependent plastic deformation processes in model
nanotwinned metals in Cu, Ag and Ag-Cu alloys using atomistic simulations
tightly coupled to a new nanodiffraction mapping technique inside a transmission
electron microscope, in-situ synchrotron x-ray diffraction tensile tests, and
atomic force microscopy nanoindentation experiments. Second, we will examine the
impact of temperature, stacking-fault energy, defect density, and grain boundary
structure on hardening and softening mechanisms in these metals. Third, a
multiscale approach using quasi-continuum computer simulations will be deployed
to model the effects of twin boundary defects and twin size on fracture
toughness. This project will benefit from the expertise of the PI in theoretical
and computational materials research in nanotwinned systems, and from
collaboration with scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Ames
Laboratory who will perform state-of-the-art experiments on freestanding
nanotwinned films.