* 1410940
* Epitaxy in Two Dimensions: Novel Structures and New Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gerd Duscher, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,242.00

Non-technical Description: Nanoscience and nanotechnology often involve
materials of reduced dimensionality, such as one-dimensional (1D) nanotubes and
nanowires as well as 2D sheet materials. Reduced dimensionality frequently leads
to new phenomena not observed in their 3D counterparts. This research project
aims to synthesize two different 2D materials joined together to form a plane of
single atomic-layer thickness. The constituent 2D materials in such an in-plane
heterostructure are crystalline, and the atomic order is not disturbed crossing
the sharp interfaces of the different materials. Due to these traits similar to
those of epitaxial heterostructures in 3D, the synthesis of the in-plane
heterostructures is called "epitaxy in 2D." Successful synthesis of such
structures enables the investigation of the associated new physics, which is
expected to lead to novel electronic, photonic, and magnetic devices. The new
knowledge generated during the course of the research is passed directly to
students by integrating research into teaching, not only to convey excitement of
new discoveries but also to stimulate curiosity. This project also impacts K-12
STEM education through outreach activities. In addition, the team participates
in a National Public Radio (NPR) program to educate the public on science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research project
focuses on the synthesis and characterization of two-dimensional (2D)
heterostructures. The long-term goals of the research are: 1) To establish the
growth science of 2D heterostructures; 2) To reveal the very rich and often
exotic physics of these structures; and 3) To develop novel electronic,
photonic, and magnetic device concepts based on the novel physics. Specifically,
the scope of this project includes: 1) Perfection of the zigzag boundary of the
graphene-hexagonal boron nitride (graphene-hBN) in-plane heterostructure. This
involves the elimination of antiphase disorders by growing the nonpolar graphene
onto the edges of polar hBN in a well-controlled environment to overcome the
chemical factors preventing this growth sequence. The interface is characterized
by atomic resolution, element-contrast imaging to investigate the obtainability
of a truly atomically sharp boundary. 2) Synthesis of complex in-plane
heterostructures comprising multiple graphene-hBN junctions. Besides bottom-up
growth, top-down control is incorporated when necessary. 3) Initial
investigation of the novel physics, such as tunneling between localized boundary
states and spin polarization of the boundaries, of these heterostructures.
Dichroism in electron energy loss spectroscopy is the method of choice for the
initial experimental probing of the spin polarization of the atomic-scale of the
boundary states.