* 1410343
* NMR Studies of Organic and Inorganic Frustrated Quantum Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 535,851.00

Non-technical abstract

This project, supported by the Condensed Matter Physics Program in the Division
of Materials Research, is in the area of magnetic materials. Disordered ground
states are postulated to arise in magnetic systems where the spins are arranged
in specific frustrated geometries. Long sought-after, these so-called spin
liquid phases have the potential for use in quantum computation technology and
are proposed as a route to high temperature superconductivity. However,
candidate materials for these were experimentally realized only recently.
Competing interactions, determined by geometry, are understood as an important
component for their stability, but how the real systems are dependent on the
details remains unclear. This research project aims to explore the circumstances
for stability of disordered and ordered ground states of frustrated quantum
magnets by exploiting the delicate balance of interactions linked to the
geometry. Tuning is accomplished by means of varying strain, pressure, and
magnetic field strength. The nature of the accessed phases and associated
excitations are determined by a combination of measurements, with considerable
reliance on solid state magnetic resonance techniques. The project goals are
achieved in tandem with the science education and training of graduate students
and undergraduate students in nationally important technical fields, including
high frequency and magnetic resonance techniques, as well as high pressure and
cryogenic instrumentation.

Technical abstract

This project entails the use of solid state magnetic resonance techniques to
probe the properties of frustrated quantum magnets and field-induced
inhomogeneous superconductivity. With respect to the quantum magnets, the
contrast between long-range ordered and quantum disordered systems is of
particular interest, as are the nature of the ground states, the spectrum of
excitations, and the effects of tuning by magnetic field or strain. The
materials selected for study can be classified into two groups. The first
includes two structurally similar inorganic compounds, which exhibit
antiferromagnetic (AF) and disordered ground states. The second group includes
two organic anisotropic triangular systems. The ground states of both are
continuously tunable by the application of uniaxial strain or pressure. The
focus is on the evolution of physical properties associated with the suppression
of magnetically ordered or spin-gapped phases. Signatures for phase transitions,
and the nature of excitations, will be inferred from NMR spectroscopy and
relaxation measurements. Clean and layered superconductors are ideal candidates
for field-induced superconducting phases. The system chosen for study is known
for weakly-coupled layers, and the appropriate field range is easily accessed.
Magnetic resonance is often an ideal probe for these problems, because of its
compatibility to the required extreme conditions, and because it is a local
probe sensitive to the electronic environment through the hyperfine interaction.
The research will be conducted in the laboratory of the P.I. at UCLA, and at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) for fields larger than what is
available locally.