* 1410301
* GOALI: Development of Metallic MEMS Materials for Extreme Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past several decades
micro-devices and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) have found uses as ink
jet printers, accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure sensors, and digital light
projectors and have become a multi-billion dollar industry. This study is
motivated by the fact that a broader spectrum of MEMS materials would offer a
wider range of functionality and fuel a greatly expanded assortment of MEMS
applications. Elevated temperature MEMS devices are of particular interest in:
aviation, automotive, power generation, sub-sea drilling, and chemical
processing industries in which MEMS sensing and guidance in harsh environments
would provide enhanced feedback and control. Metal MEMS alloys that offer: high
density, electrical and thermal conductivity, strength, ductility and toughness;
low cost; and fabrication routes for complex geometries would be especially
attractive for these applications. But, highly engineered metallic alloys that
can be sculpted with submicron resolution are currently not in the suite of
available MEMS materials. For this reason, an interdisciplinary team from Johns
Hopkins University (JHU) and General Electric Global Research (GEGR) has been
formed to undertaking a collaborative program to develop Metal MEMS alloys for
use as high temperature MEMS sensors and micro-switches. Extended internships at
GEGR will provide students with an invaluable perspective on systems level
materials integration. Participation in the SABES outreach program (an NSF-
sponsored partnership between JHU and Baltimore City Public Schools) also
provides the PI and his students with the chance to pay it forward by giving
Baltimore elementary school students a unique perspective on STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team from Johns Hopkins University (JHU) and General Electric
Global Research (GEGR)is undertaking a collaborative program to develop metal
MEMS alloys for high temperature MEMS sensors and micro-switches. The motivation
for this collaboration lies in the desire to expand the MEMS material set beyond
silicon to metallic alloys that can be deposited and shaped on the micro-scale
and offer an attractive balance of properties: electrical and thermal
conductivity, high density, low thermal expansion, strength, ductility, and
toughness. The intellectual challenges to be addressed include the establishment
of a science-based protocol for developing metal MEMS alloys that possess
requisite physical and mechanical properties and can be used in extreme
environments, e.g. temperatures of 300-500ºC for operational lifetimes exceeding
one year. Candidate single- and multi-phase alloys have been identified and are
being used to improve scientific understanding in five areas: (i) techniques for
processing and shaping metallic alloys at the micro-scale, (ii) alloy design for
dimensional stability, (iii) unique microstructure-mechanical property pathways
and relations in alloys deposited far-from-equilibrium, (iv) thermal and
mechanical drivers for microstructural evolution, and (v) integration of metal
MEMS alloys into commercial applications. Fundamental processing-structure-
properties studies at JHU have been designed to provide a foundation for
concurrent GEGR efforts on the development of next-generation MEMS switches and
sensors. Extended internships at GEGR are planned and will provide the visiting
graduate student with an invaluable perspective on systems level materials
integration. Moreover, participation in the SABES program (an established NSF-
sponsored partnership between JHU and Baltimore City Public Schools) provides
the PI and his students the chance to give Baltimore elementary school students
a unique perspective on STEM research.