* 1410119
* Universal Strategy for the Synthesis of Sequenced Copolymers with Molecular Weight Control
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2018
* USD 452,144.00

Technological advances in medicine, energy, and electronics often depend on the
availability of suitable materials. Polymers, which are long chains made up of
hundreds of monomer subunits, are an important class of materials employed in
many of these fields. Although the properties of biological polymers, like
proteins and DNA, are derived from sequence, few methods for preparing non-
biological polymers with controlled sequences exist. Professor Tara Meyer of the
University of Pittsburgh is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of NSF to develop a new method for preparing polymers from
sequenced monomer units. Using this method a large number of polymers with a
range of properties can be constructed by rearrangement of a limited number of
monomer subunits, e.g., ABABABAB... vs. AABBAABB... . The method employed herein
offers important advantages over the few competing strategies including
increased scale, control of chain length, and the potential for the creation of
more complex architectures. Undergraduate and graduate education is a
significant component of this project. Students are trained specifically in
polymer chemistry by participation in the research and more generally in career
skills by direct mentoring from Prof. Meyer and through participation in a
series of workshops. The workshops, although offered generally to all interested
graduate student participants, stress skills and knowledge that are recognized
as particularly helpful for students from underrepresented racial, gender, and
socioeconomic groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entropy-driven ring-opening
polymerization (ED-ROMP) of macrocycles with embedded sequences of 3-12 monomers
is employed to produce polymers with a periodic display of the encoded sequence
and controlled molecular weights. Two new variants of the fundamental ED-ROMP
protocol, Selectivity Enhanced (SEED-ROMP) and Deactivation (DED-ROMP), are
developed in order to improve molecular weight control, lower dispersities and
allow for the preparation of more complex block architectures. By studying the
kinetics, molecular weights and dispersities for each process, this research
aims to gain a better fundamental understanding of these processes and
information important for developing optimized, universal protocols for ED-,
SEED-, and DED-ROMP. These methods are applied to the preparation of two
distinct classes of sequenced copolymers: biodegradable poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)s and semi-conducting conjugated arylene vinylenes. Properties related to
the targeted application of each system, i.e, bioengineering and
optoelectronics, are be measured and compared with those of the starting
oligomers and/or the copolymers prepared by direct step-growth coupling of the
sequenced oligomers.