* 1410171
* Using and Understanding Forster Resonance Energy Transfer in Organic Polymer Based Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Andre Taylor, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Programs, both in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description: There is a great need for new energy sources, and solar cells are
one of the potential solutions. This project aims to provide the scientific
foundation for the development of new high-efficiency organic solar cells, which
are made from inexpensive and sustainable materials that are easy to
manufacture. Specifically, this project explores how the incorporation of
additional tailor-made components to more common organic solar cell structures
affects the properties of the devices. These components have been shown to
increase solar cell efficiency, and this research focusses on understanding how
this improvement occurs. The elucidation of how these components operate allows
the team to rationally design new materials for incorporation into solar cells.
A number of undergraduates, two graduate students and one post-doctoral
researcher are involved in the research project and trained in both chemistry
and materials science. Outreach to K-12 students includes local school students'
visiting research laboratories at Yale, as well as lectures and demonstrations
at local schools about solar cells and alternative
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project explores the
hypothesis that the addition of one or more types of dye molecules to simple
binary donor/acceptor polymer solar cells can increase the spectral absorption
range of the device and enhance exciton harvesting by facilitating Forster
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET). The hypothesis is being verified through the
investigation of the photophysical and structural properties of the ternary and
higher order devices using a range of techniques including ultrafast optical
spectroscopy, microscopy and wide-angle X-ray scattering. The key issues
addressed in this research project include the effects of the dye molecules on
the recombination rate, the photon absorption efficiency, and device morphology.
This fundamental materials study is expected to lead to the rational design of
new dye molecules and polymers with desired properties.