* 1410504
* DNP-enhanced NMR surface characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Chandrasekhar Ramanathan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 443,580.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program is supporting the
research of Chandrasekhar Ramanathan of Dartmouth College to develop new
techniques to study and understand the physical and chemical properties of
surfaces. A number of important processes occur at the surface of materials. For
example, catalysis?such as occurs in solar energy conversion processes or in
catalytic converters?takes place on the surface of the catalyst. A detailed
understanding of the structure of solid surfaces and their interfaces to other
media is critical to the development of new catalysts and other technologies,
such as highly sensitive sensors that can be used, for example, to measure
groundwater contamination or detect explosives. This research develops methods
based on nuclear magnetic resonance (the technology behind magnetic resonance
imaging, or MRI) and applies that technique to the study of small-scale
materials. The goal is to characterize the structure of these surfaces with high
spatial resolution. The resulting information is then used to selectively
activate specific sites on the surface to improve on their catalytic or sensing
properties. The research is having a broad impact through the development of
useful new technologies that will have a variety of applications in many areas.
It is having a further impact through programs in local science pubs and cafes
designed to communicate the science involved to a broad societal audience.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic methods are being developed to
study the physical and chemical properties of surfaces and interfaces. To
compensate for the low sensitivity of NMR, dynamic nuclear polarization
techniques (DNP) are being designed and optimized to both maximize the signal
enhancements for surface spin species, as well as to obtain information about
the local spatial ordering of the spins at nanometer and sub-nanometer length
scales. In particular, the use of endogenous and exogenous polarizing agents for
DNP of surface functionalized groups in silicon and silica micro- and nano-
particles are being compared. Hyperpolarization is being combined with static
multiple-pulse NMR techniques such as multiple-quantum spin counting experiments
to probe the local ordering of the surface spins in these systems. The newly
developed methods are being applied to systems such as nanoparticle surfaces and
atomistically-thin layers such as Langmuir-Blodgett or functionalized graphene
films, using both endogenous and exogenous polarizing agents. The goal of these
studies is to get a better quantitative estimate of the size of the quenched
region, the polarization transfer rates and atomic level detail about the local
DNP process. A better understanding of these phenomena could, in turn, enable
the use of optimal control techniques to selective excite and study certain
chemical species, allowing selective maximization of enhancements.