* 1410239
* RUI: Thermodynamics of RNA Structural Motifs
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Martin Serra, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 229,136.00

In this research project computational methods will be developed and applied to
predict the structure of Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) molecules from their sequence.
Undergraduate students will perform all of the investigations, including the
selection of sequences to be investigated, providing them with excellent
training and valuable research experience. Students from PI's laboratory have an
excellent track record for attending graduate and professional schools after
obtaining their BS degrees. Since 2005, 11 of these students are attending
graduate school in either chemistry or biochemistry; and, 12 are attending
professional school. The graduate programs attended by the students include Yale
University, University of Rochester, Penn State University, Duke University,
Carnegie Mellon University, Ohio State University, Arizona State University, and
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. This work will be disseminated as
published manuscripts in peer-reviewed journals and at scientific meetings
including regional and national meetings. Since 2006, 29 of the PI's students
have been co-authors on papers. In the past eight years, 20 students have given
presentations at either national or regional meetings. The improvements in
secondary structure prediction will be incorporated into RNA structure, a
secondary structure prediction program distributed by the Mathews lab
(University of Rochester). In addition, a high school science teacher will be
recruited to join the research group during the summer. The high school teacher
will have the opportunity to engage in authentic research using state-of-the-art
techniques, methodology and instrumentation. This, in turn, enhances the
teacher's abilities and experience base and makes for a richer teaching and
learning experience in high school science classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop models to predict the structure of
Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) molecules from their sequence. RNAs are intimately
involved in a wide variety of biological activities. During the process of gene
expression (protein synthesis), they serve as informational molecules and part
of the synthesis machinery. Biological molecules, including RNA, must fold into
the correct three-dimensional shape to acquire their active-functional form. The
ability to predict RNA structure from sequence will improve our understanding of
RNA and its biological role. This project will develop models for the prediction
of RNA structure from sequence. These studies will combine both stability and
structural characterization of RNA to achieve a better understanding of the
nature of RNA.