* 1410341
* Novel Transitional Engineered Liver Models Using Detachable Polyelectrolyte Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Padmavathy Rajagopalan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supported by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, is co-funded by the BME program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET). Liver
fibrosis is a leading cause of death in the USA. Alcohol abuse, obesity,
diabetes or viral infections are some initiating events that induce fibrosis.
Each of these events causes severe liver inflammation, thereby altering
signaling pathways leading to the initiation and progression of fibrosis. This
project will use a fundamental science focused biomaterials approach to generate
novel insights into the cellular and signaling mechanisms that underlie the
progression of fibrosis. This project includes a K-12 outreach program. Through
a one-week summer camp, the project will provide opportunities to high-school
students to understand how biological membranes affect the properties of liver
cells. The one-week camp will include experimental and analytical activities.
The overall goal is to encourage high-school students to consider future
education and careers in STEM
fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liver
fibrosis is a leading cause of death worldwide. Some other extremely harmful
conditions that result due to liver fibrosis are hepatic carcinomas, renal
failure, toxin-induced comas, bleeding, and a host of metabolic disorders. This
project will study the initiation and progression of liver fibrosis from a
fundamental science focused biomaterials perspective. This project seeks to
design engineered transitional tissues. The investigators will develop a
transitional liver tissue containing a polymeric membrane that exhibits a
gradient in both mechanical and chemical properties. They will seek to determine
to what extent must chemical and mechanical profiles vary in the liver in order
to sustain hepatic fibrosis and to understand how the major hepatic cells
respond to stiffer matrices and varying chemical concentrations.