* 1410942
* Majorana particles in topological insulator quantum wires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical: This award from the Condensed Matter Physics program of the
Division of Materials Research supports Purdue University with a research
project which aims to create and manipulate exotic particles known as Majorana
particles. Majorana particles are an important class of fundamental particles
originally proposed in particle physics (such as in the study of neutrinos) as
having the unique property of being their own anti-particle but have not been
conclusively found despite decades of research. Recently, it has been realized
that it is possible to create analogues of such elusive particles using
realistic material systems. Besides their fundamental interests, such "condensed
matter" analogues of Majorana particles could potentially be used as quantum
"bits" (qubits) to build a robust quantum computer, which would revolutionize
our ability to perform computation and solve many complicated problems with
dramatically increased speed and reduced energy cost. This project aims to
create and manipulate Majorana particles using nanowires of a novel type of
insulator, "topological insulators", interfaced with superconductors. Such
"topological superconductor nanowires" promise to offer a robust experimental
material system to realize the Majorana particles and to manipulate them for
possible future applications in quantum computing. The project will also enhance
collaborations across multiple disciplines in physics and engineering, with
other institutions and international partners. Several graduate and
undergraduate students, from both physics and engineering, including those from
underrepresented groups, are expected to actively participate and be trained.
Outreach activities will also involve high school and undergraduate college
students and teachers.

Technical: Realizing and manipulating analogues of "Majorana particles" (MPs,
originally proposed in a particle physics context) in condensed matter systems
has attracted strong attention for both fundamental interests and for potential
applications to enable fault-tolerant topological quantum computing (TQC). This
project aims to realize and detect MPs in "topological superconducting quantum
wires" consisting of topological insulator nanoribbons (TINR) coupled to s-wave
superconductors, with supercurrent carried by a unique 1D spin-helical mode.
Recent theories have suggested that such a setup has several important
advantages and is among the most promising experimental systems to host MPs. The
properties of MP will be investigated by tunneling spectroscopy, and dc and ac
Josephson effects. The proposed research could establish a new, robust
experimental platform to realize MP, to explore their novel physics and
topological phase transitions, and pave the way for their applications in TQC.
The project will also enhance collaborations across multiple disciplines in
physics and engineering, with other institutions and international partners.
Several graduate and undergraduate students, from both physics and engineering,
including those from underrepresented groups, are expected to actively
participate and be trained. Outreach activities will also involve high school
and undergraduate college students and teachers.