* 1410190
* Starless Cores and Clumps: The Physical and Kinematic Structure of the Incipient Phase of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Yancy Shirley, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 252,110.00

The goal of this proposal is to build on previous NSF supported research
regarding the earliest stages of star formation; i.e. the initial fragmentation
of giant clouds of molecular gas and the evolution of these fragments into dense
cores that will eventually become newborn stars. The proposal aims to study
these sites of star formation through a multi-wavelength campaign of
observations from the radio to the infrared using a number of different ground-
based and space-based facilities. The proposers will use these observations to
test computational models of star formation and stellar evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new research will undertake a detailed
systematic study of the physical, chemical, and kinematic structure of large
populations of low-mass starless cores and high-mass starless clumps. For the
high-mass starless clumps, the research will utilize the Bolocam Galactic Plane
Survey (BGPS) previously completed by the PI to identify a statistically
significant sample of high-mass starless clumps for more detailed study through
observations with the IRAM, APEX, HHT, JVLA and ALMA. For the low-mass starless
cores, the project will use radiation transfer modeling of the starless core
population in molecular clouds to investigate the evolutionary phases of the
cores and to determine the importance of magnetic fields during their evolution.
The project will make use of low-mass starless core identifications from the
space-based Herschel and ground-based SCUBA observatories. The project will
perform new observations of these identifications with the 12m Arizona Radio
Observatory and ALMA for comparison with the results from their radiative
transfer models.