* 1410850
* GOALI - Collaborative Research: The Impact of Chemically Induced Stresses on Kinetic Processes and Degradation Mechanisms in Non-Stoichiometric Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Yue Qi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 274,997.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This research project focuses on several oxide
materials that are important in energy related applications. The central
phenomena of interest are linked to internal stresses that are created by
changes in composition (for example, adding and removing lithium in a battery
material). The specific findings from this project are contributing directly to
the development of improved electrodes for high energy density lithium ion
batteries for hybrid and electric vehicles, and improved materials for
applications in fuel cells and catalysis. Knowledge transfer is occurring
through both public dissemination and direct interactions with researchers and
General Motors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In ionic materials
there is a complex interplay between internal stresses, defects in the material,
electrochemical phenomena and kinetic processes (e.g., diffusion and phase
transformations). These stresses lead to degradation and performance limitations
in new materials that are being explored for both solid oxide fuel cells and
lithium ion batteries. Scientific understanding of these stress-related issues
is currently very limited. In this project, research into these phenomena is
based on systematic and strategically planned investigations that closely
integrate theory and experiments. The efforts at Brown University employ precise
in situ measurements of stresses along with other experimental methods to
develop novel approaches for probing a variety of complex phenomena where stress
interactions with fundamental mechanisms are poorly understood (e.g., defect
association, grain boundary segregation, multicomponent diffusion, etc.).
Interpretation of these data relies on atomic scale modeling at Michigan State
University. Students and faculty from both Universities are working directly
with Dr. Yan Wu and other researchers at General Motors, in ways that expand
educational outcomes and enhance knowledge transfer to industry. The overall
understanding of stress effects on kinetic processes and degradation mechanisms
obtained from this project is also relevant to a broader range of ionic solids.