* 1410639
* CDS&E: Quantum Monte Carlo Methods for Electron Correlations and Spin-Orbit Effects in Low-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Lubos Mitas, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2018
* USD 258,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research on properties and
behavior of interacting quantum systems. This is one of the most impactful
frontiers of current condensed matter and materials physics. In particular, low-
dimensional structures with sizes of the order of a nanometer (one billionth the
size of a meter) with various competing interactions between the electrons and
their spatial and spin degrees of freedom offer new and unprecedented
opportunities for the development of new materials and devices with ultralow
power consumption and ultrafast processing speeds. The key barrier that hampers
the realization of this potential is our limited knowledge of how to efficiently
and accurately describe, modify and control the relevant quantum mechanisms. The
PI and his group will focus on high-performance computational approaches for
solving the underlying fundamental equations and establish a new set of tools
for analysis of quantum phenomena and for discovery of new materials made up of
nanometer-sized components. The proposed methodology is based on an optimized
combination of sophisticated analytical constructions, robust and effective
simulation approaches, and high performance of large parallel computing
platforms.

The computational developments will become a part of an open source simulation
package for use by research communities at large. Inherent part of the effort
will be the training of a graduate student in advanced simulation methods and
the physics of nanometer-sized systems. Such training is expected to provide
multiple opportunities for a future career in scientific research. The
educational impact of this research will be further enhanced through expansion
of the curriculum at North Carolina State University by developing a graduate
computational physics course with emphasis on simulations of quantum systems and
related topics with broad interest across physics, chemistry, materials and
engineering disciplines.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research focused on the
development of computational quantum Monte Carlo methods for studies of low-
dimensional materials. First, novel approaches for constructions of many-body
pairing wave functions will be established using effective Hamiltonians with
explicit inclusion of pairing effects based on pair density matrices. This will
provide the key inputs for correlated trial wave function constructions in a
robust and systematic manner so that electron correlations will be described
consistently across varying spin-polarizations and symmetries. As a result, the
quantum Monte Carlo accuracy for important quantities such as binding and
dissociation energies, spin gaps, and excitations will increase very
significantly when compared with mainstream electronic structure approaches.
Second, quantum Monte Carlo methods for treating spins as genuine quantum
variables will be developed and implemented for routine use in calculations of
systems with important spin interactions. This development will break new ground
in electronic structure calculations and will make studies of materials with
significant spin-orbit effects and systems with non-collinear spins or
topologically ordered states possible in a many-body wave function setting. The
planned applications and prototypes target promising research challenges in low-
dimensional and spintronic nanomaterials such as doped graphene and related
systems.

The computational developments will become a part of an open source simulation
package for use by research communities at large. Inherent part of the effort
will be the training of a graduate student in advanced simulation methods and
the physics of nanometer-sized systems. Such training is expected to provide
multiple opportunities for a future career in scientific research. The
educational impact of this research will be further enhanced through expansion
of the curriculum at North Carolina State University by developing a graduate
computational physics course with emphasis on simulations of quantum systems and
related topics with broad interest across physics, chemistry, materials and
engineering disciplines.