* 1410364
* Theoretical Investigations of Low Dimensional Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Mohit Randeria, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 07/31/2018
* USD 282,350.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education to advance
understanding of magnetism and superconductivity in materials, particularly two
dimensional materials. The research is motivated in part by the experimental
discovery of magnetism at the interface between two materials that are
themselves not magnetic. The PI aims to develop a theoretical framework to
investigate magnetism in two dimensions that can investigate the possibility of
quantum mechanical states with spatially varying magnetism. These spatially
varying states have particle-like properties and a structure where the local
direction of magnetism twists around the center. These magnetic states may form
the basis of new technologies for data storage or new devices. The PI will also
investigate the effect of a high degree of imperfections and defects on the
superconducting state, which can transport electric power without loss.
Specifically the PI will investigate the transformation of a superconductor into
an insulator when the level of imperfections and defects, or disorder, becomes
sufficiently high. The PI will study the consequences of the interplay between
superconductivity and disorder to advance understanding of the nature of both
the insulating and superconducting states. This research contributes fundamental
insights into novel materials providing the basis for controlling their
properties for potential applications with benefits to society. This project
will involve the training and mentoring of young scientists at the frontiers of
science.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The award supports theoretical research and education with a goal to gain
theoretical insights into two classes of low-dimensional quantum materials. The
first project seeks to elucidate the chiral and anisotropic exchange
interactions arising from spin-orbit coupling and broken inversion symmetry in
two-dimensional materials. This will lead to a better understanding of the
resulting spatially modulated magnetic phases, like skyrmion crystals, and their
unusual electronic properties. These investigations are motivated by recent
experiments on thin films and interfaces. The second set of problems is related
to the interplay between localization and superconductivity and the resulting
quantum phase transition in disordered thin films. The superconductor-insulator
transition is a long-standing problem that has received renewed impetus from the
PI's recent theoretical work and from new experimental progress in tunneling and
optical spectroscopy. The PI will investigate the spatially inhomogeneous
electronic state in highly disordered superconductors, with emergent granularity
and an unusual insulator of pairs, for which there is growing experimental
evidence. In both areas the PI's theoretical research will use a mix of
analytical and numerical approaches to address questions directly motivated by
recent experiments, with the goal of obtaining new insights and making testable
predictions.

The project will involve the training and mentoring of young scientists in
frontier areas of condensed matter and materials physics. The PI is actively
involved in the Bridge Program at Ohio State to help enhance under-represented
minority participation in physics. The PI will incorporate aspects of his
research into teaching, and will disseminate this research through publications,
talks at international conferences and lecture at summer schools. The PI will
also continue to give public talks and lecture-demonstrations, aimed at non-
scientific audiences including middle and high school students.