* 1410132
* Bad Metal Behavior and the Metal Insulator Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Vladimir Dobrosavljevic, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 09/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest to understand what controls
the electrical properties of materials has been the driving force for much of
the physical science as we know it today. This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on materials that are somewhere between
metals and insulators. The PI will use advanced computational techniques to
study materials which have electrons that interact strongly with each other and
contain many imperfections in their structure or chemistry that are reflected in
the environment of the electrons. This is fundamental research to understand the
nature of metals, insulators, and new states of electronic matter that may exist
between them. In this intermediate region between metals and insulators,
materials display qualitatively different physical behavior, the understanding
of which requires new theoretical and computational tools. This research may
contribute to the intellectual foundations of future device technologies and to
developing new strategies to discover new materials with desired electronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow training of graduate
students in theoretical and computational condensed matter physics. The PI will
continue to promote and enhance scientific and technological understanding and
importance of our research to the general public through various outreach
activities. These will include: (1) Presenting lectures at elementary schools in
order to popularize science and technology, and bring the most recent
discoveries within reach of young students; (2) The PI will act as a judge at
annual regional Science Fairs. These fairs involve K-12 students from public and
private schools within the region; (3) The PI will also be working with high-
school summer interns as a part of the "Florida Young Scholar" program, enabling
them to bring cutting-edge science to the public at large through the
development of JAVA animations and other web-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education on materials
that are somewhere between metals and insulators. This so-called "bad-metal"
regime between a metal and an insulator is dominated by inelastic electron-
electron scattering, and shows behavior qualitatively different from either
phase. The impact of disorder and inhomogeneity on such strongly correlated
matter is rapidly becoming one of the central issues in materials science, as
recent advances in experimental probes allow direct visualization on the
nanoscale and have provided compelling evidence that most systems near the
metal-insulator transition are much more inhomogeneous than previously assumed.
The PI will theoretically examine several key aspects of the metal-insulator
transition that have come to focus through recent experimental work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be focused on providing answers to the
following questions: (1) What is the physical nature of the nanoscale phase
coexistence between a strongly correlated metal and a Mott insulator at finite
temperature? (2) Can the physics of "Electronic Griffiths phases" associated
with Mott-Anderson transitions be tackled using strong disorder renormalization
group ideas, which are the tools of choice for other disorder-dominated quantum
critical points? How does the competition between valence-bond formation and
Kondo screening manifest itself in such disorder-driven non-Fermi liquid
regimes? (3) What is the role of strong geometric frustration characterizing the
long-range Coulomb interaction in producing a variety of electronically
inhomogeneous phases with and without disorder?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will allow training of graduate students in theoretical and
computational condensed matter physics. The PI will continue to promote and
enhance scientific and technological understanding and importance of our
research to the general public through various outreach activities. These will
include: (1) Presenting lectures at elementary schools in order to popularize
science and technology, and bring the most recent discoveries within reach of
young students; (2) The PI will act as a Judge at annual regional Science Fairs.
These fairs involve K-12 students from public and private schools within the
region; (3) The PI will also be working with high-school summer interns as a
part of the "Florida Young Scholar" program, enabling them to bring cutting-edge
science to the public at large through the development of JAVA animations and
other web-based materials.