* 1410215
* Iron Pyrite {100}: Investigation into an Electronically Frustrated Material
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Conrad Stoldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 525,000.00

Non-technical Description: Iron pyrite is one of the most abundant minerals on
the planet. Iron pyrite also has some key physical properties well suited to
optoelectronics and energy storage applications. But numerous measurements
indicate that the electronic transport and optical properties of bulk and
nanocrystalline iron pyrite limit effective device development. The fundamental
causes of these limitations remain mired in uncertainty, but recent work does
suggest that defect structure and chemistry on the surfaces and interfaces of
iron pyrite are of primary importance. This research project is a synergistic
experimental and theoretical effort designed to provide a comprehensive
understanding of iron pyrite and its surface physics and chemistry. In
conjunction with this research activity, a collaborative K-6 outreach effort is
planned to increase awareness of materials science, and to instill an interest
in scientific methods in the younger generation. A series of hands-on materials
science modules will be developed and disseminated in coordination with K-6
curricula at local schools in order to further their science programs for years
to come.

Technical Description: Recent observations of unusual optoelectronic phenomena
in iron pyrite nanocube colloids directly link its unique {100} surface defect
structure to the surrounding chemical environment. The experimental component of
this research project aims to validate the surface interaction model through
interface characterization and directed chemical modification of colloidal, thin
film and single crystal samples. High-resolution, surface-sensitive
spectroscopy, in conjunction with magnetic and electronic measurements that span
a broad range of temperatures, are applied to iron pyrite's intrinsic and
engineered surface structure to build a comprehensive structure/property
relationship. A parallel theoretical effort systematically examines the nature
of the excited states for iron pyrite's bulk and surfaces using some of the most
detailed electronic structure calculations that can be done. For these purposes,
the GW method, Bethe-Salpeter and time-dependent density functional theory
relate optical and transport properties to their microscopic origins. In
particular, the manifestations of electron-phonon couplings are systematically
examined and compared to experimental observations.