* 1410714
* Phase-field Modeling of Flexoelectric Contributions to Ferroelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and computational
modeling, and education with an aim to better understand ferroelectrics, which
are multifunctional materials that have many uses, including actuators, sensors,
memory storage, and microelectromechanical systems. These materials can not only
produce electric signals under an applied electric field or a macroscopic shape
deformation under an applied mechanical stress field but can also produce
electric signals in response to an applied mechanical stress or a shape
deformation in response to an applied electric field. There have been extensive
studies on the couplings among electric signals, electric fields, homogeneous
mechanical loads, temperature, and homogeneous shape deformations, and the basic
science of how a homogeneous shape deformation affects the electric properties
of ferroelectrics, characterized by the "piezoelectric effect," is reasonably
well understood. In this project, the PI will focus on understanding how an
inhomogeneous stress or shape deformation affects the multifunctional properties
of ferroelectrics, through the "flexoelectric effect." Effort will be devoted to
developing efficient computational methods and employing them to model, predict,
and understand internal, nanoscale inhomogeneous structures and properties of
ferroelectric materials under the influence of the flexoelectric effect. The
computational research will be carried out in close collaboration with numerous
experimental groups, computational physicists, and applied mathematicians. The
fundamental understanding achieved and the computational tools developed in this
project should provide guidance to develop material systems that can exploit the
flexoelectric effect that exists in all materials. The proposed research is
expected to contribute to graduate education in materials as phase-field
simulations of phase transformations and microstructure evolution are being
incorporated into graduate courses at Penn State. In particular, user-friendly
graphical interfaces for a number of applications of the phase-field models have
been developed under prior NSF support. The software has been employed in two
graduate courses and one undergraduate course. In addition, it has been used in
summer short courses on computational thermodynamics and kinetics of phase
transformations, which were offered to research scientists from national labs,
engineers from industry, and professors and students from academia. This project
will provide new computational tools to illustrate how materials properties may
be modified through the flexoelectric effect. The PI will involve undergraduate
students in the research by participating in a number of programs at Penn State
including senior thesis projects and the Minority Undergraduate Research
Experience program.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Ferroelectrics are a class of materials in which a
spontaneous electric polarization develops below their paraelectric to
ferroelectric phase transition temperatures. The spontaneous polarization
direction can be reoriented among crystallographically defined orientations in a
single crystal by an electric field. Very often a spontaneous strain arising
from the crystal structure change at the ferroelectric transition accompanies
the appearance of spontaneous polarization. So, the state of a ferroelectric
crystal can generally be characterized macroscopically by two order parameters,
polarization and strain. It is the coupling between the order parameters,
polarization and strain, and the thermodynamic variables such as temperature,
stress, and electric field that leads to the multifunctionality of a
ferroelectric crystal ranging from dielectric, piezoelectric to pyroelectric
properties, and thus to many applications in a wide variety of electronic
devices, including capacitors, actuators, nonvolatile memories, and
microelectromechanical systems. Although the thermodynamics of these couplings
has been well established, the coupling among order parameters and their
gradients is much less well understood. The main goal of this proposed program
is to fundamentally understand the role of the flexoelectric effect, the
coupling between polarization and the gradient of strain in the ferroelectricity
of a crystal, in domain structures, polarization distributions across domain
walls, and domain switching. There is sufficient evidence that the flexoelectric
effect, which is small and generally ignored in macroscopic systems, may become
significant or even dominant with decreasing size approaching nanostructures,
particularly in ferroelectric materials which exhibit strong dielectric
properties. The PI plans to employ a phase-field modeling approach integrated
with mesoscale elasticity and electrostatic theory. The main objectives of this
proposal are: (1) to develop a phase-field model of ferroelectric domain
structures and switching incorporating flexoelectric contributions, (2) to study
whether the flexoelectric contribution can significantly modify the properties
of a ferroelectric domain wall and to discover potentially new domain wall
features induced by the flexoelectric effect, (3) to investigate the role of the
flexoelectric contribution to the polarization distribution and thus to domain
structure in thin films, and (4) to investigate the flexoelectric response of
ferroelectric thin films under a local mechanical force and explore the
possibility of mechanical switching of ferroelectric polarization. The proposed
research is expected to: (1) yield a phase-field formulation for modeling
flexoelectric response of ferroelectrics, (2) significantly contribute to the
fundamental understanding of the roles of flexoelectric effect in ferroelectric
properties including domain wall structures, polarization distribution, and
switching, and (3) produce advanced numerical algorithms based on the spectral
method for solving phase-field equations involving domain wall anisotropy and
flexoelectricity. The project will contribute to human resource development by
training both graduate and undergraduate students through undergraduate thesis
and summer research. The research findings will be disseminated to a wide
audience through archival publications and conferences, review papers, and
active participation and lectures at workshops and conferences. Finally, the PI
will actively pursue collaborations with industry and national labs such as Los
Alamos, Argonne, Oak Ridge, and the industrial members associated with the
Center for Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics (CDP) at North Carolina State
University and Penn State to provide internship opportunities for students
involved in the project.