* 1410240
* Polymetric Hydrogel Microfibers with Internal Alignment for 3D Myelination
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Hai-Quan Mao, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research is to develop a novel hydrogel biomaterials platform with
internal alignment and signals to guide the maturation, organization and
function of neuron and glial cells, thereby generating a more physiologically
relevant nerve tissue model. Despite many advances in tissue engineering, the
ability to control cell alignment and organization in 3D is still limited. This
study will provide key knowledge for the rational design and synthesis of
internally aligned hydrogel microfibers with integrated signaling cues and
physical properties from a wide range of biopolymers. Through partnerships with
clinical and industrial scientists, the PI and co-PI will develop
functionalities of these new materials for regenerating tissues including
peripheral nerve, spinal cord, skeletal muscle and microvasculature. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students on biomaterials, nanotechnology and regenerative
medicine. The research activities will also promote the recruitment and
mentoring of women and underrepresented minority students through highly
effective outreach programs targeting inner-city high school students in the
Baltimore area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Matrix alignment is an important
feature in many types of tissues for inducing cell organization, tissue
microarchitecture, regulating cell migration and controlling biological
functions. However, there is a shortage of robust methodologies for engineering
alignment cues within polymer hydrogels to control the 3D spatial patterns of
the encapsulated cells. This study aims to engineer a novel hydrogel microfiber
platform with internal alignment with added biochemical cues to mediate neuron
and Schwann cell alignment and maturation. This platform is expected to be
highly effective for myelination and in generating an in vitro functional 3D
nerve fascicle tissue model. The technological impact of these studies would be
enhanced through the partnerships with clinical and industrial scientists, and
these collaborations are expected to result in multiple regenerative biomedical
applications of these hydrogel microfibers. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities to graduate students and undergraduate
students through research and new curriculum development. Additionally, the
investigators will promote the recruitment and mentoring of students from
underrepresented groups through highly effective outreach programs in the
campus.