* 1410514
* A Machine Learning Framework for Acceleration of Materials Prediction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Alexey Kolmogorov, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 372,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational research has been
playing an increasingly important role in the development of new materials. The
central aim of this project is to create a theoretical framework and
computational tools capable of speeding up the prediction of new synthesizable
materials by orders of magnitude. The efficiency and the reliability of the
method will be achieved by combining two bio-inspired algorithms. A learning
"neural network" scheme will be implemented in the "Module for Ab Initio
Structure Evolution" package which presently has the capability to perform
global structure optimization with an evolutionary algorithm. The introduced
computational approach will be applicable to a broad range of material classes
and expected to accelerate the exploration of complex systems. A particular
focus will be placed on the development of metal oxide catalysts and metal-based
battery electrodes for energy-related
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial neural networks are a powerful
tool used in many research areas for dealing with classification, control, and
interpolation problems in multi-dimensional spaces. The application of the
method to solid state problems requires a formalism specifically designed for
building and training neural networks to map the potential energy profiles of
given atomic configurations. Namely, an automated algorithm should be able to
parse an arbitrary atomic configuration into a suitable set of input parameters,
train the neural network on a relevant dataset, and monitor the ability to
produce accurate total energy and atomic forces during simulations. The PI's
preliminary work and the recent research in the field have shown that, compared
to widely used quantum mechanical and classical models, neural networks have the
potential to provide a good balance between accuracy and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include multiple educational
activities to foster high-school and undergraduate students' interest in science
and mathematics. Students will have the opportunity to learn about computational
methods and take part in the research under PI's supervision. A part of the
outreach work will be done through Binghamton University's Evolutionary Studies
program which brings together students and researchers from biological, physics,
and computer sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research and education directed at advancing analytical and computational
techniques for materials discovery. Computational input can be particularly
valuable at the initial stages of materials development providing libraries of
synthesizable candidates and possible synthesis conditions. The success of
determining new stable materials depends on the careful global optimization of
crystal structures and the accurate evaluation of their thermodynamic stability.
Traditionally, the two challenges have been addressed separately.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine a neural network method with an
evolutionary algorithm to automate and accelerate compound prediction. The
neural network formalism will be generalized to describe a wide range of
interatomic interactions with near ab initio accuracy while scaling linearly
with the system size. Preliminary tests have shown the ability of such models to
capture subtle many-body effects. The developed computational approach is
expected to accelerate the exploration of systems known to exhibit particularly
complex structures, such as metal oxide catalysts or metal-based battery
electrodes. Neural network models will be trained, in particular, on already
generated databases containing thousands of entries. Analysis of the constructed
neutral-network-based interpolators will advance the fundamental understanding
of the bonding mechanisms for future rational materials design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The compound prediction tool offering a combination of two
bio-inspired algorithms will be released as an open-source code. One of the
objectives is to create a shared online resource with full access to all built
interatomic models and all ab initio data used for training the neural networks.
Such a platform will ensure reuse of generated density functional theory data
and reduce the redundancy of expensive ab initio calculations. Validation of the
developed predictive approach will be carried out in close collaborations with
Chemistry and Engineering experimental groups at Binghamton University. The
project will also include multiple educational activities to foster high-school
and undergraduate students' interest in science and mathematics. Students will
have the opportunity to learn about computational methods and take part in the
research under PI's supervision. A part of the outreach work will be done
through Binghamton University's Evolutionary Studies program which brings
together students and researchers from biological, physics, and computer
sciences.