* 1410937
* Algorithms, States, and Dynamics in Models of Disordered Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* A. Alan Middleton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research aimed at improving our understanding of materials where
atoms are randomly arranged. This class of materials, including magnetic
materials, window glass, and superconducting materials with many impurities, can
be strongly affected by their built-in randomness. The properties of disordered
matter change extremely slowly over time. This slow evolution provides these
materials with remarkable complexity and intricate memories, but makes direct
simulation on a computer inefficient, as extremely long simulations are needed.
The PI's group will search for novel procedures to speed up the simulation of
such slowly evolving matter. These procedures will be used to explore the
general properties of a wide class of disordered
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's group will investigate the deep
connections between computer algorithms and physics. As an example, algorithms
that we use every day to find the shortest route on a map can be used to find
the lowest-energy fracture path in a material. Algorithms developed in computer
science to study complex networks (social, computer, or transportation, for
example) have many applications to disordered matter. In return, physical
insights about matter have suggested improvements in more widely applicable
algorithms in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include training of students in advanced computational methods that have
applications in many scientific and technical domains. Computer codes developed
for each project will be quickly made available for unrestricted use by other
researchers. This project also aims to strengthen ties between theoretical
condensed matter physics, mathematical physics and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glassiness and complex energy landscapes are of
wide importance in condensed matter and soft matter physics, as seen for
structural glasses, random magnets, granular materials, and constructed
mesoscopic systems such as vortex channels in type-II superconductors or
artificial spin ice. This award supports work in condensed matter and
statistical physics to improve both our understanding and our ability to
simulate the behavior of inhomogeneous glassy materials. Numeric studies of
models of spin glass alloys and other disordered materials will be used to
explore general glassy behavior. Direct microscopic dynamic simulations of
glassy models are often not possible due to the large range of time scales that
need to be covered. Efficient algorithms and connections with computational
complexity will be further developed to construct efficient optimization and
configuration sampling methods for these challenging model systems. Scaling
approaches and other analyses will guide the computational approaches. The goal
will be to use simulations to identify the spatial changes that allow disordered
materials to have complex memories of external parameter changes. More
generally, this work aims to characterize and describe more precisely the high-
dimensional landscapes that underlie such memory and glassiness. This
characterization will include the investigation of the controllability of the
low free energy states. For example, the effects of boundary conditions on the
interior state of finite dimensional models will be studied through accelerated
methods that replicate exhaustive enumeration with less
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be trained in design and
development of computer codes to study complex physical systems. These new codes
will rely on recently developed sophisticated algorithms and will include
general optimization and sampling methods that have not traditionally been
taught to physicists. This project will also focus on strengthening the
interdisciplinary connections between condensed matter and statistical physics
with algorithm development and benchmark problem sets for computer science. Such
connections result from the related mathematical structures and large complex
systems studied. Students will be trained in rigorous analysis and verification
of the results of large complex simulations, including large data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Codes developed for each project (e.g., exact
sampling algorithms for two-dimensional random magnets, planar dimer models as
might be used in quantum Monte Carlo simulations, and interfaces in random
potentials) will be freely and widely distributed with documentation to
facilitate both research by the community and advanced training.