* 1410496
* RUI: Electronic Properties of Finite Molecular Layer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Timothy Kidd, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 247,303.00

Non-Technical: The goal of this project is to better understand the electronic
and optical properties of thin sheets of materials with thickness in the range
of a few atomic layers. These properties have practical applications in solar
cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), and a wide variety of sensors. A
multidisciplinary approach is used to obtain a more complete picture necessary
to use these materials in these applications. This research involves
undergraduate students trained on a wide variety of techniques that involve
electronics, optics and chemistry. Such an environment results in well-rounded
students ready for careers in either industry or academia. The University of
Northern Iowa provides an excellent opportunity for this project to have a
positive impact on elementary, middle, and high school students from diverse
backgrounds throughout Iowa and surrounding states. Regular contact with high
school science teachers allows faculty research activities and student
opportunities to be showcased directly. Such efforts encourage students to
explore careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal of this project is
to develop a more thorough understanding of the electronic and optical
properties of a wide variety of finite layer dichalcogenide molecular sheets.
Ultrasonic agitation is used to break apart these layered crystals from the bulk
into thin nano-sheets. Those sheets with the smallest number of layers are
separated using a centrifuge and studied using scanning tunneling microscopy,
optical spectroscopy, and ballistic electron emission microscopy. Scanning
tunneling microscopy measurements serve to study topological features as well as
surface electrical properties on the atomic scale. This includes the zero
resistance characteristics associated with charge density waves in two-
dimensional dichalcogenides sheets. Raman and photoluminescence complement the
electrical measurements made using the localized probe of the scanning tunneling
microscope, providing global information on electronic band structure and
vibrational properties. Transport measurements are achieved by injecting
electrons into these structures using ballistic electron emission microscopy,
allowing characterization of electron scattering as a function of temperature
and energy. Together, these combined data will enable a more complete
understanding of reduced dimensionality on the electronic properties in a wide
variety of material systems. More importantly, broadening the research focus of
this field to a more diverse array of layered materials will enhance our
understanding of the fundamental physics in two-dimensional systems.
Modifications of current theories to encompass a wider variety of layered
materials leads to more robust theoretical models, essential to device design.