* 1410272
* SusChEM:  Resourceful Polymers Derived from Polyhydroxyl Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2016
* USD 291,700.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Karen Wooley of Texas A&M
University is studying how to synthesize complex polymers from naturally
occurring sugars. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are found in
many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including food packaging,
structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. Polymers derived from naturally occurring
compounds are anticipated to degrade into completely biocompatible products.
This work is of scientific and societal importance for several reasons, as it is
expected to: (1) reduce our reliance on petrochemical feedstocks; (2) advance
chemical knowledge and experimental techniques involved with the synthesis of
advanced polymer materials; (3) generate polymers that will be useful as unique
"plastics"; (4) produce environmentally-resorbable and biologically-beneficial
(e.g., nutrient, growth-promoting, anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory or other
responses) products upon degradation of the polymers.

The research project involves the development of synthetic chemistry approaches
with the objective being the production of a series of polycarbonates and
polyphosphoesters that originate from renewable resources, exhibit novel
chemical, physical and mechanical properties, and undergo hydrolytic breakdown
to biologically-beneficial or benign by-products. Functional monomers are being
prepared from polyhydroxyl natural products (as the primary focus, sugars are
serving as the starting materials) and transformed by ring-opening
polymerizations. In one direction, cyclic carbonate monomers are being prepared
that will yield polymers that contain carbonate linkages. Hydrolytic degradation
will produce the polyhydroxyl compound plus carbon dioxide. In a second
direction, phosphoester linkages are being utilized, borrowing from natural
polymers such as DNA or RNA. Studies are being performed to advance controlled
ring opening polymerizations of cyclic carbonates or phosphoesters to afford
these polymers as well-defined macromolecular structures. The physical,
mechanical and stability properties of the polymers are being characterized
using rigorous physicochemical and mechanical characterization studies and tuned
via their chemical compositions and structures. The broader impacts of the
project involve the synthetic chemistry advances, the ultimate materials that
are developed, and the educational outcomes for the students and postdoctoral
associates involved in the proposed work. The project integrates research and
education across the schools of science and engineering. The proposed
polyhydroxyl natural product-based polycarbonates are expected to exhibit
properties that will allow for their development in applications that will solve
real-world problems.