* 1410869
* Magnetodielectric Coupling in Nanostructured Multiferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2022
* Ratnakar Palai, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,236.00

Non-technical description: Multiferroics are promising materials because of
their potential applications for spintronics (data storage, etc.) and novel
multifunctional devices. Devices based on these materials have many important
features, such as high speed, low power consumption, and multi-functionality,
and could facilitate device miniaturization impacting daily life. The project
will contribute to the understanding of the new physical phenomena and
fundamental science in nanostructured multiferroics. The project involves
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students (e.g., Hispanics and/or
women). The PI designs new courses, disseminates new findings through
presentations at conferences and publication in scientific journals, and
organizes a workshop on multifunctional nanomaterials involving the
participation of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
The research goal of this project is to understand the magnetodielectric
coupling in nanostructured multiferroics, which is important for the realization
of novel spintronic and multifunctional devices. The mechanisms and dynamics of
magnetodielectric coupling and the origin of the fundamental excitation in
multiferroics are not yet well understood. The project aims at a comprehensive
understanding of mechanisms and dynamics of magnetodielectric coupling in
nanostructured multiferroics, the factors that affect it, and the approaches to
control and enhance the properties. These nanostructures include nanograin
polycrystalline single phase thin films, nanoscale epitaxial thin films, and
artificially engineered multiferroics using ferromagnetic/ ferroelectric
epitaxial heterostructures. The specific tasks are to (i) study the
magnetodielectric coupling in nanocomposite and polycrystalline thin films; (ii)
explore the effect of strain, reduced dimensionality, and interface effect on
magnetodielectric coupling in epitaxial thin films and artificially engineered
ferroelectric/ferromagnetic multilayer heterostructures; (iii) examine the
effect of temperature, frequency, and electromagnetic field on magnetodielectric
coupling. These nanostructured multiferroics are grown by pulsed laser
deposition (PLD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and analyzed by several
state-of-the-art characterization techniques.