* 1410199
* Directing and Probing DNA Origami Self-Assembly on Dynamic Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,09/30/2018
* Tao Ye, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 09/30/2018
* USD 510,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to University of California, Merced is to
understand how DNA folds to make a variety of large scale structures. Nature has
developed the ability to assemble biomolecules into complex biological
structures which allow the molecular components to work in concert to perform
the elaborate functions of life. A long-standing endeavor is to develop methods
that allow molecular building blocks to self-organize into higher order
structures. The DNA origami method folds a long, single-stranded DNA molecule
into nanoscale shapes using short oligonucleotide strands with complementary
sequences. By developing high-resolution microscopy techniques that can capture
snapshots of individual DNA origami structures as they form, the PI will begin
to understand the mechanism of the self assembly process. The findings of this
research may enable the self-assembly of complex structures that can perform
novel functions such as sensing and nanoelectronic and photonic
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide graduate students and postdoc
researchers with interdisciplinary training that is needed to address high-
profile challenges in biomolecular materials. It will also bring new research
opportunities to undergraduate students at UC Merced, a large fraction of whom
are under-represented minorities. Working with the local school district, the PI
will host lab tours and develop nanoscience
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to understand the self-assembly pathways of DNA origami and introduce
precise surface interactions to regulate the self-assembly process. The ensemble
spectroscopy and ex-situ microscopy techniques commonly used provide limited
information concerning the intermediate structures. The PI will fold DNA origami
tiles on dynamic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) surfaces, which can rapidly trap
the intermediate structures for high resolution AFM imaging. With detailed
structural information of the folding intermediates, the PI will begin to
reconstruct and elucidate the folding pathways. Building upon novel surface
chemistry developed in the lab, the PI will enable individual oligonucleotide
molecules to nucleate the formation of origami tiles of specific size, shape and
internal arrangement on the SAM surface. If successful, the study will
significantly advance the understanding of the self-assembly process of DNA
origami nanostructures and potentially allow the formation of much larger
structures with more sophisticated functions. The project will prepare graduate
students and a postdoctoral scholar to tackle high-profile challenges in
biomolecular materials, a field demanding highly interdisciplinary solutions.