* 1410334
* Contacts to Layered Dichalcogenide Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Suzanne Mohney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 462,873.00

Non-technical Description: Two-dimensional layered semiconductors have recently
captured the imagination of scientists and engineers because of their unusual
physical properties and potential for many applications. For example,
transistors fabricated from these materials could be used in consumer
electronics; photovoltaics derived from the materials could offer greater energy
independence; and molecular sensing using these materials could aid homeland
security. To realize the potential of these new materials and use them
efficiently in a variety of devices, it is critical to understand and develop
electrical contacts that allow current to flow in and out of the devices without
significant losses. A graduate student and undergraduate students are receiving
direct training in science and engineering research methods as they address this
scientific problem. The principal investigator is also gaining experience that
informs upper-level material science and engineering courses, as well as
outreach activities for underrepresented middle- and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project addresses the
need for low-resistance Ohmic contacts for two-dimensional layered
dichalcogenide semiconductors, including molybdenum disulfide and tantalum
diselenide. Investigators are using thermodynamic calculations and phase
diagrams to select metal contacts that are likely to exhibit different types of
reactions upon annealing. The scenarios for reaction include diffusion of the
metal into the semiconductor, substitution of other transition metals for
molybdenum or tungsten, and formation of a different layered semiconductor with
a different band gap. Such reactions offer the potential to dope the
semiconductor or alter the Schottky barrier height at the metal/semiconductor
interface, and they could therefore reduce the resistance of the contacts. The
reactions are under study using transmission electron microscopy (including
aberration-corrected scanning/transmission electron microscopy), which is well
suited to detecting changes in the arrangement of atoms at or near the
metal/semiconductor interface. Researchers also employ complementary approaches
to measure specific contact resistance and gain greater insight into current
transport through the contacts. The project contributes to a deeper
understanding of contacts to two-dimensional layered dichalcogenide
semiconductors and more generally to the science of processing layered
materials.