* 1410896
* Continuing operation of the High Elevation Antarctic Terahertz telescope at Ridge A, Antarctica
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Craig Kulesa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 05/31/2018
* USD 273,715.00

Stars within the Milky Way and other galaxies are formed as giant clouds of gas
composed primarily of hydrogen and helium collapse under their own gravity, thus
heating up the gas to the point where nuclear fusion is triggered and stars are
formed. The life cycles of these interstellar clouds drives the internal
evolution of all galaxies. The goal of this project is to study the earliest
stages of the formation of these clouds by observing the spectra from certain
atomic and molecular species, which serve as tracers of these otherwise cold,
dark clouds. The project will carry out these observations by using the NSF
supported High Elevation Antarctic Terahertz (HEAT) telescope. Outside of space,
the Antarctic plateau on which the HEAT telescope is located is one of the few
places on Earth that these observations can be made. The project will use the
HEAT telescope to map these giant clouds along the plane of our galaxy with
unprecedented resolution and sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current theories
of molecular cloud formation are guided and constrained by atomic (HI) and
molecular (CO) observations of the cloud gas in the interstellar medium.
However, HI and CO surveys are less sensitive to the early stages of the
molecular cloud formation. Through measurements of CI and CII line emissivity
with HEAT, the project will map the early stages of cloud formation as clouds of
atomic hydrogen transition to Giant Molecular Clouds of H2. The project also
plans to observe the NII line to determine the ionizing luminosity of OB stars,
which is a standard metric for star formation rate. This data will be correlated
with the rate of destruction of nearby GMCs as measured by the CII
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HEAT telescope is a fully automated
facility designed to run unattended for a year between servicing missions. The
proposal points out that there are actually two fully functional HEAT
telescope/receiver facilities; one that is deployed in Antarctica while the
other is being refurbished in Arizona for the following year. This project will
build upon previous efforts by the PI to train of a new generation of scientists
and engineers by involving them not only in the science from the facility, but
by providing a hands-on experience with the instrumentation as the off-duty HEAT
telescope is refurbished. The project intends to communicate its results to the
general public in two ways. First, the project will use the off-duty facility
for public outreach demonstrations held at the University of Arizona. Second,
the project intends to present the HEAT project via a program produced for PBS?s
NOVA television series.