* 1410987
* Targeted delivery of antimicrobial peptides to intracellular bacterial pathogens
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Alyssa Panitch, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intracellular bacterial infections
are caused by bacteria that reside in host cells such as macrophages and
multiply, avoiding detection and destruction by the host immune system. These
infections are currently managed by oral or injectable antibiotics, which reach
the infected cells only after spreading in the entire body. The therapeutic
outcomes of traditional antibiotics treatment have not been satisfactory,
because many antibiotics do not enter mammalian cells and access the
intracellular pathogens. Moreover, the pathogens tend to develop resistance to
the antibiotic treatment as a consequence of persistent suboptimal delivery of
antibiotics. For the effective management of intracellular bacterial infections,
there is a critical unmet need for new types of antimicrobials, which will
effectively eradicate intracellular bacteria without inducing resistance, and an
appropriate carrier system that will deliver the new agents specifically to the
infected macrophages and the pathogens resident in the cells. In this research
the PIs propose to develop new materials that may be of potential use in
addressing intracellular bacterial infections. Specifically, the PIs will use
positively charged peptides with potent antimicrobial activity to replace
traditional antibiotics. The PIs will administer these peptides using pH-
sensitive polysaccharides, which will take the peptides to the infected cells
and help unpack them where the peptides are most needed. This project has the
potential to bring about novel materials that may be of use relative to
intractable intracellular infections. In addition, it will create a sustainable
research platform for interdisciplinary collaborations and contribute to the
next generation science education through active participation in institutional
outreach service and joint summer research fellowship
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intracellular bacterial infections are currently
managed by systemic administration of antibiotics. However, their therapeutic
outcomes have not been satisfactory, because of the inefficient intracellular
delivery of antibiotics and frequent emergence of bacterial resistance to the
treatment. For the effective management of intracellular bacterial infections,
there is a critical unmet need for new types of antimicrobials, which will treat
persistent and multi-drug resistant intracellular bacterial infections, and an
appropriate carrier system that will deliver the new agents specifically to the
infected macrophages and the pathogens resident in the cells. Ideal treatment of
intracellular pathogens should have low potential to induce bacterial resistance
and be able to travel across the eukaryotic cell membrane and access pathogens
residing inside the cells. To satisfy these requirements, the PIs will develop
antimicrobial semi-nanoparticles (SNPs), consisting of (i) cationic
antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs), a new class of antibacterial agents, and (ii)
pH-sensitive polysaccharides, a carrier of CAMPs. The underlying hypothesis of
this approach is that CAMPs will overcome the prevalent bacterial resistance
through distinct mechanisms of action, and a pH-sensitive SNP system will offer
a means to target the organs harboring infected cells (liver and spleen) and
traffic CAMPs within the cells to access the intracellular pathogens. This
research will bring about three outcomes with broad impact: medical benefits to
patients with intractable intracellular infections; sustainable research
platform for interdisciplinary collaborations; and outreach activities for
advanced science education, including leadership in institutional service
programs and implementation of joint summer research fellowships.