* 1410237
* Electric Field Effects on the Ferromagnetism of Dynamically Phase Separated Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Amlan Biswas, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 376,014.00

Non-technical Abstract

This award from the Division of Materials Research supports the University of
Florida with a project to study the effect of electric fields on the magnetism
in a class of materials called manganites. Manganites can exist in various
magnetic phases known as ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, and paramagnetic and
can even form a phase separated state in which these magnetic phases coexist.
The principal investigator and his research team of graduate and undergraduate
students grow crystalline thin films of manganites and control their phase
separated state to form nanometer to micrometer sized ferromagnetic regions
embedded in an antiferromagnetic insulating matrix. The samples are then
subjected to external stress and electric field and the effect on the
ferromagnetic regions is measured using techniques such as microscopy and
neutron reflectometry. A possible outcome of this project is the control of the
magnetism in using an electric field, which could lead to data storage devices
with reduced energy consumption. Since this project includes both sample
preparation and measurement, young scientists are trained to use a broad array
of modern experimental techniques and the expertise acquired enhances their
future career options in both the industry and academe.

Technical Abstract

Perovskite manganese oxides (manganites) exhibit competing phases with different
electronic, magnetic, and structural properties which can result in phase
coexistence. In high-quality thin films of manganites the coexistent phases have
shown evidence that they behave in a dynamic and fluid-like manner and can even
move spatially within the solid sample under the influence of strain and
electric field. This project investigates this fluid-like behavior in manganites
and its possible application to control the magnetic properties of the material
with an electric field. The experiments are designed to: (1) ascertain the
physical mechanism behind the fluid-like behavior of the ferromagnetic regions
in the dynamic phase coexistence state and hence, find the optimal conditions
for producing such a state, (2) investigate the effects of electric field,
strain, and sample geometry on the dynamic phase separated state, and (3)
measure the effect of an electric field on the magnetic properties. The high-
quality thin films of manganites are grown using pulsed laser deposition. The
local and bulk properties of the thin films and fabricated micro/nanostructures
are then studied using techniques such as low temperature conducting atomic
force microscopy, spin-polarized neutron reflectometry, resistivity, and
magnetization measurements. Density functional theory calculations are used to
model the experimental results and suggest new directions for the experimental
efforts. The results of this project are expected to reveal a novel method for
generating an electric field effect on the magnetic properties of a material.
Since this project includes both sample preparation and measurement, young
scientists are trained to use a broad array of modern experimental techniques
and the expertise acquired enhances their future career options in both the
industry and academe.