* 1410320
* Investigation into Surface-Modified Electrode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Meilin Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Batteries are now more ubiquitous than ever, powering
our laptops, smartphones, and other portable electronic devices. Other
applications include medical devices (e.g. portable defibrillators) as well as
electric cars. The performance and capacity of batteries are greatly influenced
by the properties of their electrode surfaces; surface modifications are widely
used to mitigate electrode problems and thus enhance battery performance.
Although enormous effort has been devoted to the study of electrode surfaces, a
detailed understanding of the electrochemistry on these surfaces and the
mechanisms by which surface modifications enhance performance is still lacking.
The motivation for this project is to utilize unique spectroscopic tools to
directly probe electrode surfaces under in operando conditions (that better
replicate real-world battery operating conditions). The results of the project
will be widely disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, and the new
scientific knowledge is expected to have a significant impact on the rational
design of electrode surfaces and interfaces for improved battery performance.
The new knowledge is also being incorporated into courses offered at Georgia
Tech, and eventually at other universities as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The feasibility of using Raman
spectroscopy to directly probe many important surface species and new phases
relevant to electrode reactions has been demonstrated. In this project, in
operando surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is applied to well-designed
model systems (e.g. LiMn2O4-based electrodes) in order to gain deeper insights
into electrode surfaces. The surface structure and composition of battery
electrodes are directly correlated to their effects on battery capacity, rate
capability, cycling life, and capacity retention in order to unravel the
mechanisms of performance enhancement through surface modification and to
provide scientific guidelines for rational design of superior electrode
materials and structures. With rising demand for better battery life and
performance for a variety of applications (portable personal electronics,
medical devices, electric cars, etc.), this project seeks to better understand
the electrode surfaces that underpin battery performance. One graduate student
and one to two undergraduate students are working as research assistants on the
project; the students are gaining valuable experience with cutting-edge in
operando characterization techniques.