* 1410915
* EAGER: Earth Abundant Element Nitride Semiconductors Based on ZnSnN2
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Steven Durbin, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 171,970.00

Technical Description: There exists a poorly understood semiconductor family
closely related to the (In,Ga)N family where the column III element is replaced
by an ordered cation sublattice composed of equal numbers of Zn and column IV
(Si, Ge, Sn) atoms. While the Si- and Ge-containing members have been
synthesized, the narrow band-gap member based on Sn -- key to realizing photon
absorption and emission in the visible wavelength portion of the spectrum -- has
not, limiting the application prospects of this family whose band-gap range is
very similar to that of (In,Ga)N. This project is focused on growth and
characterization of high-quality single-crystal thin films of zinc tin nitride
and the determination of its fundamental optical and electrical properties,
particularly with respect to the influence of defects and disorder. Thin films
are grown using a plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy technique.
Crystallinity and microstructure are evaluated using in-situ reflection high
energy diffraction as well as x-ray diffraction and both electron and scanning
probe microscopy tools; stoichiometry is evaluated using energy dispersive
spectrometry calibrated using ion beam analysis. Optical properties are
evaluated using optical absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy, and
electrical characteristics are measured using Hall effect
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Many inorganic
semiconductor alternatives to silicon solar cells contain indium, an element
only three times more abundant than silver and a commodity experiencing
significant increases in demand. The II-IV-nitride family in contrast is
synthesized from earth-abundant elements for which there already exists
significant recycling infrastructure, making it of interest both from economic
and environmental perspectives for optoelectronic applications such as
photovoltaics and solid state lighting. High-quality samples of new materials
also provide important opportunities in the broader semiconductor community to
improve our understanding of thin film growth processes, and the nature and role
of defects in determining fundamental material properties. Educating students in
contemporary issues in semiconductor synthesis and characterization, as well as
photovoltaics, provides them with important skills highly relevant to the
semiconductor industry and the realization of next-generation devices. Exposing
high school students to basic solar cell fabrication provides a valuable pathway
to encouraging them to consider careers in science and engineering, while at the
same time providing them insight into limitations of current photovoltaic
technology.