* 1410564
* Development of Multiferroic Nanocomposites for 3D Electroactive Cell Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Christine Schmidt, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Florida is cofunded by the Nano- Biosensor
program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems (ENG). The goal of this project is to develop new types of
materials that are capable of generating a local electric field in response to
an applied magnetic field, which the human body is permeable to. Electric fields
play a critical role in many of the body processes, ranging from the neural
circuitry of our brains, to how one sees and hears among others. However, there
is a lack of a non-invasive method in which one may apply electric fields
remotely to the body. The main focus of this project is in developing novel
methods to prepare new types of materials that are capable of generating a local
electric field in response to an applied external magnetic field, and these
materials will be incorporated into scaffolds for neural tissue engineering. The
technological broader impact of the project is in developing novel materials
that could lead to an entirely new way of treating nervous system diseases,
tissue regeneration and repair. In addition to the technical impact of this
program, outreach events will be developed to promote the involvement of women
in science, with a range of approaches that target students from elementary to
graduate levels. In terms of diversity, the Principle Investigators will enhance
the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority students from the
undergraduate degree through to academic careers. These activities will be
carried out in collaboration with Southeast Alliance for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate program on the campus.

Technical: Electric fields play an important role in a wide range of biological
processes, including prenatal development, cell signaling, nerve sprouting,
wound healing, etc. As a result, a range of devices have been developed that are
capable of delivering electric fields to the human body. However, at present, it
is not possible to apply electric fields to interior parts of the body in a non-
invasive manner. With this award, the researchers plan to overcome this
limitation with the development of a 3-D multiferroic nanocomposite-based cell
scaffold. Multiferroic composite materials are materials that couple multiple
types of ferroic ordering, which leads to new types of ordering including the
magnetoelectric effect. For example, magnetoelectric multiferroic materials are
capable of generating an electric field in response to an applied magnetic
field, which the body is permeable to. The primary goal of this project is to
synthesize biocompatible multiferroic nanomaterials and to incorporate them into
biopolymer hydrogels. After developing biocompatible electroactive composite
scaffolds, the researchers will study relationships between electric fields and
the fate of cells. With the incorporation of multiferroic materials in a
biopolymer scaffold, this project seeks to assemble a cell scaffold material
that fully mimics the chemical, topographical, mechanical, and electrical
properties of native tissue. The proposed research is multidiscliplinary and
involves collaboration among faculty members in different departments such as
Chemistry, Biomedical Engineering, and Materials Science & Engineering
departments in the Campus. Through this collaboration, students will be exposed
to creative thinking and cooperative co-advising of research projects that
transcend research groups and disciplines.