* 1410581
* Supramolecular Assembly of Charged Nanoparticles: Understanding the Nucleation Process that Connects Kinetic and Equilibrium Behaviors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Yao Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Many technological applications of nanoparticles rely on our ability to control
the interactions of nanoparticles to exploit their ordered structures and
collective properties. In this project funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Yao
Lin and his students at University of Connecticut are conducting studies to
understand the physical mechanisms that make possible the controlled assembly in
solution of nanoparticles with different types of molecules (ligands) grafted
onto them, and to predict where the tendencies to aggregate further and to
disperse are balanced so that equilibrium is reached. A goal is a general
approach for prediction and control of the formation of bigger "supramolecular"
structures from a large set of nanoparticles. Understanding the mechanism of the
assembly process can contribute to the generation of hierarchical,
multicomponent materials and systems, eventually approaching the level of
sophistication found in nature. Using biologically inspired mechanisms to
synthesize supramolecular structures provides new opportunities and challenges
in chemical research and education. The PI aims to address students needs for
interdisciplinary education and high quality research experience in this
emerging field. The proposed research will be integrated into curriculum
materials and outreach activities, providing interdisciplinary training and
vibrant research experiences for students at different levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intermolecular interactions define the self-assembly
pathways and the kinetics of the formation of large-scale supramolecular
structures. In nature, numerous globular proteins can be "polymerized" into
specific helical or tubular assemblies via a well-defined nucleation-growth
mechanism, as exemplified by the formation of actin filaments and microtubules.
Inspired by the sophisticated assembly mechanism, the PI is developing a general
strategy for controlled assembly of ligand-grafted, charged nanoparticles.
Guided by a thermodynamic analysis, fibrous supramolecular structures assembled
from polypeptide-grafted, charged nanoparticles have been successfully created
in the preliminary study. Using these nanoparticles as a model system, the
research focuses on: (1) conducting kinetic analysis to understand the
nucleation mechanism involved in the fibrous supramolecular assembly of charged
nanoparticles, and (2) determining the phase diagram for the self-association of
charged nanoparticles and elucidating the transition mechanism between different
supramolecular structures. By mimicking nature's assembly approaches, the
research is developing a general strategy for assembling nanoparticle building
blocks to predictable superstructures, and providing insights into the critical
nucleation process that connects kinetic and equilibrium behaviors of
nanoparticles self-associations. Particularly, the understanding of
thermodynamic and kinetic processes involved in the fibrous assembly of
nanoparticles tests the applicability of classic theories obtained from the
studies of the protein polymerizations, leading to the need for development of a
more generalized model.