* 1410450
* SusChEM:  Environmentally Friendly Microfiber Polycarbonate Meshes for Continuous Oil Retrieval
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Mark Grinstaff, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The most commonly used clean-up techniques after an oil spill are in-situ
burning, mechanical methods (booms, skimming, and vacuums), and chemical
dispersants and/or sorbent materials. Each technique possesses advantages and
disadvantages that dictate their use in various oil-spill scenarios. One of the
most successful, cost-effective, and versatile methods is the use of porous
sorbent materials to remove oil from the surface of a body of water (i.e., an
oil absorbing sponge). However, the oil selectivity, reusability, safety, and
lack of biodegradability of these synthetic sorbent materials are of significant
concern. The goal of this project is to prepare and explore an environmentally
friendly, biodegradable oil absorbing sponge for enhanced oil recovery after an
oil spill. Different polymer-based materials will be synthesized and
characterized in terms of their mechanical and oil-absorbing properties and
their biodegradability. In addition to addressing this need for improved
environmentally friendly methods to clean up an oil spill, these research
activities will train graduate students who will benefit from an
interdisciplinary educational experience. These activities will contribute to
positive societal outcomes by increasing fundamental scientific knowledge on
polymers, educating the workforce in materials science and engineering, and
potentially leading to improved polymer-based technologies for today's
challenges.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The primary goals of this proposal are to develop an environmentally friendly
continuous oil recovery system based on new, biodegradable, safe, and highly
tunable poly(glycerol carbonate) meshes, and at the same time educate and train
undergraduate and graduate students in a highly interdisciplinary research
environment. Specifically, a combined mechanical (skimming/vacuum) and synthetic
biodegradable sorbent material system is proposed to retrieve oil after an oil
spill that addresses the recovery, reusability, safety, and lack of
biodegradability of the current systems. In Objective 1, a library of fatty acid
derivatized poly(1,3-glycerol carbonate)s and poly(1,2-glycerol carbonate)s will
be synthesized in high yield with molecular weight above 50,000 g/mol via ring-
opening polymerization of the corresponding carbonate or epoxide with CO2,
respectively, and subsequently characterized. In Objective 2, electrospun
polymeric meshes of the poly(glycerol carbonate)s will be fabricated and the oil
absorbent, degradation, and mechanical properties will be determined. In
Objective 3, the efficiency of oil extraction/recovery using the biodegradable
mechanically robust polymeric meshes will be determined in a continuous, vacuum-
assisted system and compared to the current gold-standard sorbent (a nonwoven
polypropylene mesh). Completion of these objectives will provide: 1) novel
synthetic approaches to functionalized poly(1,3-glycerol carbonate)s and
poly(1,2-glycerol carbonate)s; 2) correlation of polymer structure on the
control of degradation rates; 3) an understanding of the oil and water
wettability in highly porous poly(glycerol carbonate) fiber meshes; and 4)
design criteria for developing new polymeric materials for enhanced oil recovery
after an oil spill.