* 1410599
* Resolving competing orders and symmetry-breaking in cuprate and iron pnictide high temperature superconductors using infrared Hall measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2018
* John Cerne, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 257,378.00

Non-Technical Abstract

Superconductors conduct electricity without any resistance and have provided
fascinating new science as well as important new technologies (from medical
imaging to high energy particle accelerators to telecommunications filters to
maglev trains). One of the biggest technological challenges of conventional
superconductors is that they have to be cooled to very low temperatures using
expensive and increasingly scarce liquid helium. This award supports research on
new materials that superconduct at significantly higher temperatures and have
challenged our understanding of superconductivity. These high temperature
superconductors have attracted a great deal of attention in the last three
decades for their rich and often unresolved behavior as well as their
technological applications. The researchers at the State University of New York
at Buffalo use new infrared techniques they developed to explore how these
materials behave as a function of chemical composition, magnetic field,
temperature, and probing frequency. The project involves graduate and
undergraduate students. The outreach program involves a public high school in
Buffalo and will have a large impact on urban mixed-income public school
students.

Technical Abstract

This award from the Condensed Matter Physics program in the Division of
Materials Research supports research on cuprate and iron pnictide high
temperature superconductors (HTS) at the State University of New York at
Buffalo. HTS materials have attracted a great deal of attention in the last
three decades for their rich and often unresolved behavior as well as their
technological applications. Due to the characteristic energy scale of many of
these properties and the unique ability of magneto-polarimetry to probe
asymmetries and order in the electronic structure, these HTS are extremely well-
suited for exploration using terahertz Hz (2-6 meV) and infrared (IR: 100-1200
meV) Hall measurements. The principal investigator studies a wide range of HTS
materials as a function of doping, temperature, probe energy, and magnetic
field. The sensitivity and broad spectral extent of the proposed measurements
provide new insights into the unusual pseudogap phase (PGP) in these HTS
materials, as well as new information about charge, spin, and magnetic ordering.
A key question in the cuprates is whether the PGP is simply a precursor to
superconductivity or whether it is a fully fledged new phase with its own broken
symmetry. The objective is to provide insight into the mechanism(s) breaking the
symmetry. In the iron pnictides, the work explores a wide range of anomalous
behavior, including anomalous optical absorption far above the superconducting
gap, unusual spectral weight transfer in the IR, possible coexistence of
magnetism and superconductivity, spin-ordering, and a PGP. The research involves
undergraduate students and two PhD students.