* 1410159
* Diffusion and Solute-Solute Interactions in Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gary Collins, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical Summary

Intermetallic compounds are key technological materials. As an example, NiAl, or
nickel aluminide, is used as a structural material in jet turbines of Boeing
aircraft. It must retain strength under enormous centrifugal forces and white-
hot temperatures. Physical and material properties ultimately depend on
structure and dynamics at the atomic level. Like the familiar rock-salt crystal
structure, intermetallics such as NiAl and the ones to be studied in this
project have highly ordered structures, but inevitably contain point defects.
These include atoms on wrong sites and missing atoms, called "vacancies".
Vacancies make it possible for atoms in solids to move through jumps of atoms
into neighboring vacancies, a process known as diffusion. However, such motion
may lead to agglomeration of defects, weakening the material and increasing the
potential for fracture. For this reason, it is important to study the behavior
of defects in crystals. This project will use a nuclear spectroscopy that can
monitor the locations of probe atoms on an atomic scale. The spectroscopy, PAC,
measures interactions of nuclei of impurity probe atoms with fields produced by
the local surroundings of the probes. Different local surroundings lead to
distinct fields that serve to label and identify the locations of the probes. In
addition, the rate at which the probe atoms jump at high temperature can be
measured. This project has two main goals. (1) To obtain a better understanding
of the systematics of diffusion through studies on series of related compounds.
(2) To measure interaction energies of pairs of impurity atoms in compounds,
which may attract or repel each other. Achieving these goals will contribute to
a better understanding of the behavior of intermetallic compounds at high
temperatures, measured on a true atomic scale. The PI will integrate the
research with education by training graduate, under-graduate as well as high-
schools students. Efforts will be made to involve female students and members of
under-represented minorities. Promising students from within the university and
local high schools will be sought out and a tutorial group research website will
be maintained.

Technical Summary

Intermetallic compounds are key technological materials. Physical and material
properties ultimately depend on structure and dynamics at the atomic level. In
this project, Professor Gary S. Collins and students are applying a specialized
nuclear hyperfine spectroscopy, perturbed angular correlation of gamma rays
(PAC), to study diffusion phenomena and solute interactions in intermetallics.
Students receive interdisciplinary training in solid-state physics, nuclear
laboratory methods, and data analysis. The principal measurable is the nuclear
quadrupole interaction at PAC probe nuclei caused by local electric field
gradients (EFGs). The project builds on twin methodologies pioneered in
Collins's laboratory over the previous ten years. The first is measurement of
diffusional jump-frequencies of probe atoms made through analysis of nuclear
relaxation in PAC spectra caused by fluctuating EFGs. The second is
determination of differences in energies of probe-atom solutes at different
crystallographic sites. Both kinds of measurements are made in thermodynamic
equilibrium at high temperature. PAC results will be buttressed by classical
diffusivity measurements out of which correlation factors for impurity diffusion
will be determined for the first time in a direct way. Three major efforts will
be undertaken, as follows:

1) Jump-frequencies of cadmium tracer atoms will be measured in select systems
to round out extensive studies already made for five series of rare-earth phases
having the Cu3Au structure. 2) The correlation factor is an important parameter
in the theory of impurity diffusion but has never been measured in a direct way.
Diffusivity measurements will be carried out on several alloys for which precise
PAC jump-frequency data already exist. Dividing the diffusivity by the jump-
frequency yields the correlation factor; its temperature dependence will also be
determined. 3) Interaction energies between pairs of solute atoms will be
measured for the first time, with one atom of the pair being a PAC probe atom.
Crystal EFGs and EFGs caused by solute atoms near the PAC probes will be used to
identify locations of probe and solute atoms. Association enthalpies will be
determined from temperature dependences of solute site fractions for a variety
of solutes and phases, including phases having common, cubic, crystal
structures.

This work is fundamental and interdisciplinary in scope, bridging solid-state
physics and materials science. PAC has an excellent ability to determine
detailed atomic arrangements and atom movements at high temperature. Jump-
frequency measurements on additional series of rare-earth alloys will help to
firm up rules showing how diffusion behavior (and site-preferences) of probe
atoms depend on phase, composition and temperature. Detailed diffusion
mechanisms may be elucidated for complex crystal structures. Measured
correlation factors may also depend upon, and give insight into, diffusion
mechanisms. Studies of solute-solute interactions will be used to formulate
heuristic rules for predicting site preferences and estimating association
energies between solute-atom pairs.