* 1410950
* Testing the Millisecond Magnetar Model for Gamma-Ray Bursts and Superluminous Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Brian Metzger, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 381,234.00

This award supports theoretical astrophysical studies of magnetars, which are a
rarely observed type of neutron star. Neutron stars are city-sized objects that
form out of the gravitational collapse of massive stars during a supernova
explosion. Magnetars are fast-spinning and highly magnetic neutron stars that
may have ultra-powerful eruptions in just a few hours. Their formation is still
a mystery, but these short-lived outbursts are proposed to be the cause of many
mysterious gamma-ray bursts and superluminous supernova explosions in the
universe. The main focus of this work is to develop a prediction from the
theoretical models that will be tested by observations. The PI will train and
mentor undergraduate students in research and organize a two week long
international summer school on ?theoretical modeling of astrophysical
transients,? which will teach students how to analyze the physical properties of
short-lived observed astronomical phenomena.

The PI and his team will develop models of the neutrino-heated outflows from
newly-formed protomagnetars. They will also solve the neutrino-heated
magnetohydrodynamic wind equations along open field lines set by the force-free
geometry of the magnetosphere. Finding new sites for the heavy r-process to
operate is important for nucleosynthesis models, in general. The work will also
study the observational signatures of the birth of millisecond magnetars by
providing optical, X-ray and gamma-ray spectral predictions for comparison with
observations. The work will also inform our understanding of the nuclear
equation of state especially near the high-mass limit, which will probe the most
extreme physical conditions in the universe.