* 1410031
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Black-Box Evaluation of Cryptographic Entropy at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Hovav Shacham, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2019
* USD 384,000.00

The ability to generate random numbers -- to flip coins -- is crucial for many
computing tasks, from Monte Carlo simulation to secure communications. The
theory of building such subsystems to generate random numbers is well
understood, but the gap between theory and practice is surprisingly wide. As
built today, these subsystems are opaque and fragile. Flaws in these subsystems
can compromise the security of millions of Internet
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop black-box techniques for
finding entropy failures at Internet scale related to randomness. These
techniques, which build on programming languages, operating systems, networking,
security, and cryptography, will then be applied to perform a systematic,
ongoing census of the state of random number generation vulnerabilities. Through
this census, the project can analyze the "longtail" of deployed networked
systems rather than a handful chosen a priori.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop and disseminate defensive analysis tools that will help programmers
debug and correct entropy problems in their code before they ship it. It will
produce cryptographic countermeasures and entropy-gathering subsystems that
provide better security guarantees than existing systems, reducing the impact of
those entropy failures that do slip through.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result
will be a better understanding of entropy and more trustworthy systems, today
and in the future.