* 1410126
* Simulation studies of ground state phases and criticality in correlated quantum matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Anders Sandvik, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 396,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on new states of
electronic matter in materials. Materials derive their properties from their
microscopic building blocks; atoms and molecules, and, in particular, the
electrons that we often envision as swirling around atomic nuclei. In metals a
fraction of the electrons disassociate from individual atoms and migrate through
the system, while in other materials all electrons remain localized. In either
case, the electrons give materials the electrical and magnetic properties that
are exploited in electronics components and other technological applications.
This project aims at increasing our understanding of the ways in which electrons
can form a wealth of different complex states due to their interactions with
each other. The interactions depend on the specific material which hosts the
electrons. Being microscopic particles, the motion and interactions of electrons
are governed by quantum mechanics, and it is technically challenging to
construct tractable theoretical models to describe them, and to understand and
tailor their properties. In this project, models of interacting electrons are
studied under conditions relevant to, for example, high temperature
superconductor materials formed by copper-oxide layers separated from each other
by other atoms. In these materials electrons form a new state of matter,
superconductivity, which can conduct electricity without loss or resistance at
temperatures where oxygen would be a liquid. The models are studied using large-
scale computer simulations. At the heart of the project is to understand how an
insulating magnet is transformed into new magnetic states when a model
parameter, for example describing electron interaction, is changed, and how
additional electrons injected into this state behave. Understanding this model
system may be key to understanding the physical origins of superconductivity in
these materials and may provide a key to the discovery of new materials which
exhibit superconductivity at higher temperatures opening avenues to
technological applications such as low loss power transmission and new kinds of
electronic devices. In addition to its scientific significance, the project aims
to train graduate students in state-of-the-art physical modeling and computer
simulations, and to help develop user-friendly software for other researchers
applying the methods and models developed.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on new states of
electronic matter in materials. An important aspect of condensed matter physics
is to study ground states and excitations of strongly correlated quantum-matter
systems for example, localized spins of highly frustrated quantum magnets or
valence electrons of cuprate high temperature superconductors. Quantum field-
theory descriptions often contain emergent ingredients, such as spinons, holons,
and gauge fields, which are proposed on the basis of phenomenology and symmetry
arguments. The field theories are typically only solvable in certain limits.
This research focuses on utilizing numerically exact quantum Monte Carlo
techniques to study microscopic Hamiltonians, which can be tuned to various
regimes where emergent particles and fields can be detected by studying low-
energy physics. These studies can be related to field-theory results, and also
can yield experimentally detectable signatures of unconventional collective
electronic states. This research can therefore bridge lattice-scale physics and
emergent low-energy behavior, with potential impact on theoretical as well as
experimental research on correlated quantum matter. The PI will study J-Q models
in which the magnetically ordered ground state of a 2D quantum antiferromagnet
can be destroyed, leading to a quantum phase transition to a non-magnetic state
with emergent local singlets that form a valence-bond solid. These models appear
to host unconventional low-energy quantum objects which can be interpreted as
spinons and a U(1) gauge field. The PI will address how these particles and
fields emerge from the lattice scale up to large length-scales accessible with
powerful simulation techniques tailored to the models. The main objectives are:
(i) To relate the excitations of J-Q models to gauge field theory, in particular
to explore analogies of the Higgs mechanism and Higgs boson in systems close to
the quantum phase transition between the antiferromagnet and the valence-bond
solid. (ii) To introduce mobile charge carriers which presumably would lead to
holons, and explore connections with the "strange metal" state of the cuprate
high temperature superconductors. New and improved simulation algorithms will be
developed as an integral part of the project and these have broad applications
in condensed matter physics as well as in research on ultra-cold atomic
condensates and systems of interest in the quantum information research. The
models and methods are also of interest in high-energy particle physics,
providing a simpler setting than standard lattice gauge-field theory to study
non-perturbative quantum many-body physics.