* 1410247
* Heat, Charge, and Spin: Thermal Spintronics in Ferromagnetic Films and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 473,229.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motion of charges through
metals and semiconductors produces heat. This fundamental result of the
collisions of electrons in electrical currents means that modern electronic
circuits, where currents flow rapidly in features with nanometer dimensions,
suffer losses and other challenges due to high densities of heat. If information
could instead be carried by angular momentum in the form of the electron's spin,
much of this heat can be avoided. Furthermore, recent work suggests that
application of heat to nanomagnetic systems could provide a long-sought source
for such spin currents, in addition to allowing possible applications in energy
harvesting based on heat, charge, and spin flow. In this project, the principal
investigator and his research team carry out fundamental studies of the
interactions between these flows. The essential technique is a novel thermal
isolation structure that allows accurate measurements of tiny temperature
changes of magnetic thin films and nanostructures. The results allow a new view
into the phenomena arising from the coupling of heat, charge, and spin, and form
the essential foundations for designing and optimizing new devices for
nanoelectronics and energy harvesting. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of
pure spin currents is an important requirement for future spintronic
nanoelectronics models. However, reliable methods to generate such a flow of
angular momentum without associated charge remain elusive. Recently some groups
have reported that a spin current can be produced simply by applying a thermal
gradient to a ferromagnetic material. This effect, called the spin Seebeck
effect, has generated tremendous interest in the interaction of heat, charge and
spin in ferromagnetic systems and has also raised the possibility of new
thermoelectric devices based on magnetic materials. Such thermoelectric systems
could offer breakthrough performance by decoupling heat and charge flow, one of
the traditional challenges in thermoelectric materials. This project extends the
principal investigator's recent work on thermoelectric and thermomagnetic
effects in thin film metallic ferromagnets. His research team's measurements are
enabled by a micromachined thermal isolation platform that removes potentially
confounding effects introduced by the presence of a highly thermally conductive
bulk substrate. This allows accurate measurements of the thermopower
(traditional Seebeck effect), thermal and electrical conductivity, and Peltier
effects in addition to a variety of less widely known thermoelectric and
thermomagnetic effects. All these measurements can be performed on a single
sample. These novel techniques provide the probe of the physics governing the
interaction of heat, charge and spin currents in nanomagnetic systems required
to understand and optimize their potential use for spintronics and energy
generation.