* 1410390
* RUI: Mutagenesis Studies of Old and New Firefly Luciferases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Bruce Branchini, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 599,386.00

The goal of this project is to increase the understanding of how living
organisms convert chemical energy into light. Bioluminescence--the emission of
light by living organisms--is a beautiful natural phenomenon that has enchanted
children, challenged those who have tried to understand it, and provided the
basis for an important research tool. The project addresses the need to produce
novel luciferase proteins to improve current research applications of
bioluminescence and to advance the development of new ones. The proposed
research will be carried out at a liberal arts college with an established
record of effective research training of undergraduate students. Modern
facilities and equipment provide an excellent environment for students and
faculty to engage in collaborative research. The PI has actively directed
undergraduate research projects for 37 summers. Approximately 98 undergraduate
students, approximately 70% of whom are women and approximately 10% who are from
traditionally underrepresented groups, have worked with him and approximately
60% of these participants entered graduate or professional school. Students who
work in the PI's lab and make substantive contributions to a project become co-
authors and are actively involved in the writing of manuscripts and presenting
their results at scientific meetings. The aim is to offer a meaningful research
experience to a diverse group of students. Moreover, several of the students in
the proposed program will be participants in a department collaborator's NSF
S-STEM grant. All program participants will engage in modern mainstream
bioluminescence research and will contribute positively to increasing the
numbers of well-prepared graduates for entry into graduate programs and
professional scientific careers.

Two major objectives are addressed in this project that were developed during
related investigations with prior NSF-RUI grant support. The first is to
determine the basis for the altered emission color (574 nm), resistance to low
pH red shifting, and unexpectedly greater specific activity (compared to the
brightest North American firefly Photinus pyralis) of a newly cloned luciferase
from Photinus scintillans. The main aim is to better understand the natural
determinants of firefly emission color and pH stability through mutagenesis
studies of the enzymes from both species. The PI will fully characterize the
physical and spectral properties of the new enzyme and undertake biochemical
studies to identify key amino acid residues that determine the enhanced
properties. The proposed investigation will involve a mutagenesis approach and
variants of the enzymes will be studied by: steady state kinetics, quantitative
analysis of bioluminescence reaction products, and spectral methods including
fluorescence and bioluminescence emission techniques. With collaborator
Professor Andrew Gulick, the crystal structure of a complex of the novel
luciferase with DLSA, an inhibitor that binds to the active site, will be
determined and the mutagenesis data will be interpreted in a structural context.
The second objective is to develop new substrates and red-emitting luciferase
variants for improved dual color (analyte) reporter gene applications. The plan
is to seek new assay methodology with greater convenience of performance and
enhanced sensitivity compared to current technology. The PI will use 2
luciferase variants and 2 bioluminescence-producing substrates-- beetle
luciferin and a novel analog called benzothiophene luciferin. Additionally, the
PI may explore the use of fluorine-containing derivatives of benzothiophene
luciferin to be made by synthetic routes that have been designed. The 2
luciferase variants are engineered to produce well-separated green (~520 nm) and
red (~617 nm) emission spectra. The PI will use several mutagenesis strategies
to produce enzymes that produce light with further separated emission maxima.
The assays will be optimized with respect to pH, signal stabilizers, lysing
agents, substrate concentrations and spectral filters.