* 1410741
* Tunable interface properties of correlated and topological materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Ilya Vekhter, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2020
* USD 309,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education focused on the discovery and manipulation of materials
properties and phenomena at surfaces and interfaces of recently discovered and
predicted classes of insulators and superconductors, and hybrid materials and
structures involving these or these in combination with strongly correlated
materials. Topological insulators are insulating materials that do not conduct
electricity in the bulk but are surrounded by metallic states that cover the
surfaces, edges, and interfaces. Similarly topological superconductors are
thought to be like ordinary superconductors in the bulk in that they conduct
electricity without loss, but their surfaces and edge are enveloped in a
fundamentally new quantum state of electrons with unusual properties. Hybrid
structures of these materials and ones that include strongly correlated
materials, that is materials where the strong interactions among electrons lead
to unusual properties that arise from the correlated motion of electrons, are
promising ingredients to discover new phenomena which are interesting in their
own right and may form the basis of new electronic device technologies for a
wide range of applications. The PI aims to build on previous work and
investigate how the properties of a topological material in the boundary region
at and near the surface of a topological material influence the properties of
the surface states that envelope the topological material. &lt;br/&gt;Some
properties of strongly correlated materials are more tunable than their analogs
in more conventional materials, making them interesting candidates for
technological applications. However, complete understanding and control of these
functionalities is an ongoing challenge. This is especially true at interfaces
that form the backbone of realistic devices, in large part because the behavior
of a material near a surface may differ qualitatively from that in the bulk.
This award supports research that builds on the PI's previous work to connect
the magnetic properties near the surfaces of topological superconductors and
insulators with realistic descriptions of both bulk and surface physics. The PI
will investigate hybrid devices combining superconductors, magnets, and
topological electronic materials, and establish new strategies to control their
properties and discover new phenomena. This award supports the discovery new
materials and materials-related phenomena that contribute to the knowledgebase
for future information technologies, and energy and related applications.
&lt;br/&gt;Research will be performed in collaboration with groups both in the
US and in Europe. Developing techniques that combine theoretical and
computational approaches pursued under this award will help train a new and
diverse generation of students, and prepare them for a variety of careers in
academia and in industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, and education that is
focused on surface properties of topological materials, and their interfaces
with strongly correlated electron materials. A key aspect of the research is to
develop a realistic description of the boundary at surfaces and interfaces and
understand how the boundary affects the surface states of topological matter.
Previous work shows that boundaries play an essential qualitative role in
determining the magnetic properties of topological insulator surface states.
Moreover, subdominant order parameter in topological superconductors can give
rise to static magnetism. Building on these results, the PI will develop methods
to address in detail the magnetic, spin transport, and superconducting
properties of hybrid structures of topological matter with magnetic,
superconducting, and other correlated electron systems. Among the crucial
ingredients of the models are the absence of inversion symmetry at the
interface, and its interplay with the strong spin-orbit interaction
characteristic of the bulk. To make progress, the PI will combine theoretical
methods of many-body physics with computational techniques. Since the magnetic
properties of the surface state depend on the details of the bulk band
structure, the PI will collaborate with colleagues performing first-principles
calculations to make materials-specific predictions. Research performed under
this award aims: to establish how to control the magnetic and spin transport
properties of the topological surface states, and to achieve spin control over
proximity and Josephson coupling and vice versa. These studies will advance
understanding of correlated electronic matter both for applications and in
search for novel quantum phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;Research will be performed in
collaboration with groups both in the US and in Europe. Developing techniques
that combine theoretical and computational approaches pursued under this award
will help train a new and diverse generation of students, and prepare them for a
variety of careers in academia and in industry.