* 1410883
* Collaborative Research:  GOALI: Experimentally-Validated Computational Approach to Developing and Predicting Kinetics in Anisotropic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Michele Manuel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,367.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the weight of vehicles can
increase fuel efficiency, which counters the rising economic and social costs of
energy extraction and use. Magnesium is attractive as a potential alternative to
steel and aluminum because of its low density, and high stiffness/weight and
strength/weight ratios. However, alloy development can be a slow and costly
process. To expedite the design of new casting alloys, this research uses
experimentally validated computational methods, with particular emphasis on
enabling a kinetically-informed approach. In the spirit of the Materials Genome
Initiative, this project brings together computation and theory (Univ. Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign), experimentation (Univ. Florida), and industrial modeling
(ThermoCalc, LLC) in a joint effort to develop the science and data to predict
relationships between processing, material structure, and eventually properties.
The science and engineering advances will be applicable to other alloys as new
methods are developed to study solidification and predict how atoms move at the
atomic scale. This project takes advantage of new advances in computing power,
new theoretical developments, and new high-throughput experimental methods. The
program will support two PhD students, and the faculty are involved both in
undergraduate research and education of high-school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To combat
emissions and increase the fuel economy in transportation vehicles, considerable
effort has been made to understand and enhance the structure-property
relationships in magnesium (Mg) alloys due to their low density. This
collaborative project unites computation (Univ. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign) and
experimentation (Univ. Florida) in an integrated fashion to significantly
advance the knowledge of transport in cast Mg alloys. In the spirit of the
Materials Genome Initiative, the PIs proceed in an integrated and self-
consistent manner to understand and predict transport phenomena during
solidification. The approach integrates computation and experiment throughout,
providing validation and connecting fundamental mechanisms to mesoscale
transport. In collaboration with ThermoCalc, LLC, they will create new kinetic
databases to enable material development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
approach is to produce a new fundamental understanding of solute and vacancy
transport in Mg in a framework to predict phase transformation phenomena for new
Mg alloys. A unified understanding of multiscale behavior provides a science-
driven approach to future alloy development in a materials-genome framework. The
data from this program will be disseminated via public databases (NIST MatDL)
and the development of databases for mesoscale phase-field and continuum-level
simulations. By accounting for temperature, time and compositional effects, the
predictions from this work allow for the complete merger of processing-structure
and structure-property predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four
tasks that build upon each other to predict the mesoscale microstructure for
cast Mg: 1) Determine mobilities in binary and higher order systems for HCP and
liquid Mg. Density functional theory (DFT) will lead this approach by
calculating activation energies and mobilities. 2) Determine solid-liquid
surface energies and molar volumes in all relevant systems via experiments and
molecular dynamics simulations in DFT. 3) Assemble molar volumes, surface
energies and mobilities in repositories and mobility databases. DICTRA
simulations are compared to diffusion multiples, and segregation behavior and
homogenization temperatures validated with experimental data. 4) Predict
solidified microstructures through the integration of mobilities, molar volumes
and surface energies. Simulations include the prediction of nuclei number
density, size, and composition as a function of temperature and cooling rate,
and are validated with experimental grain size distributions obtained from
similar processing routes.&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes are a new fundamental
understanding of atomic transport in HCP metals, with mobility, volumetric and
surface energy databases that will serve both as a repository and a foundation
for increasing system complexity (additional phases, solutes, etc.). The data
will be supplied in a logical, manageable, and accessible fashion for transition
into commercial practice. This platform may allow predictions of nucleation
behavior in other relevant phases in the future.