* 1410265
* Tuning electronic instabilities in triangular surface lattices via subsurface doping
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Hanno Weitering, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 366,296.00

Non-Technical Abstract: This project aims to controllably modify the electronic
properties of monatomic thin film materials via chemical doping experiments. The
thin film systems under investigation consist of tin or thallium atoms arranged
in various triangular patterns on a silicon substrate. The monatomic tin layer
is of particular interest because there is the potential to obtain novel
electronic materials with possibly exotic properties, such as superconductivity
via chemical doping. Exotic magnetism may be obtained through the chemical
doping of monatomic thallium films. Atomic-scale understanding of the quantum
mechanical mechanisms that give rise to such emergent electronic behavior is
crucial in order to advance a new class of electronic materials as the possible
replacement of silicon in, e.g., nano-electronic devices used in information
technology. The proposed science and supporting infrastructure at The University
of Tennessee provide an excellent setting for the education and training of
internationally competitive graduate students. A rigorous plan for integrating
sponsored research with undergraduate education is being implemented to boost
enrolment in the physics major. The outreach program targets sophomore and
junior high school students who are participating in the prestigious Tennessee
Governor School for the Sciences and Engineering. By providing all of these
young people with unique research and educational experiences, the investigators
aim to entice these deep thinkers and future decision-makers to pursue an
advanced degree in the physical sciences.

Technical Abstract:

A critical aspect for advancing knowledge and practical applications of complex
materials is the ability to control their electronic properties via chemical
doping. For a strictly two-dimensional system, chemical doping inevitably
introduces structural disorder as the ionized dopant impurities become an
integral part of the two-dimensional electron system. This project builds on the
main accomplishments from earlier NSF sponsored research, in which hole doping
of a surface layer or thin film was accomplished via subsurface- or ?modulation
doping?. In analogy with studies on complex oxide systems, the investigations
aim to widen the concentration range of the hole dopants and expand the
modulation doping concept to n-type species, so as to establish a full
electronic phase diagram. This strategy is being employed to dope triangular
surface lattices with strong Mott correlations and strong spin-orbit coupling.
The exciting possibilities of d-wave superconductivity in the former, and spin
density wave instabilities in the latter will be explored as a function of the
doping level. The project involves thin film growth in ultrahigh vacuum,
scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, and angle-resolved photoemission
experiments, all in conjunction with theoretical support from outside
collaborators. The proposed science and supporting infrastructure at The
University of Tennessee provide an excellent setting for the education and
training of internationally competitive graduate students. A rigorous plan for
integrating sponsored research with undergraduate education is being implemented
to boost enrolment in the physics major. The outreach program targets sophomore
and junior high school students who are participating in the prestigious
Tennessee Governor School for the Sciences and Engineering. By providing all of
these young people with unique research and educational experiences, the
investigators aim to entice these deep thinkers and future decision-makers to
pursue an advanced degree in the physical sciences.