* 1410712
* A Novel Gap Spectroscopy Tool and Discovery of New Nodal Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 358,972.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their high transition
temperatures and exotic new correlated electronic states, high temperature
superconductors show a great potential for transformative applications, such as
quantum information processing. The objective of this project is to discover new
classes of unconventional superconducting materials and to examine them for
evidence of unconventional superconductivity using a new experimental technique
that the principal investigator discovered. The project trains graduate students
with backgrounds in physics and engineering to discover new materials and
phenomena at the forefront of condensed matter physics research. The students
also participate in international research, carrying out part of their Ph.D.
research at the Center for Functional Nanostructures at the Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology in Germany. The US and German laboratories complement each other,
thus enhancing the educational experience for the graduate students involved.
The principal Investigator has a history of broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups and is involved in outreach activities to recruit more
underrepresented students. This project is establishing a new experimental
technique of interest to condensed matter researchers, creating new
partnerships, collaborations, and facilities that impact the landscape of the
superconducting materials and applications fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award from the Condensed Matter Physics Program in the Division of Materials
Research supports the University of Maryland with a project focused on the quest
to discover new superconducting materials with new properties, and to further
refine the anisotropic nonlinear Meissner effect spectroscopy method into a
broadly useful technique that contributes significant results to the ongoing
debates about the pairing mechanism in unconventional superconductors. The
principal investigator's discovery of the anisotropic nonlinear Meissner effect
photoresponse helps to speed up the discovery of superconducting materials with
nontrivial and exotic properties. The method relies on the anisotropic nonlinear
Meissner effect, and the presence of Andreev bound states, to create images of
the nonlinear electrodynamic response of the superconductor that illustrate the
superconducting gap nodal directions. The method is sensitive to both bulk
properties (through the superfluid anisotropic nonlinear response) and surface
properties (through measurement of Andreev bound states associated with the
unconventional order parameter). A superconducting thin film is patterned into a
compact self-resonant spiral structure, excited near resonance in the radio-
frequency range, and scanned with a focused laser beam perturbation. At low
temperatures, direction-dependent nonlinearities in the reactive and resistive
properties of the resonator create photoresponse that maps out the directions of
nodes, or of bound states associated with these nodes, on the Fermi surface of
the superconductor. The method was demonstrated on a known nodal superconductor,
so the next step is to discover new nodal superconductors by extending the
method to work on single crystals and un-patterned thin films. The co-PI grows
the new superconducting materials and the PI performs the experiments both in-
house and in collaboration with a group in Karlsruhe, Germany, to discover new
nodal superconductors. The new materials discovered should have potential for
transformative applications, including new forms of superconducting electronics,
or sensitive single-photon detectors. The results are disseminated through
publications, talks and posters at international conferences, a research web
site, a tutorial web site explaining how to set up a nonlinear Meissner effect
experiment with minimal equipment, and continuation of the outreach activities
by the PI, co-PI and students.