* 1410472
* Collaborative Research: RAPID Assessment of 2013 Flood Sedimentation, Button Rock Reservoir, North St. Vrain Watershed, CO
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2016
* USD 11,475.00

This collaborative RAPID project will assess flood sedimentation in Button Rock
Reservoir, North St. Vrain watershed in north-central Colorado following the
September 2013 extreme event. In addition, it will fill knowledge gaps about
event-based sedimentation from fires and floods, and expand knowledge to annual
and decadal scales using a record of sediment accumulation since construction of
the reservoir in 1950. The sedimentary record will inform on trends in basin-
averaged erosion rates and sedimentation, as well as on trends in carbon storage
in natural or artificial lakes, and on rates of carbon export from North St.
Vrain Creek under flow scenarios from single, large events to flows over the
past six decades. Button Rock Reservoir provides a unique setting to assess the
effects of a very high magnitude, infrequent flood in the Front Range because
(1) no intentional flushing events have been conducted by the reservoir
operators since construction of the reservoir, (2) the reservoir stratigraphy
chronicles uninterrupted delta deposition, and (3) this is the only on-channel
reservoir with unimpeded, natural sediment flux from the Continental Divide to
the mountain front in a basin with no significant historic timber harvests, flow
regulation, or land use impacts. The team will collect four cores within the
delta deposit during the December 2013 to March 2014 timeframe. A ground-
penetrating radar survey will be completed of the exposed delta and subaqueous
portions of the reservoir. Together with information from pre-dam topographic
maps, information from these cores and the GPR survey will constrain the volume
and spatial distribution of sediment deposition. Samples from the delta cores
will be collected for radiocarbon analysis to constrain sediment accumulation
and provide insight into landscape denudation through basin-averaged erosion
rates. The carbon flux within the catchment will be determined from organic
carbon content in delta sediments. Discharge and precipitation records will be
compared with the core information to analyze trends in sediment flux into the
reservoir in response to event-based and seasonal drivers.

This project will collect a unique uniterrupted and undisturbed record of the
impact of floods and fires on erosion in Colorado's Front Range over the past
six decades. It will inform understanding of how the landscape responds to such
major events and the role of these events in moving Carbon among storage points
in the landscape. A near-term outcome of the work will be a refined estimate of
the amount of material moved by the September 2013 weather event--an event that
has necessitated the City of Longmont to remove the associated pulse of sediment
from the Button Creek Reservoir in order to regain reservoir capacity. The
project presents training experiences for graduate and undergraduate students,
forges a new collaboration between colleagues at two universities, and will
share information with entities that manage water and sediment flows along the
Front Range.