* 1410164
* An Isotope-Assisted Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Signaling Pathways Initiated at the Plasma Membrane of Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Michael Sussman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,347,252.00

Although the genome sequence of a plant was first reported in 2000, in the
ensuing years we have not yet been able to understand fully how these genes act
together to allow plants to grow, develop and withstand environmental stresses
like drought. Plants (unlike animals) cannot move to avoid the challenges they
face in their environment, and new knowledge is needed to allow us to regulate
plant growth and sustain improvements in crop yields. This project will help
elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which a group of important plant proteins
control plant cell growth and development; this information will help us develop
methods to maintain the crop yields that are important for our food, fuel,
shelter and clothing. This project will provide training for graduate students,
and offer educational opportunities and activities for the community, with the
basic goal of de-mystifying mass spectrometers and helping the public understand
how these instruments can provide amazing sensitivity and power for detecting
small amounts of good and bad compounds in our environment. A new high school
curriculum called "Global Warming, Campfires and Proteins: What Do They Have in
Common?" has been developed and its exercises invite students to experience the
ways that scientists explore the unknown as they probe the genetics and
biochemistry of plants, and map out the interplay of molecules, plants and
humans at the global level.

In the genome of Arabidopsis and other plants, protein kinases represent the
largest of all gene families, pointing to a complexity in the phosphoproteome
that remains poorly understood. The goal of this project is to increase our
understanding of protein kinase mediated signaling by the development and
application of mass spectrometric based isotope-assisted quantitative proteomic
and computational tools. The biological emphasis is on quantifying and
evaluating the in vivo function of rapid protein phosphorylation changes
initiated by a newly discovered plant peptide hormone/receptor kinase cognate
pair that regulates the rate of proton extrusion and cell expansion. Stable
isotope-assisted untargeted "discovery" measurements are performed with a high
resolution Orbitrap-based tandem mass spectrometer followed by targeted
measurements using chemically synthesized heavy isotope labeled phosphopeptide
standards and a triple quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer. Reverse genetic
experiments using Arabidopsis plants containing mutations in the phosphorylated
amino acids provide final tests of the in planta functions for specific
phosphosites. A computational approach will be used to collate data performed
under a large number of environmental and genetic perturbations. These network
based computational methods of clustering large datasets are aimed at obtaining
a more global picture of the protein kinase based signaling pathways. Overall,
these experiments will identify networks of key growth regulating signaling
pathways, as well as reveal important new insights on the molecular mechanism by
which cells expand.