* 1410435
* Topological Physics and Light Matter Interactions: From Floquet Topological Insulators to Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Gil Refael, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2018
* USD 326,711.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Physics contribute funds to this award which supports
theoretical research and education focused on means to stabilize and utilize
topological behavior through light-matter interactions in a variety of systems.
Topological insulators possess some amazing properties such as the ability to
conduct electricity without dissipation at their boundaries while being
insulating through their interior. The research which will be carried out under
this award is geared toward extending concepts of topological behavior of matter
when it interacts with light. This presents a fertile ground for fundamental and
applied research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will concentrate on three
themes. The first is to employ topological insulator surfaces for energy
harvesting and detection of infra-red light. The second is to use light to turn
an ordinary insulator into a topological insulator. The third is to create
unique edge states in a hybrid system of a semiconductor in a cavity that could
bridge semiconductor and optical technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has the potential of introducing new techniques for energy harvesting
and light detection and paving the way to new photonic devices based on
topological principles. The award will allow training of graduate students and
postdocs in an interdisciplinary research environment at the intersection of
materials physics and optics. The PI will involve undergraduate students in this
research and incorporate the research material into the undergraduate level
course that he has developed at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Physics contribute funds to this award which supports theoretical research
and education focused on means to stabilize and utilize topological behavior
through light-matter interactions in a variety of systems. The first part of the
project is focused on turning the surface of three-dimensional (3D) topological
insulators into a photovoltaic platform aimed at the elusive mid-wavelength
infrared spectrum. The surface electrons of 3D topological insulators typically
have a minute photocurrent response to incident light in spite of the fact that
many electron-hole pairs form. The PI will exploit the spin-orbit locking on the
surface to turn it into a photocurrent rectifier. This can be done using a
magnetic grating deposited on the surface which should result in a substantial
photocurrent response to circularly polarized light. The PI will consider the
manifestations of this effect in realistic topological insulators, its
optimization with respect to the magnetic pattern deposited, and its extension
to other systems, such as two-dimensional (2D) topological insulators and 2D
quantum wells with Rashba interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second part
the PI will study ways to induce topological behavior in trivial semiconductors
using coherent light. Electrons in semiconductors driven into a topological
phase exhibit a non-equilibrium energy distribution determined by the strength
of the drive and various relaxation mechanisms. By deriving these distributions,
the PI will investigate under what circumstances the non-equilibrium effects do
not obstruct the topological behavior of the driven system, and analyze schemes
to detect this so-called Floquet topological phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third part of the project is focused on the possibility of creating topological
polariton states in optical waveguides coupled to trivial semiconductors.
Relying on the idea of the Floquet topological insulator, the PI will examine
whether it is possible to have a topological bound state of a cavity photon and
an exciton in a topologically trivial semiconducting quantum well. A topological
polariton state may exhibit strongly enhanced lifetimes, as well as could be
used as a nanophotonic isolator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the
potential of introducing new techniques for energy harvesting and light
detection and paving the way to new photonic devices based on topological
principles. The award will allow training of graduate students and postdocs in
an interdisciplinary research environment at the intersection of materials
physics and optics. The PI will involve undergraduate students in this research
and incorporate the research material into the undergraduate level course that
he has developed at Caltech.