* 1410985
* Design of Tough Resilient Gels Using Adhesive Rigid-Rod Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Megan Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 380,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the optimal design
parameters for strong, resilient polymeric materials to improve their use in a
wide range of applications including as smart structural materials that can heal
after failure, as tissue replacements for damaged joints, and as scaffolds for
the large-scale manufacture of stem cell cultures. Our study takes advantage of
the unique features of protein-based polymers to create materials with enhanced
toughness and resiliency. Our results will provide not only optimization
criteria, but will establish the relationships between molecular structure and
bulk, macroscopic material response. Building such connections between length
scales is very important, and will enable other academic and industrial
engineers to leverage our work to solve numerous problems in materials science.
This study will engage graduate, undergraduate and community college students in
materials research, while providing hands on training in state-of-the-art
experimental and computational methods. The students and the PI will participate
in community outreach events and visits to local elementary schools to advance a
public understanding of cutting edge materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enable the improved design of strong, resilient polymeric materials
by establishing the relationships between structure and mechanics in adhesive
rigid rod polymer networks. We use a model system made of filamentous cellular
proteins called microtubules with chemical and mechanical properties we can
tightly control. Experimentally, we apply local forces to such networks using
focused electromagnetic fields to manipulate microscale particles and we relate
particle displacement to understand the local mechanical properties of the gels.
Unlike most synthetic systems, protein-based networks are very rigid allowing
them to retain an intrinsic memory of their initial, unloaded state. Moreover,
protein-based crosslinkers are labile: their bonds break under force but can
reform when the force is removed. These unique features increase biomaterial
toughness and resiliency, and allow such materials to 'heal', even when they are
locally loaded to failure. Through experimentation and simulation, our work will
establish the microscopic origins of material response, and will guide the
development of bio-inspired materials that are durable, adaptive, and self-
healing. Such materials could be used as artificial tissues or as smart
structural materials where shock absorption under loading is required. This work
will engage graduate, undergraduate and community college students in materials
research. The students and the PI will participate in community outreach events
at local elementary schools to advance a public understanding of cutting edge
materials science and will share our results broadly through publications,
conferences, and in-person visits to local schools.