* 1410853
* Automatically Resisting, Releasing, and Killing Bacteria Using a Single Peptide
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Zhiqiang Cao, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,993.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research to Wayne State University is to develop a
single, rationally designed peptide that is capable of automatically performing
bacteria-resisting, releasing, or killing tasks. When bacteria bind to a
surface, they eventually lead to possible formation of biofilm, bacterial colony
and infection. This project will develop a peptide material as surface coatings
that can resist binding from most circulating bacteria. For small portions of
bacteria that do adhere to the surface, the peptide will sense where they are on
the surface and automatically release or kill them locally, while the major part
of the surface will be kept free of bacteria. This technology will substantially
increase antibacterial efficiency, and can be translated as medical device
coatings to prevent infections. The success of this project can potentially
improve patient care and reduce healthcare expenditures. The proposed research
will be integrated into related educational opportunities to excite and inspire
students from K-12 to graduate levels to pursue STEM education and related
careers. The planned "Open Lab Days" in the Principal Investigator's laboratory
are to introduce research to high-school students from the Detroit area, and
influence their career decisions related to STEM topics. High-school and
undergraduate students participating in the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program will be continuously recruited and mentored as part of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim
of this project is to develop a single, rationally designed peptide capable of
automatically performing both as anti-fouling and antimicrobial surfaces by
bacteria-resisting, releasing, or killing tasks by adapting to adsorptive status
of bacteria. Conventional bacteria-killing or resisting materials can hardly
achieve 100% efficacy in permanently protecting a surface, and usually delay,
rather than fully prevent, in forming biofilm. Different bacteria killing and
resisting materials have been combined together, but multiple materials tend to
dilute and interfere with respective effectiveness, and overall performance is
compromised. To maximize the viability of the combined approach, smart surfaces
have been developed to kill, resist and/or release bacteria. Nevertheless, this
requires an external treatment to convert surface structures, which is not
available at present. The proposed peptide overcomes the above limitations and
automatically performs different antibacterial tasks simultaneously on any parts
of the surface composed of this material, enhancing the overall antibacterial
efficacy. Students would be trained in peptide synthesis and characterization,
and exposed to rigorous antibacterial assays and analyses. The goal is to
enhance their appreciation of this fundamental work and its impact to the
community in fighting bacterial infections.