* 1410510
* Coherent Multidimensional Spectroscopy of the Oxygen Evolving Complex in Photosystem II
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,10/31/2017
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 10/31/2017
* USD 639,068.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms Programs of the Chemistry Division have funded Professor John C.
Wright of the University of Wisconsin to develop laser spectroscopy methods for
measuring complex molecular systems with quantum state resolution. The methods
are analogous to the brain's ability to distinguish colors from the response of
the three types of retinal cone cells. The laser methods use three different
laser beam colors to simultaneously excite three quantum states of specific
molecules that proceed to drive photosynthesis. The methods provide the key for
discovering how plants make oxygen by resolving the quantum states actually
involved in photosynthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal is
applying the new laser methods to understanding the mechanism of oxygen
evolution in photosynthesis. Oxygen is created at the oxygen evolution center
(OEC) in photosystem II (PS II). The OEC contains Mn, O, and Ca ions and amino
acid ligands. The laser beam colors will excite different combinations of
vibrational and electronic states of the OEC that distinguish it from the much
larger number of molecules in PS II. Different transition metal coordination
complexes cobalamin will serve as model systems for testing and developing the
methods. The project will resolve the quantum state changes as the OEC
progresses through its different oxidation states. The changes will be
correlated with those measured by the Biology with X-ray lasers NSF-STC program.
The impact of this research is broadened by the participation of under-
represented minorities; the development of strategies, materials, and the
educational infrastructure required to implement active learning in college
classrooms; and the dissemination of the research through different
communication channels. The broadest impact is providing a model for how to
efficiently collect and use solar energy for our energy future.