* 1410968
* Toughness and Friction of Model Polyelectrolyte Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2017
* USD 386,556.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer gels are flexible, solid
materials containing a high proportion of a small-molecule component like water.
The aim of the project is to develop polymer gels that are very strong, and that
can also be used to produce exceptionally slippery surfaces with ultra-low
friction. The possibilities have been illustrated by nature, in the form of
certain types of cartilage tissue that are responsible for lubricating load-
bearing joints in the body. The availability of synthetic versions of these
tissues would transform orthopedic practice, extending the life of hip and knee
replacements or even making these replacement procedures unnecessary. In
addition, materials with the sought after combination of properties can be used
as contact surfaces in a variety of manufacturing settings, enhancing energy
efficiency by reducing the energy lost due to frictional heating. Past efforts
to produce high-strength, low-friction gels have been limited by the fact that
the same factors that enhance strength generally increase the friction as well.
Two elements of the project will be undertaken in pursuit of the overall project
aim. The first of these is the synthesis and testing of new gels designed to
break the connection between gel strength and gel friction. These gels have
features in common with their natural counterparts (like cartilage tissue), but
can be tuned by altering certain details of the gel structure. The second
element of the project is more conceptual, and involves the development of a
general design strategy to guide future synthesis of high-strength, low-friction
gels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop high-
toughness gels with ultralow friction, and to develop a generalized design
strategy for producing these types of materials. The work is based on the
synthesis of hybrid gels consisting of a charged, polyelectrolyte network to
which multivalent cations have been added. These materials can have an
extraordinarily high mechanical toughness, resulting from energy dissipation
mechanisms arising from the presence of both weak and strong bonds in the same
material. Because the development of a highly lubricious, low-friction material
requires that energy dissipation be minimized, it is particularly challenging to
maintain material toughness while simultaneously reducing the friction. The
working hypothesis for the project is that friction and toughness are controlled
by energy dissipation mechanisms that are operative on different time scales.
The project is designed to elucidate these effects in a set of model gel systems
that enables the relevant time scales to be controlled. The most important time
scales are the force-dependent lifetimes of the weaker bonds, and the rate at
which these weak bonds are able to reform after they are broken. The
experimental model systems are based on gels formed from the controlled assembly
of high molecular weight triblock copolymers with a poly(methacrylic acid)
(PMAA) midblock and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) end blocks. Assembly of
these polymers results in the formation of polymer gels with the strong bonds
consisting of glassy PMMA aggregates. The weak bonds are introduced by
complexation of midblock carboxylates with atomic or polymeric cations, with
bond formation times and bond lifetimes controlled by the specific cations that
are chosen. The tunable and quantifiable nature of the weak and strong bonds in
these systems will enable the development of widely applicable design principles
for producing high-toughness materials with the desired frictional properties.