* 1410572
* Academic and Research Leadership Symposium for Diversity-Driven Innovation
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Moore
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,711.00

Background&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2010, the National Academies released a
report, Rising Above the Gathering Storm, Revisited: Rapidly Approaching
Category 5, which suggests that the majority of new jobs created in the U.S.
will be a result of advancements in science and technology. Racial and ethnic
minority groups including African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans,
however, remain substantially underrepresented in engineering and science,
especially at the level of Ph.D. researchers and faculty. Growing evidence of
increased innovation resulting from racially and ethnically diverse
organizations and top management underscores the strong need to increase the
number of underrepresented minorities in advanced research, and in academic
positions, to sustain the United States as a global economic leader.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responding to
the aforementioned need, the Academic and Research Leadership Symposium (ARLS)
has been created to prepare minority engineers in academia, industry, and
government laboratories whose careers involve a strong focus on research and
development in advanced technologies. The 2014 ARLS, co-located with the 2014
National Society of Black Engineers national conference, is the inaugural event
of the recently founded Academic and Research Leadership (ARL) Network. The ARLS
has two focused threads: (1) faculty development, and (2) research career
development and peer networking. The faculty development thread has workshops
organized by members of the ARLS Network that strengthen and demystify
fundamental components of academia. The research career development and
networking thread is critical to preparing minority engineers for a career in
research organizations and helps meet the goal of a self-sustaining ARL
ecosystem through peer networking. It provides an opportunity for researchers at
all career levels to nurture connections with their peers and be inspired by the
latest discoveries and technical advances across many disciplines of engineering
and science. Opportunities for new collaborations and strategic career
advancements are anticipated and will create new connections to support the
development and growth of minority engineers involved in research in the United
States. NSF Funding will support travel expenses for 30 minority early career
faculty, graduate students, and research professionals to attend the Symposium.
It will also support some of the preeminent speakers for the
Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Signficance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium will serve as a meeting place for minority researchers to share ideas
leading to new intellectual products and technologies that benefit society. ARLS
will provide a pool of minority candidates to improve the diversity amongst
employees in universities or federal/industrial laboratories within the United
States. The gathering of engaged minority researchers will provide a network and
critical mass that is necessary to help increase the number of participants in
research focused careers in the United States. Finally, it will also provide a
pool of candidates for program managers of federal agencies needing to diversify
their review panels, people to develop content and teach workshops in the
current NSBE graduate school conference (GSC), and develop best practices for
increasing the interest amongst minority students to seek Ph.D.s in engineering
in ways not currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being
supported by the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program of the
Engineering Education and Centers Division.