* 1410787
* Research Initiation Award: Investigating optical properties of urban aerosols for monitoring fine air particulate matter
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Zhiming Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 196,729.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to North Carolina Central University has potential broader impact in a
number of areas. The goal of the project is develop a new Aerosol Optical Depth
(AOD) retrieval approach that addresses outstanding challenges of remote sensing
applications to air particulate matter (PM2.5). Particles less than 2.5
micrometers in diameter (PM2.5), which are generated by all types of combustion
activities and certain industrial processes, are referred to as "fine" particles
and are believed to pose a great health risks. Because of their small size, fine
particles can lodge deeply into the lungs. This project will also enhance the
research experience and training of undergraduate students at North Carolina
Central University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
a new methodology for retrieving Aerosol Optical Depth at a 1 kilometer
resolution suitable for the aerosol microphysical environments and land surface
types in North Carolina. This project seeks to allow better characterization of
spatial and temporal variations in spectral Aerosol Optical Depth and thus
improve the understanding of aerosol optical properties including estimation of
the single scattering albedo and the asymmetry parameter. The specific
objectives are to investigate the spectral characteristics of aerosols in urban
areas; to develop a regression model to estimate PM2.5 using ground AOD
measurements; and to develop a new method to retrieve AOD from satellite data at
a 1 kilometer resolution.