* 1410253
* Programmable pattern transformation of reconfigurable polymer membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Shu Yang, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project involves synthesizing polymeric materials that can respond to
external stimuli by reconfiguring their shapes. These polymers will be processed
so as to yield patterned microstructured membranes with regularly spaced holes.
The study of structural change in response to external stimuli will provide
important scientific insights into how to design reconfigurable nanomaterials.
These could be used to create more complex, multifunctional microstructures. The
resulting changes in physical properties (e.g. transparency and color change)
may also make these materials relevant to novel technologies, including tunable
optical windows, sensors, programmable sound and heat transfer, catalysis, drug
delivery, and soft robotics. Students at all levels will be exposed to a diverse
range of topics in chemistry, materials science and engineering, physics, soft
mechanics, nanofabrication and computational modeling. Outreach will include
underrepresented groups at local high schools and community colleges to carry
out research on campus at the University of Pennsylvania. Research results will
be showcased at the Philadelphia Materials Day and at other public outreach
events.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project involves synthesis and study of microstructured polymer membranes
that are responsive to external stimuli (e.g. pH, temperature and light), aimed
at providing deeper understanding of the materials' mechanical responses in
complex geometries (both isotropically and anisotropically). This in turn will
allow for programming the evolution of complex chiral structures by considering
the molecular structures of the polymers, the geometric parameters of the pore
arrays in the membranes, and the application of external forces. Specifically,
the research includes 1) preparation of a range of poly(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) (PHEMA) based hydrogel membranes with microscopic hole arrays of
arbitrary feature size, spacing, aspect ratio, and arrangement; 2) examination
of the solvent-swelling induced pattern transformation at different pH and
temperature and its comparison to modeling; 3) synthesis of nematic liquid
crystal monomers and crosslinkers to prepare microstructured nematic liquid
crystal elastomers (NLCEs); 4) control of surface anchoring of the liquid
crystal molecules within the membranes to maximize the strain response and
comparison to modeling; 5) exploration of the internal instability in NLCE
membranes at different temperatures in comparison to pattern transformation in
PHEMA-based hydrogel membranes; 6) application of the same deformation
principles to investigate light-responsive NLCE membranes with local spatial
control of light and polarization.