* 1410214
* Mixed Molten Metals as Solvents for Materials Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Susan Latturner, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 367,424.00

Non- Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores the synthesis
of new semiconductors and magnetic materials by carrying out reactions using
molten metals as solvents. Synthesis in metal flux allows reactions to take
place in a solution; this liquid state method enables crystal growth and the
formation of unusual new compounds. The new materials discovered in this work
may possess useful magnetic and electronic properties, and their study
contributes to increasing understanding of the nature of magnetic alloys, solar
cell materials, and hydrogen storage alloys. This interdisciplinary research
project educates undergraduate and graduate student researchers in materials
chemistry. The work involves collaboration with scientists in a variety of areas
(such as chemistry, physics, and engineering), as well as the use of advanced
facilities at national labs such as Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. This allows the student participants to
understand the increasingly complex and collaborative nature of modern
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Support from the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research allows the research team to explore two areas: the synthesis of
magnetic alloys in lanthanide/transition metal (Ln/T) eutectic fluxes, and the
synthesis of lightweight complex salt-like compounds in alkaline earth-rich (AE)
flux mixtures. Products of these reactions are characterized by X-ray
diffraction, magnetic susceptibility measurements, transport measurements, band
structure calculations, and other techniques. Trends in reactivity, common
structural building blocks, and structure-property relationships are
investigated. The Ln/T flux syntheses yield new compounds with magnetic
properties stemming from both the lanthanide and the transition metal element.
Product structures often contain clusters or layers of transition metals; the
magnetic behavior of these building blocks will shed light on how magnetic
moments develop as transition metal clusters increase in size. Magnetic behavior
that may arise includes magnetic ordering, spin glass behavior,
superconductivity, magnetoresistance, mixed valence and heavy fermion behavior.
Alkaline earth-rich flux mixtures using calcium, strontium, or barium will
strongly reduce most main group elements to form new Zintl phases and complex
salts. These include new metal hydride and subhydride phases which may be of
interest for hydrogen storage. Using magnesium-rich fluxes yields more
borderline products which do not exhibit complete charge transfer and are often
semimetallic; they may be of potential use as thermoelectric materials, or may
show metal-to-insulator transitions.