* 1410660
* Ultrafast study of spin-orbit materials by time and spin resolved photoemission spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Alessandra Lanzara, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 324,537.00

Non-technical abstract: The electron spin is a fascinating property of
materials. Its binary nature "spin-up or -down" acts as the simplest example of
quantization, and as such, it is often used as the starting point for quantum
mechanics textbooks. The magnetic moment of the electron spin is a primary
driver of the rich field of magnetism, and its interaction with the orbital
motion (known as spin-orbit interaction), can have significant consequences such
as the anomalous Hall effect in ferromagnets. Although present in some degree in
all materials, only recently with the discovery of a new class of materials
known as topological insulators (materials insulating on the bulk but metallic
on the surface), it has been realized that spin-orbit coupling can be the driver
of beautiful new phenomena in non-magnetic materials as well. This project
focuses on an experimental investigation of the emergent spin dependent physics
from spin-orbit coupling in a range of materials relevant to both fundamental
materials science research and technology, with main focus on the three
dimensional topological insulators. Students working on this project will
develop expertise in material characterization methodologies and the evolving
techniques of photoelectron spectroscopy to become future leaders of the new
growing community of experimental spin-dynamics. This will prepare them for
scientific careers in industry, academia or government laboratories. In
conjunction with outreach programs at UC Berkeley, this project will involve
minorities and young students to instill passion and curiosity for science.

Technical abstract: A prominent topic in current condensed matter physics is the
development of materials and devices that utilize the spin degree of freedom, in
contrast to traditional electronics, which use only the electronic charge. The
rapidly expanding field of spin-orbit coupled materials and the recent discovery
of topological insulators constitute one exciting route to such control.
Topological insulators are insulating materials characterized by a bulk bandgap,
and massless Dirac fermion surface states which are spin non-degenerate and
features unique spin-momentum locking in which states are strongly spin
polarized along a spatial direction determined by the direction of their crystal
momentum. This project seeks to advance our understanding of spin-orbit physics
in three-dimensional topological insulators and on the interaction between
topologically protected surface states and symmetry breaking materials, as well
as to search for new way to manipulate the resulting spin texture with light.
This is achieved by use of novel technique of time-, spin- and angle resolved
photoemission spectroscopy. Students working on this project will develop
expertise in the field of vacuum, material characterization, laser, optics and
photoelectron spectroscopy. The project will also target minorities and young
students through school-year mentorship and summer research projects.