* 1410936
* Investigation of Degradation Mechanisms in Layered Oxide Cathodes for Na Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ting Zhu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 460,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Lithium ion batteries are widely used as power
sources in portable electronics and electric cars. However, the scarcity of
lithium potentially limits the application of lithium ion batteries in future.
Sodium ion battery is a promising alternative energy storage technology due to
its potential to compete with lithium ion batteries in all performance
categories, such as energy and power densities. More importantly, sodium is
naturally abundant and sodium ion batteries can be manufactured at much lower
cost. However, sodium ion batteries suffer from poor cycle life, largely due to
the degradation and failure of the cathode. This research studies the
degradation mechanism of the layered oxide cathode materials at bulk and
microscopic scales. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research, the goal is to understand the
structural evolution of the cathode materials during battery cycling and to
develop means of mitigating electrode degradations for improving the cycle life
of sodium ion batteries. The project involves close collaborations between
experiment and modeling. Research opportunities are provided to train both
graduate and undergraduate students. The project also involves the course
development for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sodium ion battery is a promising energy storage device with
low cost. However, the severe degradation of cathodes can drastically limit the
cycle life of sodium ion batteries. The project aims to elucidate the
degradation mechanisms in the cathode of sodium ion batteries using the layered
metal oxides as model systems. The research hypothesis is that the mechanical
degradations are primarily responsible for the capacity fade and accordingly
poor cycle stability in layered oxide cathodes. Model compounds, such as sodium
manganese oxide, are synthesized and electrochemically tested in half cells. In
situ X-ray diffraction is used to study the structural change of the bulk
cathode materials, and in situ transmission electron microscopy is used to
observe the microscopic structural changes. Based on the experimental
observations and analyses, multiscale chemomechanical models are developed to
rationalize and predict the degradation mechanism of the cathodes. This research
not only enables the design of high performance electrode materials for sodium
ion battery with long cycle life, but also develops novel in situ experimental
techniques to advance the fundamental research of solid state chemistry.