* 1410297
* Laboratory Studies Required to Understand Cometary Emissions: O(1S) and O(1D) Yields from CO2 Photodissociation in the Extreme Ultraviolet
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* William Jackson, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 07/31/2017
* USD 365,972.00

This award's main goal is to produce laboratory measurements that are needed to
reliably interpret and quantify carbon dioxide emissions from comets. Comets are
relatively small bodies made of ice and dirt that orbit the Sun; however, they
spend most of their time very far from the Sun at very cold temperatures. Thus,
they are considered to be among the best preserved and most primordial objects
in the solar system and their chemical composition is key to constraining solar
system formation models. Carbon dioxide is of particular interest because the
molecule may be present in comet nuclei in high enough quantities that
sublimation (going directly from ice to gas upon heating without ever becoming
liquid water) may drive a significant portion of the activity as comets orbit
close to the Sun. The PI and his research team will conduct experiments in order
to better understand how carbon dioxide degrades in sunlight after sublimating
from comet nuclei that are close to the Sun. The project focuses on two atomic
oxygen emission lines commonly observed in comet spectra, which are possibly
largely formed during the breakup of carbon dioxide. Since carbon dioxide is
unobservable from ground-based telescopes, the atomic oxygen emission lines
serve as a valuable proxy for carbon dioxide. This work will also be useful for
modeling atmospheres of Mars, Venus and some exoplanets. The PI will train and
mentor a postdoctoral fellow and summer undergraduate students in this research.

The planned experiments will be carried out at the Advanced Light Source of the
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The team will use synchrotron radiation
to determine O(1S) and O(1D) yields from carbon dioxide photodissociation at
90-115 nm. In order to amplify detection of these two atomic states, which
normally have long radiative lifetimes, they will introduce xenon gas to the
samples, which enhances the radiative rate by a factor of 75. Knowledge of these
excited atomic oxygen lines from carbon dioxide photodissociation will enable
the use of the atomic oxygen red and green line emissions (at 630/636.4 nm and
557.7 nm, respectively) as a probe of cometary composition.