* 1410082
* RUI: Thermoreversible hydrogen bonding in mesophase formation: Enhancing stability and formation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Kurt Wiegel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 198,316.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid Crystals have become a mainstay of the
scientific and technological community, emerging as one of the leading display
materials of the past decade. An increased understanding of the stability of a
liquid crystalline materials could would have considerable impact on the optical
display industry. This project will prepare liquid crystalline systems that
combine the stabilities of covalent species with the healing capabilities of
hydrogen bonded chain structures, and through the incorporation of these groups,
the PI plans to introduce important new and beneficial characteristics while at
the same time improving the stability of liquid crystalline materials. Beyond
the scientific impact of this project, the project will enhance the research
infrastructure and support human resource development at the University of
Wisconsin- Eau Claire. This low-cost public institution has a long-established
tradition of strong undergraduate/faculty research collaboration that rivals
those of top liberal arts colleges. As a result, a large fraction of UWEC
undergraduates matriculate to graduate programs. Almost half of the student body
are low-income, first generation students, and about 60% are female, both of
which are underrepresented in the scientific communities. The research
activities described will greatly enhance student training and intellectual
development through hands-on experience with sophisticated equipment and the
opportunity to present their findings at national meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
this project will study the creation of new liquid crystalline systems. Liquid
crystalline networks are an area that has received considerable attention due to
the ability of the materials to couple the order of the mesogenic directors to
the elasticity and deformation of the materials. The application of
thermoreversible assemblies to liquid crystalline networks is a relatively
unexamined area. The assembly of liquid crystalline materials using non-covalent
interactions offers many interesting features involving living polymeric systems
and the ability of the liquid crystals to self-heal and repair macroscale
structural defects. This work will have a broad impact on the field of
supramolecular liquid crystals. The creation of these new LC assemblies will
provide valuable insight into the ability of a mesophase to stabilize in
unfavorable, constrained (networked) conditions, as well as an understanding of
stoichiometric balance and highly flexible non-mesogenic competitive assemblies.
The same associations will be used to form both the networks and the mesogens.
This association will vary according to functionality of the networking agent,
rigidity of the hydrogen bond accepting group and flexibility of the networking
agents. Additionally, the competition of different mesogens arising from
identical starting mixtures will be investigated. Results from this project will
provide insight into the nature of the formation of a mesophase, and a
comparison of the quantity and strength of supramolecular forces involved in the
formation of liquid crystals. In particular, the behavior of mesophase formation
and stabilization in crosslinked conditions, and the role and interplay between
rigidity and flexibility of the hydrogen bond acceptors plays for mesogen
formation and mesophase stability.