* 1410393
* SusChEM: Sustainable III-V Alloys Using Non-Toxic Bismuth as an Alternative to HgCdTe
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Yong-Hang Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 09/30/2018
* USD 428,814.00

Non-technical Description: This SusChEM project utilizes nontoxic bismuth as a
constituent to broaden and enhance the performance of III-V semiconductor alloys
for a replacement of HgCdTe alloys. This work advances the materials science
knowledge base of sustainable III-V bismides to enable novel devices needed for
present and future engineering grand challenges, such as mid- and long-infrared
lasers and detectors for homeland security and pollution detection and efficient
infrared lasers and detectors for information and communication technology.
Compared to HgCdTe alloys, III-V bismides are sustainable, safer, and more
secure without toxic element mercury and the very rare element tellurium. This
project integrates innovative and fundamental materials research and education,
and brings together researchers and students with broad areas of expertise to
study narrow bandgap III-V semiconductors alloyed with bismuth. The research
findings guide the design and engineering of III-V bismuth superlattice
materials and devices over a wide range of narrow bandgap energies, and could
enable the development of devices with exceptional
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research project
alloys bismuth with arsenic in the group-V sublattice to develop III-V materials
in the technological important 8-12 micrometer atmospheric transmission window.
Specifically, the semi-metallic compound InBi is alloyed with conventional III-V
bulk and superlattice materials to create alloys with significant and highly
exploitable electrical and optical properties that outperform and replace
HgCdTe. In particular, InAs/InAsBi and GaSb/InAsBi superlattices strain balanced
and lattice matched at the GaSb lattice constant, offer the prospect of alloying
technologically important 0.61-nm semiconductors with semiconducting InAsBi (Bi
mole fractions &lt; 7.3%) and semimetallic InAsBi (Bi mole fractions &gt; 7.3%).
These systems allow the growth of arbitrarily thick, coherently strained layers
in the readily accessible GaSb lattice constant without misfit dislocations.
Furthermore, the heterostructures offer an opportunity to design the topography
of the band structure and thus allow studying quantum phase transitions of
surface states using the effective bandgap of the superlattice as a tuning
parameter.