* 1410111
* Investigation of Quantum Materials Using Pump-Probe Raman Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Dmitry Reznik, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract In quantum materials such as superconductors and
topological insulators quantum physics underlies most important properties.
Unraveling the puzzles posed by these materials is one of the main scientific
challenges of the 21st century, with direct relevance to new generations of
electronic, energy, and medical technologies. This project is devoted to
observing how these materials evolve in time after being hit by a short laser
pulse. A weak laser pulse may kick some electrons out of their orbits. Observing
how these hit atoms and other electrons react reveals interactions between
electrons as well as between electrons and the atomic lattice. If the laser
pulse is strong, the material can briefly go into a different state, e.g. a
superconductor will become nonsuperconducting. Observing how it comes back to
the original state elucidates otherwise hidden mechanisms. This knowledge is
used to test fundamental theories and helps to harness quantum materials for
practical applications. The experimental technique for making these observations
is known as pump-probe Raman spectroscopy and allows making movies of how
quantum materials evolve in time taking frames every 0.00000000000001 sec. Light
travels a fraction of a millimeter during these time intervals, so very fast
processes can be detected in slow motion. The work is carried out at the new
ultrafast laser spectroscopy laboratory at the University of Colorado
(CU)-Boulder built with the funds previously provided by NSF. It is a part of a
Ph.D. thesis of two graduate students and contributes to undergraduate
education. The project will also contribute to outreach efforts through the
existing Partnership in Formal Science Education in the Community program.

Technical Abstract This project focuses on groundbreaking measurements of
materials where quantum physics underlies most important physical properties.
The general goal is to understand how these materials behave away from thermal
equilibrium: The investigated sample is driven out of equilibrium by a short
laser pulse, and another time-delayed laser pulse will probe its relaxation by
serving as the excitation laser for Raman spectroscopy. The work is carried out
at the new ultrafast laser spectroscopy laboratory at the University of Colorado
(CU)-Boulder built with the funds previously provided by NSF. The laser system
at the heart of this laboratory is one of the most advanced of its kind in the
world. It is utilized for pump-probe angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
and pump-probe Raman spectroscopy. This project represents the Raman component
of this effort. All Raman active excitations are tracked during relaxation.
These include phonons, magnons and some electronic excitations across gaps of up
to 5eV. Raman scattering directly probes the energies, lifetimes, and population
of excited states (e.g. phonon occupation numbers). The time-resolved Raman
scattering measurements are on charge density wave (CDW) systems, conventional
and cuprate superconductors, and Mott insulators. These materials display
diverse and often still enigmatic physical phenomena of great interest. The
project is a part of a Ph.D. thesis of two graduate students and contributes to
undergraduate education and will also contribute to outreach efforts through the
existing Partnership in Formal Science Education in the Community program.