* 1410246
* Field-theoretic simulations with excluded volume correlations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Robert Riggleman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2018
* USD 260,000.00

Nontechnical Summary This award supports development of a theoretical and
computational framework for understanding the thermodynamics of polymer
nanocomposites, a class of materials where small, typically inorganic
nanoparticles are dispersed in a polymer matrix. Polymer nanocomposites are
explored for a diverse set of applications ranging from lightweight protective
materials to plastic membranes with tunable electronic properties, yet there are
relatively few modeling techniques capable of accurately predicting their
equilibrium structure and properties. This research will help with development
of a family of new modeling techniques capable of predicting how polymer
nanocomposites will assemble on the molecular level. This could aid in the
design of conductive plastic materials, polymers with tunable optical
properties, and mechanically robust polymer nanocomposites.

This award will support training of graduate students in molecular modeling
techniques and modern polymer science. The students will interact with
experimental groups in Chemistry, Materials Science, and Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering Departments at the University of Pennsylvania. The
developed simulation codes will be made publicly available. This will facilitate
the broader application of new modeling techniques.

Technical Summary This award supports the development of field theoretic
simulation framework for a class of problems where excluded volume correlations
become important. In traditional implementations of polymer field theory, the
constituents of the model are taken as either point particles or infinitely thin
threads with a contact repulsion. However, in a number of technologically
important materials ranging from polymer nanocomposites to polyelectrolytes
exposed to multivalent ions, a point-particle description is invalid. The goal
of this funded research is to extend the field theoretic simulations framework
to study: (i) the distribution of both spherical and anisotropic nanoparticles
in a polymer matrix, including phase separated polymer blends and block
copolymers; (ii) homogeneously grafted nanoparticles, where the grafting sites
are uniformly distributed on the nanoparticle surface; and (iii) charged
polymeric systems in the presence of multivalent ions. The results the field
theoretical calculations will be compared with particle-based simulations and
with existing experiments.