* 1410970
* Collaborative Research: Tailoring the Stability and Deformation of Nanocrystalline Alloys through Hierarchical Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Garritt Tucker, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* jose caro
* 09/30/2017
* USD 183,524.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanocrystalline metals are rapidly becoming regarded
as a new class of engineering materials with advantageous mechanical properties,
such as high strength and increased wear resistance. Despite the tremendous
potential of these materials, structural instabilities and limited ductility
continue to hinder their best technological utility. This research combines
computational and experimental materials science to investigate a novel approach
for improving the stability and mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline metals by
introducing periodic non-crystalline regions into the crystalline matrix
material. By understanding the stability and mechanical nature of these alloys,
this activity assists in the development of a new generation of novel structural
materials with tunable properties. The outlined framework also develops
collaborative environments for seemingly disparate scientific disciplines and
stimulates new research areas in the field of modern metallurgy. The addition of
new educational modules into undergraduate engineering laboratory courses is
infusing principles of integrated computational materials engineering into the
existing engineering curricula at both Stony Brook and Drexel University. High
school students are engaging in the research through cooperative research
projects, which requires focused computational and experimental components, and
presentation of the results at Interactive Research or "IResearch" workshops to
undergraduates enrolled in the engineering laboratories. These endeavors are
enriching research opportunities for students at the high school and collegiate
levels, promoting student retention in STEM disciplines, and demonstrating how
engineering research can positively impact society.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objective of this research is to develop a new
fundamental understanding of the interplay between nanoscale grain boundary
physics and interfaces at larger structural length scales, which are generated
by introducing periodic amorphous regions into the monolithic nanocrystalline
structure. This project combines massively-parallel atomistic simulations with
the design, synthesis, and mechanical testing of nanostructured alloys composed
of solute-stabilized nanoscale grain boundaries and periodically distributed
amorphous layers. The research is examining how such composite structures
influence stability of the nanocrystalline grain boundary network and augment
the rate limiting deformation physics for enhancing ductility. Students are
being trained in cutting-edge in situ characterization methods, nanomechanical
testing, and computational modeling to establish correlations between
microstructural variables and their thermal stability, deformation mechanism
distributions, and measured mechanical properties. By developing such
correlations, this research is advancing the fundamental understanding of new
material architectures for enhancing ductility in nanocrystalline metals with
the potential to transform current perspectives on the design of stable alloy
nanostructures.