* 1410751
* SusChEM: Engineered protein-based biofilms as functional advanced materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Neel Joshi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical: This SusCheM award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Harvard University is part of a broad effort to
"domesticate" bacterial biofilms for the extraction of rare earth metals and
materials. Biofilms are communities of bacterial cells living inside a self-
generated biopolymer matrix. This project aims to genetic engineer a non-
pathogenic laboratory strain of E. coli to produce altered forms of this
biopolymer matrix that have beneficial functions. Specifically, biofilms will be
modified the surfaces of proteins with metal binding capabilities. This
modification will allow the biofilms to selectively bind to rare earth elements.
Rare earths are essential for a variety of cutting edge technologies, including
smartphone displays, electric vehicles, and wind turbines. As such, their
availability is critical to technological innovation and resource independence
in the United States. Despite this, more than 90% of the world's rare earth
metals are mined and extracted outside United States because of the lack of
environmental and sustainable technologies. The engineered biofilms research
proposed aims to develop cheaper, sustainable, green and environment-friendly
technologies to extract rare earth metals in USA. Integrated with the research
plan will be an intensive student trainings program that will incorporate new
teaching initiatives in the fields of biomaterials and bioengineering, and
recruiting and mentorship of several graduate and undergraduate students with a
focus on women and underrepresented minority students. Undergraduate students
will be exposed to STEM topics with a focus on genetic engineering through
established internship programs in the Campus. Coordination of outreach
activities with local high schools to stimulate interest in STEM education is
also part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The overall goal of
this SusCheM project is to develop a platform for genetically engineering
bacterial biofilms that can serve as scalable materials with programmable, non-
natural functions. With this award, the Principal Investigator will study the
genetic modification and characterization of the proteinaceous mesh-like surface
coating present in biofilms secreted by bacteria. This proteinaceous surface
coating called 'curli' contains structural proteins, which self-assemble into an
encapsulating network of amyloid fibers in the biofilm. This research involves
genetic fusion of peptide motifs to the 'curli' proteins such that the fused
peptides are on the surface of the amyloid fibers in the biofilm. These modified
'curli' proteins will be studied for structural and functional properties with a
focus on specific metal binding capabilities. The peptide modified biofilms will
be produced, and their ability to form extracellular amyloids networks will be
characterized as a function of peptide linker length. A plate-based screening
strategy will be used to evaluate the composition and metal binding properties
of the engineered biofilms and identify those that can selectively and
efficiently enrich rare earth elements. The system will also be integrated in a
laboratory scale continuous flow separation apparatus to evaluate its potential
in an industrially relevant model. Ultimately, the results of this investigation
will facilitate the development of a wide range of biofilm-based materials using
renewable sources. The research will be integrated with a cross-disciplinary
mentoring plan in which graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
subfields of molecular biology, materials science, and chemical/biological
engineering.