* 1410597
* Atomistic Simulation Investigation on Processing-Structure-Property Relation of Magnetic Metal Alloy Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Guofeng Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic metal alloy nanostructures
have wide applications in the fields of biomedical diagnostics, drug delivery,
catalysis, mechanical actuations, and ultra-high density recording. This project
will produce and disseminate new computational techniques and basic knowledge in
the area of rational design of novel magnetic metal alloy nanostructures. The
project is expected to impact scientific areas of materials science, physics,
chemistry, biology, medical health, and computer technology. The outcomes of the
project will comprise knowledge on how nanomaterial processing and crystal
structure collectively determines the magnetic properties of alloy
nanostructures as well as the capability to employ computation techniques for
material design. To maximize the impact of the project to the broader community,
the PI will incorporate the research results into curriculum enhancement,
student training, industrial collaboration, and K-12 outreach program. The
students involved in the project will gain advanced expertise in computational
materials science. In particular, the PI will use the educational activity of
this project to inspire the interests of high school students with diverse
ethnic backgrounds in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Switching from contemporary polycrystalline media
(consisting of dozens or hundreds of grains per bit) to one single crystalline
magnetic nanostructure per bit will significantly decrease the volume and
accessing time for information archive. To enable this nanotechnology, the
objective of this project is to accurately predict the surface segregation,
atomic ordering, and magnetic properties of magnetic metal alloy nanostructures
and further advance the fundamental understanding of the processing-structure-
property relation for these magnetic alloy nanostructures. The proposed research
activities include simulating the surface segregation process in some selected
binary and ternary magnetic alloy nanostructures, analyzing the variation of
atomic ordering as a function of the size, shape, composition, and processing
conditions of the alloy nanostructures, predicting the magnetic properties of
the alloy nanostructures with their thermodynamically equilibrated structures,
and elaborating the interweaved relation among surface segregation, atomic
ordering, and magnetic property of the alloy nanostructures using computational
techniques. Atomistic Monte Carlo simulations will be performed to acquire the
thermodynamically equilibrated configurations of the alloy nanostructures and
the first-principles density functional theory calculations will be used to
predict the magnetic properties of the alloy nanostructures. This work will
provide knowledge for performance optimization of magnetic alloy nanostructures
through tuning their composition, structure, and processing conditions.
Therefore, the proposed research will strengthen our capability and enrich our
knowledge in developing well-controlled magnetic metal alloy nanostructures for
advancing ultra-high density recording technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;