* 1410209
* Superconformal Growth of Thin Films by Two-Component CVD
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* John Abelson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Description: Integrated circuits require multi-level microscopic
wiring of transistors, i.e., ten or more layers of vertical columns and
horizontal rows of copper are needed to interconnect all the transistors into a
functional chip. For each layer, advanced patterning and etching methods are
required to create cylindrical and trench-shaped openings with dimensions well
below one micrometer. Fabricating this exquisite structure on ever-smaller size
scales, without any trapped void space or "seam" of low-density material along
the centerline, is a significant challenge. This project explores a new method
to accomplish the filling step: a material is deposited from the gas phase using
two chemical species under special conditions that cause the growth rate to be
faster at the bottom of the opening than at the top, termed as superconformal
growth. During the filling process, the deposited material forms a V-shaped
profile and the apex moves up from the bottom to afford a perfectly filled
structure. The research project is integrated with various educational
activities: involving graduate students in every aspect of the research,
supervising undergraduate students on senior projects, and disseminating the
research findings to the scientific and technical communities.

Technical Description: This research project develops an innovative approach to
deposit thin film materials in a superconformal fashion inside of high aspect
ratio (depth : width) openings such as trenches and vias in a substrate, leading
to complete and void-free filling. Such superconformal growth is needed for a
wide variety of nanoscale fabrication processes. In this project, growth
proceeds by chemical vapor deposition using two reactants at a relatively low
temperature, generally below 300 degrees C. A kinetic regime exists where the
competitions in species transport and surface reaction rates lead to the
superconformal growth. The project tasks include (1) to demonstrate and evaluate
the superconformal filling method for a variety of materials and in various
openings; (2) to create a mathematical model of the effect that can predict
superconformal growth conditions in general; and (3) to determine what
distribution of chemical species within the structure is needed to eliminate the
growth of low-density material. These experiments generate detailed kinetic data
that are tested against a diffusion-based model. The atomic-scale mechanisms of
the process are determined using in-situ analyses of the film surface, detailed
calculations of particle transport and filling profiles, and a critical
examination of the role of reaction byproducts.