* 1410475
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Deformation Mechanisms Governing the Tensile Ductility of Twinned Metal Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yong Zhu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

Non-technical summary

Rapid progress in nanotechnology is currently under way in that small structures
and devices are being fabricated at the micrometer to nanometer scales. The
reliable design of these structures and devices calls for an understanding of
the mechanical properties of materials at small length scales. Metallic
nanostructures like nanowires have been shown to exhibit ultra-high yield
strength, on the order of one tenth of their elastic moduli. However, these
metallic nanostructures usually have limited hardening, causing low tensile
strain to failure. Such low ductility can severely affect the mechanical
integrity of the constituent nanostructures in nanomechanical devices and other
technological applications. There is currently a critical need to understand the
fundamental deformation mechanisms governing the strain hardening and tensile
ductility in metallic nanostructures. The proposed research synergistically
integrates the in situ nanomechanical experiment and computational modeling to
investigate the nearly unexplored strain hardening behaviors in metallic
nanostructures. The results are expected to advance our fundamental
understanding of deformation mechanisms governing the tensile ductility in metal
nanowires and provide a mechanistic basis for the design of strong and ductile
metallic nanostructures. Undergraduates will be recruited for summer research on
this project. Collaborative research between the graduate students working on
this project in Georgia Institute of Technology and North Carolina State
University will promote their scientific exchange, increase team-work
experience, and develop interdisciplinary expertise.

Technical summary

The metallic nanostructures such as nanowires usually exhibit ultra-high
strength, but low tensile ductility, owing to their limited strain hardening
capability. The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the deformation
mechanisms governing the strain hardening and tensile ductility of an
interesting type of metallic nanostructures - five-fold twinned Ag nanowires -
which exhibit significant strain hardening in our preliminary experimental
measurements. The proposed research involves three thrusts: (i) to perform the
in situ nanomechanical testing to measure the tensile stress-strain responses
and mechanical properties of individual nanowires; (ii) to perform the
transmission electron microscopy characterization of pristine and deformed
nanowires for investigation of the underlying dislocation mechanisms and
particularly the effects of surface and twin boundary mediated defects; (iii) to
conduct the molecular dynamics and transition state theory based atomistic
modeling to elucidate dislocation mechanisms that control the strain rate and
temperature effects on strain hardening and tensile ductility. The five-fold
twinned nanowires studied in this project are different from the single-crystal
nanowires, bulk nanocrystalline and nanotwinned metals in that the synergetic
effects of free surfaces and coherent internal interfaces (i.e., twin boundaries
with unique orientation parallel to the nanowire axis) can be critically
important for controlling the dislocation mechanisms of hardening and related
mechanical properties. The mechanistic insights gained from this project will be
valuable to develop means to enhance the strength without a severe loss of
ductility in a range of small-volume metallic materials.