* 1410249
* Collaborative Research: Energy Transfer in Strongly Coupled Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Vinod Menon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).

Non-technical Description: Energy transfer between molecular systems lies at the
heart of several natural and artificial energy harvesting systems as well as in
high-performance light emitters and sensors. Thus understanding and controlling
the energy transfer process are of significant importance to both fundamental
research and technological applications. This collaborative project develops
artificial organic-inorganic hybrid systems where the energy transfer process is
controlled by engineering the surrounding optical environment. The results of
the project will provide guidelines for the design of efficient energy
transferring organic/inorganic molecular systems geared towards applications
such as next-generation solar cells, light emitting diodes and sensors. The
project provides training in an interdisciplinary environment to graduate and
undergraduate students at City College of New York and University of Michigan.
In addition, the project integrates with outreach efforts such as high-school
student participation in the research and public lectures/demonstrations to
local-area high-school students. These are excellent recruiting and training
tools for future scientists and engineers.

Technical Description: The primary goal of this project is to elucidate the role
of exciton wavefunction delocalization in the energy transfer process between
donor and acceptor molecules and to develop methods to control it using
artificially engineered systems. In this context researchers develop
artificially engineered energy transfer systems through strongly coupled
organic-inorganic hybrid excitons. By exploiting the fundamentally different
nature of excitons in organic and inorganic systems and hybridizing them
provides a whole new control parameter for energy transfer. Here the coupling
strengths and exciton wavefunctions are controlled via light, morphology and
dimensionality. Specific materials systems investigated include inorganic
excitons of zinc oxide (ZnO) and cadmium sulfide (CdS) quantum dots and the
organic excitons of polycrystalline organic 3,4,7,8 napthalenetetracarboxylic
dianhydride (NTCDA) and anthracene. These studies are designed to form the basis
for developing highly efficient energy transfer systems for practical
applications.