* 1410569
* Nanoparticles with Stainless Interfaces: Void Symmetry Control and New Compositions for Applications in Energy Transfer Storage and Biotechnology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Mathew Maye, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 05/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to
overcome a number of challenges encountered by researchers synthesizing metal
alloy nanostructures. Using a core/alloy approach, nanoparticles in the size
range of 5 to 50 nm will be synthesized with stainless interfaces that are made
up of iron, chromium, nickel, aluminum and titanium compositions. These
nanomaterial alloys are expected to have unique phase behavior, oxidation
properties, and void/defect morphologies. The ultimate goals of this project are
to; develop new "wet-chemical" synthesis strategies to prepare the
nanomaterials, to understand the resulting oxidation and phase behavior, and to
control that behavior in order to construct novel structures that have utility
in energy and biotechnology sectors. A postdoctoral fellow and multiple graduate
and undergraduate chemistry students will be supported. The fellow will gain
valuable professional development, and along with the students, will gain
valuable experience and training in cutting edge nanomaterial science, materials
chemistry and associated instrumental techniques. The PI will promote minority
student involvement in the project, and continue his work in guiding women to
professional STEM careers. The work will have a profound affect on the materials
chemistry and nanoscience communities in the upstate Syracuse New York region
through outreach events, enhancements to undergraduate and graduate course work
and via hosting a regional workshop on nanoscience that brings together
researchers with similar interests from the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the hypothesis that alloy composition, phase behavior, and oxidation
characteristics can be use to control the internal microstructure of
nanomaterials. Over the years researchers have mastered the synthesis required
for size and shape control of many nanostructures, and today focus is shifting
towards being able to process the internal structure of these materials with
great precision. To accomplish this goal, we will prepare new nano-alloy
interfaces with stainless steel like compositions that will be used as a
chemical tool to control interfacial oxidation rates, which in turn will alter
Kirkendall diffusion of defects and vacancies. This will allow for the
preparation of nanoparticles with morphologically defined void spaces, including
asymmetric ones, which can be controlled with 1-5 nm fidelity. The goals of this
project are to fabricate new non-noble metal nano alloys, to use alloy
composition, phase behavior, and oxidation properties to manipulate the internal
void structure, and to combine these technologies to tailor internal void
symmetry and hierarchy. Moreover, through the course of the project, a number of
novel nano-alloy interfaces will be attempted, including titanium and aluminum
based medical and super-alloys. These new nanomaterials will have immediate
applications ranging from the energy to biotechnology sectors, including; gas
storage, heterogeneous catalysis and battery technologies, as well as medical
alloy surfaces and coatings.