* 1410353
* Collaborative Research: Bacterial manganese(IV) oxide biomineralization: Mechanism of Mn(II,III) oxidation by the multicopper oxidase complex
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Thomas Spiro, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2017
* USD 259,244.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Bradley
Tebo of Oregon Health and Science University and Dr. Thomas Spiro of the
University of Washington for a collaborative research investigation of how
manganese is oxidized in living systems. The substances formed in this oxidation
are various forms of manganese oxide. These minerals are some of the strongest
oxidants found in the environment and play important roles in both a biological
and a geological sense. They are often called "scavengers of the sea" because of
their great ability to absorb toxic substances. The chemical details of the
biological oxidation of manganese ions and formation of manganese oxides by
enzymes are not yet elucidated. The research of Dr. Tebo and Dr. Spiro examines
the role of a specific enzyme, multicopper manganese oxidase, or MCO, that is
derived from a bacterium that lives in the ocean. In previous research, the
investigators were able to isolate the enzyme and, in the process, found that
additional proteins seem necessary for the manganese oxidation. The current
research addresses the nature of these newly discovered "helper" proteins and
the chemistry catalyzed by MCO and the helper proteins; the results can be used
to shed light on how the bacterium converts manganese in seawater to the mineral
exerts its important role in detoxifying seawater. The work impacts our
understanding of several areas of science including oceanography, geology,
biology and biochemistry. Another broad impact is through the inclusion of
students at all educational levels, including high school, in the research. The
investigators disseminate insights obtained from research to the general public
through a science-in-art project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collaborative approach
involving the two groups from different universities is being used to study the
mechanism of bacterial manganese Mn(II) oxidation and manganese oxide production
by the multicopper Mn oxidase (MCO) from Bacillus sp. PL-12. The formation of
manganese oxide by bacterial oxidation of dissolved Mn(II) is important in
aquatic and soil environments and is a key pathway in the global Mn cycle, which
supports life through the Mn catalytic centers of many enzymes. This process has
received increased technological interest because it leads to highly-reactive,
nanoparticulate minerals, which can break down organic molecules and adsorb
other metal ions, thereby controlling the distribution and bioavailability of
many toxic and essential elements. An interdisciplinary effort using tools from
chemistry, biochemistry and biophysics is being used to elucidate the mechanism
of manganese oxidation by MCO. The biochemical mechanism by which this
oxidation, as well as MnO2 mineralization, occurs is poorly understood.
Multicopper oxidase enzymes have been implicated as catalysts for the Mn(II)
oxidation in many model systems for Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria, including the
recently purified Mn oxidase complex from Bacillus sp. PL-12. In this project,
the structure and mechanism by which the Mn oxidase complex from Bacillus sp.
carries out two sequential one-electron oxidation steps and mineralize Mn is
being elucidated. The specific objectives of the research are: 1) to
characterize the copper centers of the Mn oxidase complex; 2) to determine the
course of Mn oxidation and oxygen entry; 3) to characterize polynuclear
intermediates formed on the pathway to MnO2; 4) to describe the role of
ancillary proteins required for the expression of the active complex; and 5) to
elucidate the structure of the enzyme complex and emerging oxides. X-ray
crystallography and spectroscopic methods are being used in conjunction with
basic biochemistry techniques to achieve these objectives.