* 1410004
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Responsive Generation of Intrinsically Motivating Scenarios
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 321,100.00

This project will develop advanced methods for automatically generating
scenarios that are intrinsically motivating, responsive to the user's behavior,
and potentially beneficial in many spheres of the economy and culture. As
numerous existing communication media are merging, computer-based narratives
have become increasingly complex, significant, and influential. However, at
present they are inflexible and ignore the characteristics and goals of the
individual user. For many of our most pressing societal needs - from more
effective education to addressing climatology challenges - a key component of
any approach is motivation. Intrinsic motivation, which involves performing an
activity because it is inherently interesting, is often associated with deep
learning and creativity. This project employs an approach that combines types of
reasoning drawn from computational creativity and logic programming to meet this
challenge.

The research will demonstrate the first successful scenario generator,
dynamically combining narrative and simulated action, and showing that
generation can be guided by domain models, laying the foundation for projects to
leverage generated scenarios for intrinsically motivating learning and other
activities. In so doing, it will execute a novel evaluation plan that will
produce a more refined understanding of the relationship between intrinsic
motivation and learning, including the interrelated categories of engagement,
agency, and valuation of outcomes by comparing player experience of integrated
scenario systems with and without allowing the user's choices to influence the
challenges and narrative. It is hoped that this research will demonstrate the
utility of heterogeneous architectures for enabling previously-impossible
experiences for users in a wide range of interactive experiences. A specific
focus is creation of a computer-based educational experience focused on
meteorological shifts, made possible by this project's technical advances and
informed by its findings related to user motivation and learning.

While the research community has had some success in generating both narrative
and simulated action, generating both together presents novel research
questions. Further, to meet social needs, this generation must be capable of
being guided by pedagogical and other explicitly-represented goals. This
research seeks to achieve two fundamental advances. First, the project will
demonstrate a successful scenario generator, showing that generation can be
guided by domain models, which will enable future projects to leverage generated
scenarios for intrinsically motivating learning and other activities. Second,
user studies will support the first empirically grounded understanding of the
effects of narrative and action responsiveness and variation on user experience,
particularly engagement, motivation, and learning. By demonstrating successful
scenario generation, this project will turn attention to the scenario as a
potential fundamental unit for educational software, with the potential to reach
underrepresented groups and produce significant economic benefit.