* 1410172
* Cooperativity in Nucleic-Acid Protein Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 252,603.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any life form has to react to changes
in its environment. In order to do so, it has to be able to process information.
Information processing within individual cells boils down to interactions
between different biomolecules that can come together in a multitude of
different combinations. In order to process information, these interactions have
to be cooperative, i.e., the interactions between one set of molecules have to
depend on the presence or absence of other molecules. The PI's group will
develop theoretical methods to model such cooperativity that will provide a
better fundamental understanding of biological information processing and
possibly the ability to engineer future biological information processing
circuits. The research will be focused on two of the most important types of
biomolecules, nucleic acids and proteins, and will have two different
components. The first component will address the question of how natural
structural properties of nucleic acids can generate cooperativity and how this
new mechanism is used by living organisms. The second component will be of a
more technological nature and will aim at improving the utilization of protein
nucleic acid interactions to measure DNA methylation, a feature of cells that is
known to be affected in many diseases. &lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute
to the training of a new generation of researchers equipped with mathematical
and biological skills that are important for the future progress in the life
sciences. This will be achieved through students' education in Biophysics
Graduate Program and participation in Biophysics Seminar series at the Ohio
State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop quantitative models to
describe cooperativity in interactions between proteins and nucleic acids. Such
interactions are at the foundation of biological information processing as well
as of biotechnological applications. Accurate theoretical models make
interpretation of today's quantitative experiments possible and allow a
fundamental understanding of biological mechanisms and extraction of "hidden"
parameters from measurements. Within this context, the project consists of two
parts. The first part will address effect of RNA secondary structure on
cooperativity of proteins binding and elucidate mechanism of how natural
messenger RNAs implements logic operations among different protein "inputs" in
post-transcriptional regulation. The second part consists of the development of
a detailed model of the interactions between several MBD2 methyl-binding domains
and (methylated) DNA molecules. These MBD2 domains are used in experiments for
determining DNA methylation status in a genome-wide manner and it is anticipated
that the model to be developed will improve accuracy of these DNA methylation
measurements. Such genome-wide measurements of DNA methylation are of interest
since DNA methylation is known to be affected in many diseases.