* 1410192
* Tunable Nitric Oxide Releasing Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Megan Frost, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research is to allow the development of tools that will allow the high
potential of nitric oxide (NO) to be utilized to create implantable materials
that are able to modulate biological response to implants. The broader impacts
of this research include increasing the scientific communities understanding of
the role NO plays in a wide variety of biological processes, leading to the
development of NO releasing biomaterials. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be allowed to conduct cutting edge research that contributes to the field
of biomedical engineering. Additionally, communities of learners will be
developed that include graduate students, undergraduates, high school educators
and high school students who will all have the opportunity to participate in
cutting edge biomaterials research, achieving the two-fold goal of improving
student learning and exposing novice science and engineering students to high
level STEM fields to help increase student understanding of biomaterials
development. High school teachers will participate in biomaterials research at
MTU over the summer that will then be taken back to home institutions and
continued with high school students. Current undergraduate and graduate students
will consult with the high school students to continue the research during the
academic year. This structure will support the multi-level participation of
students and teachers as both learners and mentors and has the potential to
enhance STEM education beginning at the high school level and integrating it
through graduate education.

Technical: The PI will develop tools that will allow the high potential of
nitric oxide (NO) to be utilized to create implantable materials that are able
to modulate biological response to implants. Work will include development of
polymeric materials that are derivatized to release NO in specific temporal
profiles such that NO production is able to achieve a desired biological effect
(such as promotion of cellular infiltration, reduction of thrombosis, etc.).
Polymer properties will be varied to control local pH, water uptake and
degradation such that NO release is modulated. An NO delivery system that allows
precise supply of NO to cells with spatial and temporal control will also be
fully developed. This system will allow the effect of dose and duration of NO on
cells to be systematically studied. In order to understand precisely what level
of NO cells produce in both pathological and normal conditions, a device will be
developed that allows continuous, real-time detection of NO from cultured cells.
This suite of tools (tunable NO releasing materials, precise delivery of NO and
precise measurement of NO) will allow for the rapid, intelligent design of NO
releasing materials tailored to specific physiological applications to be
achieved.