* 1410465
* Building on Success, Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, Phase 2
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Donna Llewellyn, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,559,778.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented (URM) in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines: African-Americans,
Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and
Native Pacific Islanders. The Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance (PNW
LSAMP) includes the three state region of Washington, Oregon and Idaho.
Broadening participation in STEM is critical to the region's economic vitality
given the significant number of STEM related industries and research
initiatives. PNW LSAMP partners are active contributors to state and regional
STEM initiatives, and the strong partnership between alliance campuses has
resulted in increased pathways to college, student success in STEM majors and
access to undergraduate research experiences. Since the inception of the
alliance, degrees granted to underrepresented minority (URM) students in STEM
have increased 70%, far outpacing the overall increase of 21% on partner
campuses. PNW LSAMP is sustaining its foundational work and enhancing it with an
emphasis on community college transfer and preparation for graduate study in
STEM fields.

The PNW Alliance will continue to implement best practices for engaging students
in STEM including bridge programs, community-building and participation in
undergraduate research. The Alliance will strengthen its partnerships with eight
community colleges to better facilitate community college student transfer to 4
year degree programs and their participation in undergraduate research. The
Alliance will expand the number of students exposed to information about STEM
graduate study through an enhanced focus on graduate school preparation. Project
goals include 1) increase the number of STEM bachelor degrees granted to URM
students by 10% per year; 2) increase the percentage of bachelor degrees granted
in STEM to URM students who transfer from community colleges to 40%, and double
the number of degrees granted to URM STEM transfer students; and 3) provide
workshops and services to ensure that 95% of LSAMP-affiliated students are
exposed to information about graduate school preparation. The knowledge gained
through the partnership with MESA community college programs will allow PNW
LSAMP to pilot and implement national models for engaging community college
students in STEM as they are discovered.