* 1410840
* Simulating Non-equilibrium Processes over Extended Time- and Length-Scales using Parallel Accelerated Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Jacques Amar, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research
and education that is aimed to develop new ways to use computers to model
processes in materials, such as growth, that operate far from the steady
balanced state of equilibrium, and to apply these methods to realistic materials
problems. Non-equilibrium materials processes play an important role in the
production of a variety of technologically important materials and devices,
including the growth of semiconductor thin films, solar cells, thin-film based
sensors, and materials for protection from radiation. This award provides
support for the development of various methods to extend the time- and length-
scales over which process like materials growth and defect formation can be
simulated on computers, as well as to increase the accuracy of simulations of
such non-equilibrium processes. The PI will use these enhanced methods to study
technologically relevant processes including the growth of semiconductor thin-
films used in solar cells, metal polycrystalline thin-film growth, the
nucleation of islands of materials in metal on semiconductor growth, and defect
formation and healing of damage in boron nitride nanostructures arising from
exposure to electron radiation. The development of improved methods for
simulating non-equilibrium processes on computers over extended length- and
time-scales is likely to have a significant impact on the realistic simulations
of a broad variety of materials-related processes. This project contributes to
developing a capability in the quest to design materials from the atoms up to
obtain materials with desired properties, and contributes toward the success of
the Materials Genome Initiative. Software developed in the course of this
project will be made available to the broader community, contributing to the
software cyberinfrastructure for the materials simulation community. This
project provides opportunities for educational and outreach activities with
broad national, international, and societal impact. In addition to the
postdoctoral research associate and graduate students involved in this project,
several undergraduates will participate through the Department of Physics and
Astronomy's Research Experience for Undergraduates program. Undergraduate
students will also participate during the academic year.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research to
develop methods to extend the speed and accuracy of temperature-accelerated
dynamics (TAD) simulations. These include the development of methods to improve
the scaling of temperature-accelerated dynamics simulations with system size, a
method to carry out on-the-fly kinetic Monte Carlo simulations by the use of
local temperature-accelerated basin searches, a method to automatically store
local configurations and processes during accelerated dynamics simulations in
order to carry out kinetic Monte Carlo simulations with a large database, and
the development of methods to efficiently identify, characterize, and exit local
superbasins in order to deal with the 'small-barrier' problem. These methods
will significantly enhance the speed and accuracy of accelerated dynamics
simulations thus allowing realistic simulations of complex ordered and
disordered systems over extended time- and length-scales. The developed methods
will be used to study a variety of different materials processes which are
relevant to semiconductor technology and photovoltaics. In particular,
simulations of cadmium telluride thin-film growth will be carried out in order
to understand the kinetics of defect formation as well as the dependence on
growth conditions. In order to study the early stages of polycrystalline metal
on semiconductor growth, simulations of island nucleation and growth in silver
on amorphous silicon will also be carried out. The PI will use simulations to
investigate glancing angle deposition with an aim to understand the effects of
activated processes on surface morphology, grain size, microstructure and
scaling behavior as a function of temperature. Finally, in order to explore the
potential for boron nitride nanostructured materials to serve as protective
shields at high temperatures and in hazardous environments, simulations of the
response of boron nitride nanostructures to electron irradiation will also be
carried out. The results of these simulations will be used to understand the
mechanisms of defect formation and evolution as well as to explain a number of
apparent discrepancies between energetics calculations and experiments. Software
developed in the course of this project will be made available to the broader
community, contributing to the software cyberinfrastructure for the materials
simulation community. This project provides opportunities for educational and
outreach activities with broad national, international, and societal impact. In
addition to the postdoctoral research associate and graduate students involved
in this project, several undergraduates will participate through the Department
of Physics and Astronomy's Research Experience for Undergraduates program.
Undergraduate students will also participate during the academic year.