* 1410765
* GOALI: Strained Layer Heterostructures for GaN-on-Si Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Description: Gallium nitride is an important semiconductor due to
its wide ranging applications in solid-state lighting and power electronics.
Pennsylvania State University and Efficient Power Conversion (EPC) Corporation
are partnering in this GOALI project to develop materials growth technology to
integrate gallium nitride thin films with silicon wafers, which are the standard
substrates used for integrated circuit fabrication. The ability to directly
combine these two materials would allow flexibility in circuit design for a
variety of applications. However, the hexagonal crystal structure of gallium
nitride is incompatible with the cubic crystal structure of (100) silicon. This
project seeks to overcome these limitations by intentionally introducing strain
into the silicon to alter the surface structure and thereby reduce the crystal
mismatch. Real-time wafer curvature measurements are used to directly measure
strain in the silicon substrate and study dynamic changes in film stress during
gallium nitride deposition. Post-growth structural characterization is used to
elucidate mechanisms of stress generation and relaxation. The project supports
the Ph.D. thesis work of two graduate students at Penn State University who are
exposed to issues relevant to process scale-up and manufacturing in a global
semiconductor foundry through the collaboration with EPC. Undergraduates and
high-school students from underrepresented groups and economically challenged
regions of Pennsylvania are participating in the research through summer
programs at Penn State University.

Technical Description: This GOALI project is on the epitaxial growth of
AlGaN/GaN heterostructures on on-axis (100) Si substrates for hybrid power
electronics circuits. Strained Si/SiGe virtual substrates are being explored as
a route to control the dominant reconstruction of the (100) Si surface and
thereby reduce the in-plane rotational misalignment of AlN nuclei. In-situ wafer
curvature measurements are used to monitor stress relaxation in the SiGe layers
and measure tensile strain in the Si layer at the growth temperature and study
its impact on GaN/AlN heteroepitaxy. The effects of n-type dopant chemistry on
stress evolution in GaN are also being examined. The project seeks a fundamental
understanding of the role of Si surface strain on GaN/AlN epitaxy, which can
then be exploited to develop AlGaN/GaN two-dimensional electron gas
heterostructures on (100) Si for power devices. The project team has
complementary expertise in group III-nitride heteroepitaxy on Si substrates
(Penn State University) and process scale-up and commercialization of GaN-on-Si
for power field-effect transistors (EPC). In addition, EPC is well positioned to
capitalize on hybrid circuit designs that will be enabled by the GaN on (100) Si
growth technology developed in this project.