* 1410525
* Probing Galaxy Formation and Cosmology with Dwarf Galaxies in Voids
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Vogeley, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 07/31/2018
* USD 253,951.00

This program will combine observations of neutral hydrogen with existing Sloan
Digital Sky Survey imaging and spectroscopy, plus satellite imaging, to study
certain types of galaxies in regions largely devoid of galaxies. The main
purpose is to address critical questions about galaxy formation and cosmology.
Broader impacts of the work include training of undergraduate and graduate
students. An astronomy outreach program for elementary school students will be
run by Dr. Vogeley and his group at a school in a minority, economically-
challenged neighborhood, with talks, interactive activities, and visits to the
Joseph Lynch Observatory at Drexel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current best
cosmological model (lambda cold dark matter) severely over-predicts the
abundance of void dwarfs unless star formation is strongly suppressed in low-
mass dark matter halos, or the spectrum of halo masses is modified. The void
environment, in which gas-stripping galaxy interactions are extremely rare, is
therefore a crucial test of our understanding of the processes affecting galaxy
formation. The exact degree of mismatch between predicted halos and observed
galaxies will be quantified, the detailed star formation and gas properties of
void dwarfs will be measured, and comparison will be made to high-resolution
cosmological simulations.