* 1410680
* Magnetic Nanostructures through Metallic Dewetting
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 352,344.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will
investigate a new strategy for making nanoparticles of different metals and
alloys, and characterize their size-dependent properties. Many electronic,
magnetic, and optical properties become size-dependent when the material is
structured on the nanometer length scale. Flash memory, magnetic recording media
in computer hard disks, and diode lasers in digital video players, are examples
of technology using nanostructured materials. The materials of interest in this
research program are metals and alloys that have not yet been prepared as
nanoparticles with good size control. The emphasis will be on alloys known to
have interesting magneto-electronic or magneto-optical properties, or potential
use as permanent magnets in energy-saving applications. The approach will use
nanopatterned templates with regular arrays of pits to control the particle
size. After depositing a thin film of the desired material, it will be heated
until the film dewets and fills the pits. The uniform pit size will lead to a
uniform particle size. This fabrication method will enable exploration of size-
dependent behavior. Characterization of the magnetic, magnetoresistive, and
magneto-optical properties will provide valuable new data that can be used in
engineering nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will investigate the
formation of monodisperse magnetic nanoparticles created by the wetting and
dewetting of thin metal films on nanopatterned templates, and to investigate
their magnetic, magnetoresistive, and magneto-optical properties. While L10 FePt
will be one of the target materials, there will be particular interest in
magnetic metal alloys that have not yet been made by chemical methods, due to
their oxidation sensitivity or complex crystal structures. The challenges are to
overcome the sensitivity to oxidation that makes many of these particles
impossible to prepare by solution chemistry methods, and to achieve
crystallographic orientation to measure their anisotropic magnetic properties.
There will be three strategies for preparing the magnetic alloy nanoparticle
arrays, each with strengths and limitations: 1) shadow deposition on a
nanoparticle monolayer, 2) deposition after seeding in nanohole arrays, and 3)
using nanopillar arrays as a hard mask for a magnetic alloy thin film. In all
cases rapid thermal annealing will be used to explore methods for
crystallographically orienting the alloy nanoparticles. The templates will be
dielectric materials (SiOx, SiNx, MgO) and conducting TiNx. The magnetic alloys
will include L10 alloys, both familiar (FePt), and less studied (FeNi, MnAl,
MnBi), materials for spintronics (the Heusler alloys Co2FeSi and Ni2MnGa, plus
FeCoB), and for magneto-optics (the amorphous materials GdFeCo and TbFeCo). The
results will lead to an improved understanding of metallic wetting and dewetting
on the nanoscale. The nanopatterning process will be applicable to a wide range
of complex materials, not only magnetic metal alloys. The preparation of
monodisperse, passivated magnetic metal alloy nanoparticles will enable
quantitative size-dependent measurements. The magnetization behavior will reveal
the roles of surface chemistry and reduced exchange interactions at the particle
surface. Novel resistance, magnetoresistance measurements will be made on
individual nanoparticles. Smooth monolayer arrays of nanoparticles will be
characterized by optical and magneto-optical spectroscopy. This project will
involve the doctoral thesis research of a graduate student, along with several
undergraduate research projects. There will also be impact to a broad audience
through numerous educational activities associated with the magnetics community.