* 1410735
* Self-assembly of Topologically Distinct Colloid Particles in Partially Ordered Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ivan Smalyukh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are unquestionably one of the
most commercially important forms of condensed matter. They are widely used in
displays, electro-optic and photonic devices and for energy conversion. This
usefulness arises from the ability to control the orientation of these cigar
shaped molecules with electric and magnetic fields. New materials allow ever
more complex structures to be engineered and increase the functionality of
liquid crystalline materials. The Principal Investigator (PI) and his team will
develop new types of liquid crystals consisting of tiny colloidal particles
dispersed in a liquid crystal medium. The colloidal particles will have
different shapes (topologies) which will determine the types of structures that
the liquid crystals will develop when subjected to electric and magnetic fields.
They will study the behavior of these 'topological colloids' to learn how the
interactions between the nanoparticles and the liquid crystal molecules
determine the structure with the goal of developing a "recipe book" to organize
the particles into precisely controlled structures. Understanding of fundamental
underpinnings of this 'topology-guided' self-assembly may enable development of
new electrically- and optically-controlled materials with unique properties
needed for practical devices of importance to society, such as flexible displays
and data storage devices. The PI will integrate this research with a broad range
of synergistic educational and outreach activities, including 'Light, Color,
&amp; Matter' Wizard Shows in elementary and secondary schools, Science Tours
for high school students, advising student chapters of professional societies
and providing research experiences for students and faculty from minority-
serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The PI
seeks to develop a new soft matter system dubbed 'topological colloids' and
identify the fundamental organizing principles behind topology-dictated self-
assembly of colloidal particles in liquid crystals (LCs). This research will
involve the design of methods for scalable fabrication of topologically distinct
colloidal particles of different sizes and their dispersions in LCs,
experimental study and modeling of the interplay between the topology of
particles, director fields, and topological defects, as well as explorations of
switchable colloidal self-assembly and alignment controlled by electric and
magnetic fields and light. The emerging interdisciplinary scientific frontiers
are at the nexus of nanoscience, condensed matter physics, and
topology/mathematics. From subatomic particles to cosmology, many phenomena
arise from the topological interaction of fields, surfaces, and monopole or
string-like defects. This topological interplay is constrained by theorems from
topology but is hard to be probed experimentally. The model system of
topological colloids may enable direct experimental studies of such topological
interactions, thus impinging on many scientific fields, well beyond the specific
goals of the proposed research activity. The research activity is transformative
in nature and expected to lay the groundwork for new research directions ranging
from topology-constrained self-assembly to experimental studies of low-
dimensional topology. Beyond the exploration of physical underpinnings, the
experimental arena PI and his students are developing may enable scaffolding of
nanoparticles, self-assembly of reconfigurable topological memory devices, as
well as new electro-optic effects based on switching between different multi-
stable director fields and orientations of particles. The fundamental phenomena
will be examined in contexts of self-assembly-based fabrication of novel
nanostructured composites and may lead to practical LC devices of importance to
society, such as novel displays. The research is integrated with a broad range
of synergistic outreach and educational activities ranging from Wizard Shows in
elementary and secondary schools to teaching short courses for liquid crystal
industry and to organizing international conferences and summer schools.