* 1410350
* RUI-Unconventional Anisotropic Order in Strongly Correlated Fermi Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,037.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
theoretical and computational research on systems of electrons that interact
strongly with each other leading to novel electronic states that spontaneously
develop a preferred direction. How these states respond to say, an applied
magnetic or electric field depends on the relative orientation of the field to
the preferred direction. The PI will investigate how states with a preferred
direction can arise eventhough the fundamental interaction between two electrons
depends only on distance between them and so, is the same for any direction. Of
particular interest is how anisotropic states emerge in electrons confined to a
plane at the interface of two semiconductors and exposed to a perpendicular or
nearly perpendicular magnetic field. The PI will investigate quantum mechanical
states of electrons that are curiously analogous to the states of long molecules
in liquid crystals that form the basis of modern display technology. This
research contributes to the intellectual foundations that lead to new electronic
and optical device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
provides an effective vehicle for involving undergraduate students in research
and training them in skills that will be valuable in the modern technical
workforce. Undergraduate students, often minority students, will be involved in
important aspects of this research. Because the research will require exploring
a variety of models using various methods methods, there are many opportunities
for undergraduate students to gain important research experience that can help
them as they pursue future graduate studies. This project will help to enhance
the research and the education infrastructure at the local institution. Through
outreach activities, the PI aims to increase interest in science topics at local
communities and high schools ultimately contributing to broader participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education with the
aim to investigate the emergence of unconventional anisotropic order in strongly
correlated Fermion systems at absolute zero temperature. The interplay between
interactions and quantum effects in this regime may lead to the stabilization of
novel quantum phases with unconventional properties. The main goal of this
project is to study how various unconventional anisotropic phases with liquid
crystalline order can be stabilized in strongly correlated Fermi systems with
non-monotonic but isotropic interaction potentials. A focus of this research is
to investigate how isotropic interaction potentials trigger anisotropic
behavior. The PI and his research team will employ theoretical and computational
methods to address outstanding questions regarding the appearance of novel types
of anisotropic ordering and phase transitions leading to unconventionally
ordered quantum states. The PI aims to develop a framework to understand the
emergence of anisotropic order in various correlated Fermion systems by
exploring mechanisms ranging from spontaneous Fermi surface deformations to
novel anisotropic liquid crystalline phases in a magnetic field. The PI aims to
advance understanding of several fundamental issues including: (i) The
stabilization of anisotropic Fermi liquid phases due to a non-monotonic
interaction potential, namely, how isotropic interaction potentials can drive a
correlated Fermi systems towards anisotropic order; (ii) The nature of the
recently discovered anisotropic quantum Hall phases in tilted magnetic field for
Laughlin-like filling factors in the first excited Landau level; and (iii) The
nature of anisotropic liquid crystalline phases in a weak magnetic field in
presence of weak anisotropic perturbations that break the rotational symmetry of
the dominant interaction potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
provides an effective vehicle for involving undergraduate students in research
and training them in skills that will valuable in the modern technical
workforce. Undergraduate students, often minority students, will be involved in
important aspects of this research. Because the research will require exploring
a variety of models using various methods, there are many opportunities for
undergraduate students to gain important research experience that can help them
as they pursue future graduate studies. This project will help to enhance the
research and the education infrastructure at the local institution. Through
outreach activities, the PI aims to increase interest in science topics at local
communities and high schools ultimately contributing to broader participation in
science.