* 1410375
* Novel properties of multi-component ultra-cold atom systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Congjun Wu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the theoretical research and
education on novel states of matter with ultra-cold atoms and molecules cooled
down to ultra-cold temperatures at one millionth of a degree above absolute
zero. Atoms and molecules are often trapped in the artificial crystalline
structures generated by laser beams. In spite of very different energy scales,
atoms and molecules develop quantum coherence and behave very similarly to
electrons in solids. Compared to solid state systems, a major advantage of the
ultra-cold atom and molecular systems is that interaction effects can be
controlled at an unprecedented level. This opens up a whole new opportunity for
the study correlated electron motion in materials through the study of ultra-
cold atoms in crystals of light.&lt;br/&gt;The physics of ultra-cold atoms and
molecules opens new directions and new states of matter than cannot exist or at
least would be very difficult to make using electrons in materials. The Coulomb
interaction between electrons depends only on their separation. In contrast, the
interaction between two dipolar molecules depends on the orientation of the
displacement vector joining the two molecules. These new features lead to novel
and complex many-body physics which are not easily accessible in
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop new directions in the study of
ultra-cold atoms and molecules and to provide theoretical guidance for the
experimental effort to find new states of matter. This research lies at the
interface between cold atom and condensed matter physics, and will bring new
understanding on quantum states of matter including magnetism,
superconductivity, and topological states.&lt;br/&gt;Students will be involved
in the research and will receive solid training to develop broad interests and
skills in the frontiers of condensed matter physics through course study,
seminars, and communications with experimentalists. The application and
appreciation of the principles of symmetry and topology will be emphasized.
Advances in cold atom physics will be incorporated into course studies with an
up-to-date perspective from many-body physics that is not traditionally
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
the theoretical research and education to study important direction in ultra-
cold atoms and dipolar molecules with multiple internal degrees of freedom. The
PI will use both analytical and numerical methods to explain experimental
results and predict novel properties for future experimental tests. Knowledge
gained from this research will greatly enrich the physics of superfluidity,
quantum magnetism, and topological states.&lt;br/&gt;The research has the
following foci:&lt;br/&gt;1) The non-perturbative study of quantum magnetism. An
itinerant ferromagnetic ground state has been proved to exist for a class of
systems with two and three dimensional p-orbital bands filled with cold
fermions. Systematic quantum Monte-Carlo simulations free of the sign problem
are planned to illuminate open issues of ground-state and thermodynamic
properties of itinerant ferromagnetism. The exotic quantum antiferromagnetism of
alkaline-earth fermions exhibit SU(2N) symmetries. The PI will study the
challenging problem of the strong charge and magnetic fluctuations using quantum
Mote-Carlo simulations.&lt;br/&gt;2) The PI plans to study ultra-cold atoms in
the p-orbital bands in the diamond lattice, including strong-correlation effects
in the three dimensional flat bands, and the frustrated superfluid state
described by a novel statistical 4-coloring model.&lt;br/&gt;3) The PI will
explore the application of quaternions in the study of 3D topological states for
ultra-cold atoms with synthetic spin-orbit coupling. In particular, the study
will focus on the three dimensional Landau levels with quaternionic analytic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;4) The study of interaction effects in Majorana flat bands
in unconventional pairing states with dipolar fermions. This projects aims at
exploring new states of matter in multi-component cold atom and molecular
systems. This research lies at the interface between condensed matter and cold
atom physics and will greatly benefit both fields.&lt;br/&gt;Students will be
involved in the research and will receive solid training to develop broad
interests and skills in the frontiers of condensed matter physics through course
study, seminars, and communications with experimentalists. The application and
appreciation of the principles of symmetry and topology will be emphasized.
Advances in cold atom physics will be incorporated into course studies with an
up-to-date perspective from many-body physics that is not traditionally
provided.