* 1410670
* Microstructural and Electrical Characterization of Novel Porous ZrO2-based NOx Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,10/31/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Exhaust gas sensors play a critical role in
monitoring emissions and regulating engine operation in diesel trucks and cars.
Recent emission standards for the United States places more stringent standards
on nitrogen oxide emissions from diesel vehicles in order to further limit and
reduce air pollutants. Current sensors are not capable of measuring nitrogen
oxides at levels that will satisfy 2015 Tier 2, Bin 8 emission standards set by
the Environmental Protection Agency. This shortcoming creates a need for diesel
exhaust gas sensors with greater sensitivity and accuracy. This project focuses
on gas sensors composed of a novel porous ceramic architecture. The research
activities in this project are providing a fundamental understanding of how the
sensor microstructure affects the electrical properties, kinetic reactions, and
electrochemical response of the sensor. This knowledge is important as it has a
direct impact on sensor sensitivity, selectivity and accuracy. This project
provides research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students through
participation in the data collection, analysis, and reporting of research
results, which greatly contributes to their university education. The outreach
activities range from laboratory research experiences to hands-on afterschool
activities with elementary age children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: New regulatory standards for diesel emissions have established more
stringent thresholds for pollutant levels; thereby, creating a need for nitrogen
oxide sensors with greater sensitivity, selectivity and accuracy. Current
sensors are capable of measuring nitrogen oxide emissions at concentrations down
to approximately 10 parts per million, which will not satisfy new standards.
Novel porous electrolyte based gas sensors are a promising alternative to
conventional diesel exhaust sensors. In this project, the electrical response of
sensors with a novel porous zirconia electrolyte and dense perovskite sensing
electrodes are being studied over a range of operating conditions. The aim is to
acquire fundamental understanding of sensing behavior that is governed by the
microstructural properties of the electrolyte and sensing electrode. The data
generated is useful for determining kinetic reaction mechanisms, temperature
dependence, and operating conditions effecting sensor sensitivity, selectivity
and accuracy. The outreach activities range from laboratory research experiences
for undergraduate and graduate students, to hands-on afterschool activities with
elementary age children.