* 1410548
* Digitization PEN: Digitization of North American Bryophyte and Lichen Specimens from Two Ohio Herbaria at the University of Cincinnati (CINC)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Steven Rogstad, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 166,627.00

This project joins the ongoing Thematic Collections Network project "North
American Lichens and Bryophytes: Sensitive Indicators of Environmental Quality
and Change". The project will contribute label data for approximately 107,000
specimens form North America. Both herbaria included in this PEN are especially
rich in 18th to early 20th Century collections which will fill an important gap
in attaining the TCN's goals. These organisms are known to be highly sensitive
to environmental changes and, accordingly this data, will support future
research on environmental changes during this period of history which may
influence distributional patterns of lichens and bryophytes over time. Other
research projects, that use map-based analyses of historical vs. present-day
data, could address questions such as, can these hyper-sensitive organisms be
used as early warning bioindicators to highlight the early causes and effects of
environmental change? In addition, exposure of these historical specimens and
their data will be useful for studies of changes in the local
vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be useful to
society by increasing our understanding and our ability for early detection of
the causal factors and resulting patterns of environmental quality including,
for example, changes in air and water quality. This project will provide
experience in museum curation and database management to undergraduate and
graduate students. Outreach will include design and implementation of pre-K and
1st grade activities to introduce young students to new colors, textures of the
strange and interesting things in the natural world, and the idea that all
organisms are important. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the National Resource (iDigBio.org).