* 1410302
* Quantum electron solids and interaction-driven phenomena in two- and one-dimensional systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Jian Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Nontechnical: Electrons are tiny quantum mechanical objects that exist in all
physical systems and most systems contain a large number of them. Understanding
how electrons interact with each other and with the environment is a vital
scientific subject and has played a critical role in advancing modern science
and technologies. Analogous to water, electrons manifest both gaseous states at
high temperatures and liquid states at low temperatures. Another form is a solid
state which was predicted but never observed. To obtain evidence of this solid
state of electrons is not only important in understanding how the most basic
force can radically affect the quantum states, but also allows scientists to
develop remarkable future quantum electronics and spintronics. These energy
sustainable systems are fundamentally important to nature. With greatly improved
semiconductor technologies, a novel type of semiconductors of ultra-high purity
has become available as a result of a recent breakthrough and preliminary
results have been recently obtained as evidence of a genuine quantum electron
solid. This project utilizes such devices to perform experiments with the most
advanced scientific tools: nanofabrication and ultra-low temperature physics.
The goal is to capture the direct evidence for the quantum mechanical mechanisms
in the dynamical properties. This project supports the education of one Ph.D.
student in pursuing discovery and advanced technologies, and allows the group to
conduct outreach activities with local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Remarkable new quantum phenomena, such as the
even-denominator Fractional Quantum Hall Effect and Topological Insulators,
emerge in response to strong inter-particle Coulomb interaction. However, the
most prominent interaction-driven effect, Wigner crystallization of electrons,
has not been well established. This fascinating quantum matter (with spin
ordering) is not only paramount to fundamental science, but also important for
future applications including quantum electronics and spintronics. For a long
time, experimental effort was hindered because most devices contain a high level
of unwanted disorder which overwhelms the interaction effect at low electron
densities. Since 2003, breakthroughs have been made in providing ultra-high
quality two-dimensional electron systems in GaAs semiconductor field-effect-
transistors. Recent achievement with the measurement of ultrahigh purity GaAs
field-effect transistors (named HIGFET) has led to the observation of a genuine
WC. Moreover, the preliminary results also point to possible quantum
pinning/depinning mechanisms that are not understood. This project utilizes
these types of devices with record low electron densities to perform transport
experiments at mK temperatures. The goal is to verify the quantum nature of the
dynamical properties well below the classical limits. Various techniques such
varying temperature, density, and interaction are adopted to study the phase
boundaries. AC+DC excitation technique is utilized to directly probe the
collective, large-scale quantum tunneling in a Wigner Crystal. This project
supports the education of one Ph.D. student in pursuing discovery and in
learning advanced technologies, which are indispensable for excellent training
in pursuing scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;