* 1410583
* Quench Dynamics of Low Dimensional Quantum Many Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Natan Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award supports fundamental
theoretical research and education to advance conceptual understanding of
quantum mechanical systems of many particles, for example electrons in
materials, that are far from the balanced state of equilibrium. The detailed
study of nonequilibrium processes has been hampered over the years by the very
short time scales that characterize the response of the system to external
impulse, and the difficulty of isolating such systems from the environment. With
the appearance of diverse new systems accessible to experiments, including
nanoelectronic and nanomechanical devices, molecular electronic devices, optical
systems, and cold atom gases trapped in beams of laser light, many limitations
have been overcome and great progress has been made to control and fine tune
many fundamental experiments to probe nonequilibrium systems. This award
addresses a need to develop in parallel the theoretical tools to describe
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on systems that undergo an abrupt
change, or quench, and investigate how the system responds with time. The
systems to be investigated are described by a class of models that have
experimental realizations in trapped cold atom systems or nanodevices.
Theoretical tools will be developed to explore the time evolution of these
systems. The PI aims to use these tools to go further to probe and identify the
fundamental principles that underlie thermodynamics for systems that are far
from equilibrium. The PI will address several questions, including: What drives
a system to reach equilibrium? What aspects of the dynamics apply to many
systems independent of specific details, and which ones are specific to a
particular system? When a system is in a nonequilibrium steady state does it
maximize entanglement, a quantum mechanical property that links different parts
of the system that may be far from each other?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects
describe detailed experimental systems and are used to discover the concepts
that govern them. Combining both the theoretical analysis with specific study of
experimental systems provides an excellent platform for the training of graduate
students. The PI will convey the underlying science and research results to a
broad range of audiences from high school students to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the theoretical research and
education on the nonequilibrium dynamics of strongly correlated systems. The
emphasis is placed on quench evolution in systems described by integrable
Hamiltonians that can be realized by experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will develop the theoretical tools needed to investigate the dynamics of
nonequilibrium systems. He will pursue generalizations of the Yudson
representation to finite volume that are necessary to allow the expression of an
arbitrary initial state in terms of the Bethe Ansatz eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian and hence its evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
investigate a variety of systems, including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gaudin-
Yang model describes multicomponent particles, fermions or bosons moving on the
continuous line interacting via short range potential. The PI will study the
interaction quench of a Fermi sea with attractive and repulsive interactions
with the purpose of understanding the different phases that ensue. Of particular
interest is the quench into a finite momentum condensed state, driven by an
imbalance of spin-up and spin-down electrons. Similar questions arise on the
lattice for systems described by the Hubbard
Hamiltonian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sine-Gordon model can describe a large
number of systems in a variety of contexts. The PI will study this model in the
physical context of the quench from a Mott insulator to a superfluid that takes
place when the strength of the periodic potential is reduced, a quantum phase
transition much studied experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum impurity
systems, typically given by the Kondo and Anderson Hamiltonians, appear in many
contexts. With these Hamiltonians, the PI will investigate the quench dynamics
of: i. an impurity coupled to a lead to determine time evolution of the Kondo
effect, ii. An impurity attached to two leads held at different chemical
potential to determine and the time evolution of the non equilibrium current
driven by the voltage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational
activities integrated with the research at the graduate level. The results of
the research will be incorporated into the PI's graduate level courses on
quantum many-body physics and condensed matter theory and into a book the PI is
writing.