* 1410972
* Investigations in Elementary Particle Physics and Particle Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Kirsten Tollefson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 12/31/2018
* USD 3,626,616.00

Overview: Particle physics considers a vast range of scientific questions, from
subatomic to cosmic scales. The Michigan State University (MSU) Group supported
through this award investigates such questions through experimentation at the
highest available collision energies at accelerators, through studies of the
very rare interactions of neutrinos, and through studies of high energy gamma
rays produced by astrophysical sources. These studies are relevant to the
understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting
fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as
we do now. To meet the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new
detectors and accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and
analytical methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader
impact for the training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement
of technological benefits to society over the longer term. A notable element of
the MSU Group's outreach activities has been the development of a planetarium
show on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) that has been
well received. ATLAS itself is developing a show on dark matter with MSU
leadership and participation. During the funding period covered by this
proposal, the group will continue to improve and innovate on similar programs
that can be shown nationally, internationally and locally, bringing the
excitement of high energy physics to a large variety of
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of experiments at the highest available
collision energies at the LHC at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the
nature of the Higgs Boson, recently discovered there in 2012, and to discover
new physics beyond the Standard Model, the current very effective, but not
complete, theoretical model that provides insight into much of our present
knowledge of particle physics. The next three years represent a transition of
the LHC physics program from data taking and operation at a collision energy of
eight Teraelectronvolt (TeV) to extended operations and data taking at nearly
double the energy, 13-14 TeV. Over a thousand scientists from the United States
are involved with this scientific program on several major experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan State group is one of the important
participants in the ATLAS experiment at CERN. Group members hold responsible
positions in physics analysis, detector operations, collaboration management,
and in the upgrade of the experimental detector. Analytically, the group is
focusing on studies of Standard Model physics and beyond the standard model
through investigations in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), Higgs physics, top quark
physics, and searches for new exotic states. The group has also made significant
contributions to CTEQ, the Coordinated Theoretical-Experimental QCD project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group has a long-standing involvement in neutrino
physics, now focused on the NOvA (Neutrinos at the Main Injector (NuMI) Off-axis
(electron) neutrino Appearance Experiment) experiment and the LArIAT (Liquid
Argon in a Testbeam) test program, both associated with Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory. The nature of neutrino mass and mixing looms as science
already beyond the standard model and the NOvA experiment is the next major US-
based experiment addressing these issues. Finally, the Michigan State group is a
member of the HAWC (High Altitude Water Cerenkov) Experiment located in Mexico.
A gamma ray observatory, HAWC will probe extreme environments in the universe,
providing a view of non-thermal processes in the galaxy and beyond. The group is
focusing its efforts on electronics and database development. Although the
detector is not fully instrumented, it is nevertheless taking data.