* 1410378
* Structure and Properties of the Twist-Bend Nematic Phase
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 460,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals brought a
revolution in how we present information nowadays, enabling the entire industry
of Liquid Crystal Displays (LCDs). Modern devices ranging from smart phones to
laptop screens and flat-panel TV sets are all featuring the LCDs, in which so-
called nematic liquid crystals realign under the action of the electric field,
thus changing the optical appearance of the pixelated screen. For many years,
the only known type of nematic alignment was the one with a single straight axis
of molecular orientation. This project focuses on a newly discovered nematic
order, in which the molecular orientation follows a nontrivial geometry of an
oblique helicoid, with twists and bends at a very small scale of nanometers. The
project will establish the basic properties of the new nematic liquid crystals,
determine their structure and properties and explore how the new materials can
be used in practical applications such as LCDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals (LCs) represent a peculiar state
of matter combining properties of solid crystals and isotropic fluids. The most
widely known type of LCs is the so-called nematic, in which rod-like molecules
are aligned parallel to each other, but have the freedom to glide past their
neighbors. The subtle combination of order, fluidity, and eager responsiveness
to the electric field featured by the nematics brought a revolution in the way
we present information nowadays, enabling an entire industry of portable LC
displays, or LCDs. For many decades, the single axis of molecular orientation,
the so-called director, was considered as the only possible nematic made of non-
chiral molecules. Theoretical models by Meyer and Dozov hypothesized, however,
that there might be nematics in which the director bends and twists. In 2013,
the existence of the twist-bend nematic Ntb was proven in materials with dimeric
molecules, representing two rigid cores connected by a flexible aliphatic chain.
In Ntb, the ground-state director is not a straight line, but follows an oblique
helicoid with a nanoscale pitch. The goal of this project is to explore the
detailed structural and physical properties of Ntb. The nanoscale-modulated
director should be sensitive to weak driving forces such as temperature and
electric field, promising applications that might rival those of the classic
LCs. The project will establish a fundamental understanding of the Ntb structure
with spontaneously broken chiral symmetry at the widely disparate length scales
from nanometers to hundreds of microns and determine the physical properties of
materials forming Ntb, such as elasticity and responsiveness to electromagnetic
fields. The goals will be achieved by applying a battery of imaging and
characterization techniques, ranging from cryo-TEM to 3D optical microscopy.