* 1410109
* Formation of Germanene, the Ge Analog of Graphene, using Electrochemical Atomic Layer Deposition (E-ALD)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* John Stickney, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 393,710.00

Non-technical Description: This project involves the formation of a new material
with unique properties that could potentially be used to develop and improve on
a range of functional devices. One of the most exciting new materials is called
graphene, atomically thin sheets of carbon in the shape of "chicken wire" with
properties never seen before. It is anticipated that radio-frequency devices
will improve dramatically when graphene is incorporated. Calculations suggest
that silicon and germanium may form analogs of graphene: silicene and germanene,
respectively. However, stand-alone sheets of those materials have not been
realized in laboratories. Most attempts to form them have involved high
temperatures. Work by this research team has involved the use of
electrodeposition, a room-temperature growth technique, and the results so far
have been encouraging. The primary importance of this project, besides the
formation of germanene, is the training of future scientists. This research
group is composed of a mix of undergraduate and graduate students, half of whom
are women. Results of this project are published in the peer reviewed literature
and described in presentations at national and international scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This research project is
on the growth and characterization of germanene, the Ge analog of graphene. Ab
initio calculations have indicated that germanene should be stable and have
properties similar to graphene. Formation of germanene has not yet been reported
in the literature, however. The Si analog of graphene, silicene, has been
reported, though only as single atomic layers of covalently bound Si on metal
surfaces in vacuum. This project involves developing chemical methods to grow
germanene nanofilms via the electrochemical analog of atomic layer deposition
(E-ALD), and determining the mechanism for its growth and optimization.
Characterization of the structure, morphology and composition of deposits is
performed with surface analytical methods such as photoelectron spectroscopy,
low energy electron diffraction, in-situ scanning tunneling microscopy, as well
as with thin film techniques such as microprobe, X-ray diffraction, transmission
electron microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy (including in-situ Raman
measurements). The project also attempts to develop methods for removing
germanene from the substrate so that its intrinsic properties can be better
measured.