* 1411024
* Driving forces and orientation selection during texture transformations in thin metal films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Thin metal films (metal layers less than one tenth the thickness of a human
hair) are essential elements in computer chips, optical systems, catalytic
converters, and many other high-tech devices. These films are made up of many
tiny metal crystals, called "grains". Because the films are so thin, grains tend
to orient themselves so that certain directions in their crystal structure align
with the plane of the film. The properties of thin films, and therefore the
performance and reliability of devices containing thin films, depend very
sensitively on these orientations. This topic has been studied for many years,
but people do not yet have the ability to predict how a film or a device will
behave. In a particularly vexing problem, films that are made with one set of
crystal orientations sometimes change to a different set of orientations over
time, dramatically changing the properties. To date, it is not possible to
predict when this transformation will occur. A number of people have proposed
that the initial grains must have defects, imperfections in their crystal
structures. These defects represent excess energy, so if new defect-free grains
can replace the defective grains, the film can achieve a more stable, lower
energy state. This argument, however, does not explain why a new orientation
should form. To understand this problem, the Baker group at Cornell University
will make films with a wide range of defect structures and will characterize
those structures and the associated film behaviors using sophisticated tools
such as the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS), the Ion Beam
Laboratory at Sandia National Labs in Albuquerque, NM, and others. They will
generate predictive models to help interpret their results. The knowledge
generated in this project will help make it possible to continue to miniaturize
the next generation of nanofabricated devices and should help to improve
performance and reliability in all devices that contain thin metal films. This
project will involve undergraduates at Houghton College, a small non-PhD-
granting institution in upstate New York. Undergraduate participation will
enhance both the scientific output of the project and the educational experience
of those students. Houghton students will be advised at Houghton by Prof.
Brandon Hoffman, but will spend summers working with the Baker group at Cornell.
Baker group graduate students and post-docs are active in outreach activities to
area schools and institutions. A benefit of the current project is that images
of grain orientation distributions can be quite striking and can often stand on
their own as art, making a nice icebreaker for talking about materials science
to non-scientists.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Metal thin films are critical elements in many micro- and nano-fabricated
technologies including microelectronics, optics, sensors, and catalysts. Due to
dimensional constraints, such films are frequently found to be textured; that
is, the individual metal crystallites comprising the film are preferentially
oriented with certain crystal planes parallel to plane of the film. Films may
form with one orientation distribution during deposition, but transform to
another over time. Since the properties of the film depend strongly on the
orientations present, this texture transformation dramatically changes film
properties. Understanding texture and texture transformations is thus critical
to understanding the performance and reliability of devices containing thin
films. A widely quoted model attributes texture transformation to a competition
between interfacial and strain energies. However, recent studies suggest that
neither of these driving forces play a dominant role. Thus, it has been
suggested that reduction in defect energy, as in bulk recrystallization,
provides the driving force. While this might well be true, the orientation
selection mechanism is not clear. Indeed, this concept suggests that certain
orientations should have intrinsically higher defect densities than others. The
existence of such orientation dependent defect densities has not yet been
reported. To understand this, the Baker group will study the defect structures
in thin metal films and their roles in texture formation and texture
transformation. They will produce films using a high-throughput method that
allows them to investigate multiple parameters with every film deposition. They
will vary deposition parameters to produce different defect densities, induce
point defects using ion bombardment in collaboration with the Ion Beam
Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories, and vary planar defect density
(stacking faults) by varying stacking fault energy. Film structures will be
examined in detail using x-ray diffraction and TEM methods. They will develop
models that link driving forces and texture transformation kinetics to allow
better prediction and control of thin film texture, and therefore properties.