* 1411527
* Astrophysical and Astrochemical Tests of Massive Star Formation Theories
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Jonathan Tan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 01/31/2018
* USD 388,719.00

Stars with masses much greater than that of our Sun are the engines that drive
the evolution of our galaxy; mixing the interstellar gas and dust with their
winds, radiation, and eventually their violent deaths in supernova explosions.
This project will improve our understanding of the way in which the most massive
of these stars are formed. The project will develop new theoretical and
computational models that simulate the formation of these massive stars from
their beginnings as condensing core of interstellar hydrogen gas to their birth
as the largest stars in our galaxy. These new simulations will include more
physically realistic models of the evolution of the proto-stellar core, the
surrounding region of rotating infalling matter, and the outflowing winds from
the newly forming star. The project will test and verify these models of massive
star formation with new observations with state-of-the-art facilities performed
at millimeter, sub-millimeter, and mid-infrared wavelengths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use existing Monte Carlo radiative
transfer code for turbulent accreting cores, which the PI has modified to
include both dust and gas opacities. These models will be used to extend the
canonical evolutionary sequence for massive stars to systematically cover a much
larger parameter space of initial core mass, core rotation, and environmental
factors. The proposers will also incorporate new models for dust grain alignment
and the effects of a binary companion to the current radiative transfer
computations. The output of the radiative transfer calculations will consist of
observables that can be compared with observations by facilities such as the
Atacama Large Millimeter/Sub-millimeter Array (ALMA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will build upon previous efforts by the PI to train of a new generation
of scientists, with a strong emphasis on students from underrepresented groups.
The project will communicate its results to the public through the development
of a presentation entitled ?Birth of the Giants ? the Most Massive Stars in the
Universe? to be shown at local schools and at events organized through the
Florida Museum of Natural History.