* 1411301
* Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Quantum Dot Superlattices for Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 596,385.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Films of semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are an
important emerging class of materials for next-generation solar cells, but the
efficiency of cells based on QD films is limited in part by the poor spatial
order of the QDs. This project focuses on the development of highly-ordered and
electrically-conductive QD films as a new class of electronic materials. With
support from both the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program and the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
researchers at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) will make these new
materials and study the role of order in charge transport, with the goal of
demonstrating greatly improved charge transport in QD films. The project will
advance the understanding of transport in functional nanoscale systems,
including the role of spatial and energetic order in the emergence of collective
mesoscale phenomena such as band formation that depend on strong electronic
interactions between nanoscale building blocks. The project will yield new
insights into QD self-assembly, interfacial physics, and charge diffusion
length, and result in a class of modular, organic-inorganic hybrid QD crystals
with transport properties suitable for a variety of QD technologies, including
solar cells. Such QD solar cells made by self-assembly from solution can lower
the cost of solar electricity and promote solar energy deployment worldwide,
with particular benefits to developing communities. The project will also enable
a K-12 materials science outreach effort as part of the UCI/Chapman University
joint Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) Program
(http://mesa.eng.uci.edu/). The researchers will develop a hands-on QD
photophysics MESA program in which students help synthesize QDs and explore
their characterization by spectroscopy and electron microscopy. This joint
program serves approximately 1,600 elementary, middle and high school students
in Orange and Los Angeles Counties, and focuses on promoting STEM education and
providing academic enrichment to low-income students from backgrounds with
historically low levels of participation in higher education. In addition,
several undergraduate students will participate in this research each summer as
part of the NSF-funded Chemistry REU and the UCI California Alliance for
Minority Participation (CAMP) summer research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;PbX (X = S, Se, or
Te) quantum dot (QD) thin films represent an important emerging class of
absorber layers for next-generation photovoltaics (PV). Remarkable progress has
been made in QD PV over the past several years by replacing the long,
electrically insulating oleate ligands on as-made PbX QDs with short organic
molecules or inorganic ions. Unfortunately, these ligand treatments destroy
medium and long range order in the QD films. Partly as a consequence, charge
transport is limited to sequential phonon-assisted tunneling, resulting in low
carrier mobility, short carrier diffusion lengths, and limited photocurrent from
QD devices. One exciting prospect is to assemble QDs into electronically
coupled, conductive superlattices (crystals of QDs) in which transport can occur
via domain-delocalized states or Bloch-type extended states (mini-bands). Mini-
band transport in QD superlattices could yield much larger carrier mobility and
diffusion length. With support from both the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Program and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, researchers at the University of California, Irvine will
replace the oleate ligands of PbX QDs with conjugated organic "molecular wires"
to fabricate a new class of conductive PbX QD hybrid superlattice nanocomposites
(HSNs) composed of QDs interconnected with molecular wires. The molecular wires
will provide excellent superlattice order, tunable HOMO and LUMO levels, strong
electronic coupling via barrier lowering, and large inter-QD spacing that is
favorable for superlattice crystallization and the adsorption of co-ligands to
passivate surface states. The impact of superlattice order on charge transport,
carrier mobility, and diffusion length will be studied using an array of
electrical and spectroscopic techniques. The main fundamental goal of the
project is to elucidate the degree to which and the mechanisms by which
superlattice effects enhance carrier mobility and diffusion length in QD films,
while the main applied goal is to make HSNs with minority carrier diffusion
lengths of at least 1000 nm, which would enable nearly perfect charge collection
and very high conversion efficiency from QD PV.