* 1411991
* Chemical probes to decipher the structure and mechanism of nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Steven Bruner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2018
* USD 483,000.00

Plants and microorganisms produce a large variety of natural molecules with
complex chemical architecture and beneficial properties. These small molecules
are made by an assembly-line-like machinery composed of enzymes in the producing
organisms. This proposal will probe the structure and mechanism of enzymes
responsible for the biosynthesis of a specific class of peptide natural
products. Using an interdisciplinary approach, the researchers will determine
the atomic resolution structures of key machinery components using X-ray
diffraction. The structural work will be complemented by synthetic organic
chemistry and molecular biology approaches. Overall, the results will both
provide insight into the fundamental chemistry and will help guide the metabolic
engineering of biosynthetic pathways to produce useful molecules. Coupled to the
research plan is a comprehensive education and outreach plan that will exploit
the results and approaches to engage high school, undergraduate and graduate
students.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Steven Bruner from the University of Florida to study
the structure and mechanism of complex, multidomain enzymes responsible for the
biosynthesis of non-ribosomal peptide natural products. These pathways are
responsible for the production of a wide range of structurally diverse and
therapeutically important products. The proposal will use an interdisciplinary
approach focused on small molecule probes in combination with protein X-ray
crystallography and mechanistic enzymology. The work will address key unanswered
questions in regard to the structure and mechanism of peptide construction:
amide bond formation, amino acid epimerization and peptide cyclization.
Expanding on prior results, a structural genomics approach will be used with
enzymes of the T. fusca fuscachelin pathway as a model for all non-ribosomal
peptide pathways. Specific focus will be on the structural characterization of
protein/protein interactions, substrate trafficking and unresolved mechanistic
questions. The broader impacts of this work encompass multiple disciplines, as
the results of this program have application and impact in diverse areas of
secondary metabolite production, including metabolic engineering and synthetic
biology. In addition, a strong educational component is present, incorporating
aspects of the research plan to introduce students at many levels to the
interdisciplinary approaches of chemical biology.