* 1411160
* Development of ultrathin intermetallics for giant spin Hall effects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* William Bailey, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,994.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certain nonmagnetic metals have been
shown to behave like magnets when electrical current is passed through them. As
electrical current is passed through these metals, which exhibit the so-called
spin Hall effect, they can be used to control the switching and other functional
properties of adjacent ferromagnetic metals, removed by a few atomic layers in a
sandwich structure. This phenomenon, known as the spin Hall effect, is very
exciting for applications in magnetic data storage ('spintronics'), since it
enables very efficient current-controlled switching for nanoscale magnets. This
project will search for chemically ordered metal alloys, up to a dozen atomic
layers thick, which are expected to offer very efficient electrical-current
control of magnetism. These metallic alloys will be synthesized at thicknesses
of dozens of atoms; their atomic arrangements and chemical tranformations will
be studied, and their functional properties in data storage will be measured at
temperatures approaching absolute zero and up to room temperature. The discovery
of these improved materials would have broad impact in information storage
technology. Graduate students will gain broad expertise in topics ranging from
classical metallurgy electronic devices. Outreach activities are planned with
K-12 schools in Manhattan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a materials search for ultrathin
paramagnetic intermetallic phases, based on tungsten (W) and other heavy metals,
which have the potential to convert charge current to spin current with high
efficiency. Theoretical considerations indicate that intermetallic phases with a
large number of atoms per unit cell should have a conversion efficiency (spin
Hall angle) possibly in excess of that observed for tungsten (W), which
currently has the highest spin Hall angle known. The experiments will combine
epitaxial ultrathin film depositions, high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) characterization, measurements of phase transformation
kinetics, and innovative measurements of the spin Hall effect using radio-
frequency techniques. The discovery of phases with high spin Hall angles would
have broad impact, facilitating the incorporation of spin torque in information
storage technology. Graduate students will gain broad expertise in topics
ranging from classical metallurgy (microstructure, phase transformations) to
measurements of film-level physical properties (cryogenic magnetotransport and
ferromagnetic resonance) to incorporation in spin electronic devices. Outreach
activities are planned with K-12 schools in Manhattan.