* 1411773
* CDS&E: AGNs Amidst the Data Deluge
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Gordon Richards, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 179,482.00

In the fifty years since the discovery of quasars, a picture of these enigmatic
objects has emerged wherein quasars are supermassive black holes residing at the
centers of large galaxies. The black hole may have a mass of millions to
billions times that of the sun. As this picture implies, the quasar phenomenon
is one and the same as that of the objects referred to as "active galactic
nuclei." All are characterized by enormous luminosity such that the quasar
frequently outshines the light from all of the billions of stars in its host
galaxy. The luminosity of the quasar allows it to be seen at very large
distances, distances at which the object is unresolved, i.e., its image is like
that of a star in our galaxy. Over the decades, quasars have been discovered by
a variety of diverse techniques, each of which has a tendency to select objects
of a limited range of characteristics such as color or radio emission,
properties that can differentiate it from the huge number of foreground galactic
stars. As astronomy enters the "Big Data" era, it is poised to consider massive
data sets, the volumes of which are far larger than any considered previously.
Specifically, large imaging surveys of the sky such as those produced by the
PanSTARRS and Large Synoptic Survey Telescope will contain millions of quasars.
This project will develop algorithms and techniques for sifting through the data
sets to pull out the quasars for study of the evolution of the properties of the
quasar population with cosmic time.

The project will create the largest sample of quasar assembled to date using
modern statistical techniques and the simultaneous combination of color,
variability, and astrometric information available in existing imaging surveys.
Quasar selection with these parameters is currently performed separately and
generally with sub-optimal algorithms. It will only be through simultaneous
consideration of heterogeneous data types and the use of modern statistical
methods that next-generation imaging surveys will achieve large quasar samples
that are both optimally complete and uncontaminated, enabling fulfillment of
their promise and maximizing their science output. This work is at the
crossroads of astronomy, statistics, and computer science, as it deals with the
problem of object classification in massive astronomical data sets that would be
intractable with standard methods. It will be possible to extend this work to
the next-generation of imaging surveys. A proof of concept of this work is in
hand, establishing that the project is both well-conceived and that the required
resources are in place. The algorithms will be tested on existing surveys for
which confirming spectroscopic data exist.