* 1411209
* Terrestrial Gamma Flashes at Ground Level - a Research and Education Program
* EHR,HRD
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Anderson Sunda-Meya, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 250,001.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support for projects that offer solutions to the severe
underrepresentation of African American students in engineering, the geosciences
and physics at the undergraduate level. The project at Xavier University will
involve a group of undergraduate physics majors in experiments to observe gamma
rays from lightning by constructing an array of detectors that can observe
terrestrial gamma flashes from the ground. This work will be done in
collaboration with Louisiana State University (LSU). Through this project, a
group of undergraduate physics majors will gain research experiences that may
further their interest in pursuing a degree in physics or in a related science,
technology, engineering and mathematics discipline, thereby contributing to
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in the discipline.

The project will update the scintillators in the current TGF and Energetic
Thunderstorm Rooftop Array (TETRA) at Louisiana State University so that the
sensitivity to terrestrial gamma flashes is increased and the energy range is
extended to 10 MeV; will install a TETRA array of ten detectors in Puerto Rico
in a location where the lightning density is higher than in Baton Rouge and
where there is satellite coverage that will enable the simultaneous observation
of terrestrial gamma flashes; and will add electric field mills, lightning
detectors, and meteorological measurements to complement the gamma ray
measurements and to understand the connection between the thunderstorm
environment and charged particle acceleration processes. The collaboration with
LSU will allow faculty and students at Xavier University to gain expertise in
experimental astrophysics, a research concentration new to the Physics
Department at Xavier University.