* 1411166
* Multiferroic Tunnel Junction with Active Dual Layer Barrier
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 480,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) and Ceramics Program (CER) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;Nanoferronics is a new
concept that combines ferroelectrics, which has spontaneous charge polarization,
with spintronics, which utilize the electron spins to transport and store
information. These new concepts can be used as multilevel multifunctional
devices with new functionalities including electric control of spins. The
project addresses a major materials challenge on how to increase the resistance
on-and-off ratio of multiferroic tunnel junctions, a nanoferronic concept, by
combining a very thin ferroelectric insulator and an interface layer as the
barrier with magnetic tunnel junctions which have been used for magnetic
recording and non-volatile memories. Success of the research can have
significant impacts on realizing the new device concept and especially the
combined memory-on-processor approach. The educational goals of the project are
to provide educational and training opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students, especially for female and underrepresented minority
undergraduate students, with a stimulating environment for interdisciplinary
experience in physics, materials sciences, and engineering. The PI has many
years of experience in advising female and underrepresented groups through
several established programs on campus and will continue in those
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Multiferroic
tunnel junctions combine magnetic tunnel junction with ferroelectric tunneling,
and have shown many promising functionalities that can bring logic and memory
into one device. The objective of the project is to design and fabricate a dual
layer barrier in the multiferroic tunnel junctions with one ferroelectric
barrier and a second interfacial layer. More specifically, by designing the
barrier interface, a phase transition at the interface may be triggered and
serve as a current filter to regulate the on-and-off state. The two major goals
are (1) to increase the tunneling electroresistance, the resistance on-off
ratio, and (2) to achieve the control of magnetic state by electrical field.
With the second barrier layer, a much larger enhancement of the resistance ratio
through the ferroelectric driven interface phase transition may be achieved. By
combining the design and controlled growth of heterostructures of different
magnetic and ferroelectric oxides, measurements of the interfacial states, and
measurements of magnetic and transport properties of the devices, the project
seeks to understand the mechanisms of the interfacial effect in enhancing
tunneling electroresistance and magnetoelectric interaction in several systems.