* 1411411
* Interpreting Data from Trapping of Stochastic Movers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* James Miller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This collaboration between mathematical physicist Prof. Jeff Schenker and
entomologist Prof. James Miller aims at a fundamental understanding of the
science of trapping of insects, particularly agricultural pests. Capture of
individual insects in traps baited with a lure, often a pheromone, has long been
a critical measurement technique in field biology. The number of individuals
caught in a trap can reveal which insects are present and when they active.
However, the difficult problem of converting the number captured into an
accurate estimate of pest density (the number of pests to be found in a given
region) is at present poorly understood. This project aims to solve that problem
through a combination of field experiments, computer simulations, and
theoretical investigations into random movements that approximate insect flight.
Better understanding of trapping will be of use to agricultural pest managers,
in the detection and management of invasive species, and in monitoring and
controlling the spread of insect disease vectors. In particular, the aimed-for
improvements in population estimation will be a boon for farmers, allowing pest
managers to recommend interventions like insecticide sprays only when there is
clear scientific evidence that the cost of application is offset by the
potential loss to the grower.

The work will follow an integrated program of mathematical investigations on
competitive trapping of stochastic movers and field experiments of marked
release/capture of insects. The aim is to answer two questions: (1) Given an
array of several traps what information about the dispersal, mobility and
population density may be inferred from the various catches? (2) Given several
traps how may we best arrange them to accurately infer estimates on population
density from catch data? In the past, a missing link in regards to both problems
has been an accurate representation of the probability of catch as it varies
with the distances animals originated from the trap. The investigators have made
considerable progress on modeling catch using computer simulated random walkers.
By bringing mathematical analysis and numerical study of diffusion and random
walks to bear on the problem, the research team anticipates being able to
extract important scientific measurements from data that can be gathered easily
and inexpensively in the field.