* 1411345
* Cold atom mixtures of fermions and bosons on a lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Shan-Wen Tsai, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Division and the Division
of Materials Research contribute funds to this award. This award supports
integrated theoretical research and education on systems of cold atoms near the
absolute zero of temperature and trapped in laser light. The research is aimed
to investigate new quantum mechanical states of matter that may be designed and
engineered with mixtures of atoms and molecules at ultra low temperatures and to
open new avenues for using ultra cold atom systems like a special kind of
computer to simulate the correlated motion of electrons in materials and
theories studied in high energy physics and quantum chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the progress in the ability to manipulate cold atoms
and molecules and to control the interactions among them, the models that have
been studied in materials research for their relevance to understanding complex
materials that are promising for future technological applications may be
engineered and tested. Even more importantly, new quantum many-body states will
be sought, some that do not have a counterpart in materials or nanoscale
systems. The PI will explore phenomena that emerge from the complex correlated
motion that arise from interactions, dimensionality, and lattice geometry in
these systems, as well as mixtures of particles with different quantum
mechanical properties, for example some that in a sense behave like quanta of
light mixed with others that behave like electrons, lead to the rich behavior of
these quantum many-body systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also continue
her education and outreach activities that include training of graduate and
undergraduate students in research and working with local K-12 schools and
teachers through the Scientists in the Classroom Program. The Scientists in the
Classroom Program is an outreach program that the PI started under prior NSF
support and is supported by the UC Riverside Department of Physics and Astronomy
and by the California Science Project. It provides a bridge between physics
students and schools in the community, enriching the education of K-12 students
and providing an important professional development opportunity for University
of California Riverside students to improve their teaching, communication, and
presentation skills. The PI and participants of the Scientists in the Classroom
Program will share their passion for physics and the fascinating physics of
ultra cold atoms and of emergent phenomena with college and K-12 students and
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Division and the Division of Materials
Research contribute funds to this award. In the past few years, there has been
remarkable experimental progress in the field of atomic, molecular and optical
physics, including manipulation of ultra-cold atoms on optical lattices, and an
unprecedented level of control and tunability of their interactions. In the vast
landscape of possible microscopic interactions that can be tuned in cold atom
systems, it is important to have systematic studies of phase diagrams and phase
transitions, and to search for key physical principles that govern quantum many-
body systems. This project investigates many-body effects in cold atom systems
with a focus on mixtures of cold atoms and molecules. This research is
integrated with education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To investigate cold
atom systems with long-range interactions, proposing ways to engineer long-range
interactions with boson-fermion and fermion-fermion mixtures, exploring dipolar
quantum systems which have recently been realized and already have tunable long-
range interactions built-in, and studying the long-range interaction coming from
narrow Feshbach resonances and its effect in a many-body
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To investigate fermion-fermion mixtures,
including SU(2) x SU(6) systems and fermions in mixed
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) To investigate cold atom systems in the
strong coupling regime, including connections between gauge theories and lattice
models in the strong coupling limit that can be created with cold atoms. It
develops a new renormalization-group approach for repulsive fermions in the
strong coupling limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) To explore renormalization-group
approaches to study dynamical effects in cold atom
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also continue her education and
outreach activities that include training of graduate and undergraduate students
in research and working with local K-12 schools and teachers through the
Scientists in the Classroom Program. The Scientists in the Classroom Program is
an outreach program that the PI started under prior NSF support and is supported
by the UC Riverside Department of Physics and Astronomy and by the California
Science Project. It provides a bridge between physics students and schools in
the community, enriching the education of K-12 students and providing an
important professional development opportunity for University of California
Riverside students to improve their teaching, communication, and presentation
skills. The PI and participants of the Scientists in the Classroom Program will
share their passion for physics and the fascinating physics of ultra cold atoms
and of emergent phenomena with college and K-12 students and the general public.