* 1411221
* Student Support: The 6th CIRP Conference on High Performance Cutting (HPC2014); University of California, Berkeley; June 23-25, 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* David Dornfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 03/31/2015
* USD 18,000.00

This grant provides support to offset the costs for 40 students to attend the
6th CIRP Conference on High Performance Cutting, which will be hosted at the
University of California, Berkeley from June 23-25, 2014. This conference
provides an international forum for manufacturing researchers and companies to
review and discuss developments in advanced manufacturing technology. Topics
that will be covered by the conference include: additive manufacturing,
sustainable manufacturing, and data-driven manufacturing (e.g., interoperability
and big data). Selected students will attend technical presentations and
interact and network with peers and senior manufacturing researchers. These
students will be selected based on the following criteria: presenters of papers
selected for the conference; quality of submitted research statement; membership
in traditionally underrepresented groups in engineering and the sciences; and
co-authors of papers accepted for the conference.

The proceedings of the conference will be made freely available online through
Elsevier Procedia CIRP. Furthermore, selected students will be able to present,
discuss, exchange, and develop their research ideas in the area of advanced
manufacturing. They will also be able to interact with local industries and
learn more about recent trends in advanced manufacturing technology. These
experiences can help develop the students' technical and communication skills as
well as provide opportunities for strong collaborative ties with other peers and
researchers in the community. This can help foster new ideas and enable
attending students to use their talents and skills to drive continued American
efforts that strengthen the competitiveness of manufacturing in the United
States.