* 1411786
* Hyperbolic Conservation Laws and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Alberto Bressan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 315,144.00

Hyperbolic conservation laws are a class of mathematical equations describing a
wide variety of phenomena, including gas dynamics, water waves, liquid crystals,
and vehicle flow. Their study dates back to Euler (1755). However, several
theoretical problems remain unresolved to this day. The presence of
discontinuities in the solutions, in the form of shock waves, is a major source
of difficulties in the analysis of these equations. The present research will
seek advances in the understanding of solutions with large data, and error
propagation in case when, as it happens in real-life situations, the initial
conditions are not known with absolute precision. In addition, a major portion
of the research will focus on conservation laws describing traffic flow on a
network of roads. New models for vehicle flow at road intersections will be
developed, which are realistic and easily computable. In particular, these
models will account for the possible spill-back of queues along roads leading to
a congested intersection. At a second stage, the PI will study traffic patterns
arising as&lt;br/&gt;(i) global optima, where departures are scheduled by a
central planner in order to minimize a global cost to all drivers, and
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Nash equilibria, where each driver selects a departure time and
a route to destination, in order to minimize his/her own individual
cost.&lt;br/&gt;In connection with recent technological advances in the
collection of traffic data and the automatic driving of cars, developing
efficient mathematical models will provide an important step toward the
prediction and the optimal control of traffic flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first part of the research aims at fundamental advances in the theory of
conservation laws and nonlinear wave equations. In particular, building upon
recent progress, the PI will study the global existence of solutions with large
total variation and the appearance of vacuum in finite time, for isentropic gas
dynamics. The research will rely on a number of new approaches.&lt;br/&gt;(i) In
the study of gas dynamics, a priori estimates or examples of blow-up will first
be studied within certain classes of approximate solutions, which are easier to
describe and that capture the essential features of true solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) In the analysis of error estimates, geodesic distances will be
used, whenever the standard Sobolev norms do not yield useful information.
&lt;br/&gt;In some interesting cases, the specific form of these metrics is
motivated by optimal transportation problems. &lt;br/&gt;(iii) For the new
models of traffic flow at a junction of roads, a solution will be constructed as
the fixed point of a contractive transformation, defined by a novel version of
the Lax formula.&lt;br/&gt;The PI serves as Director of a new Center for
Interdisciplinary Mathematics at Penn State. Its primary goal is to foster
scientific interactions, widening the use and appreciation of modern
mathematical techniques as effective research tools in a variety of disciplines.
Some of the topics of the present proposal, such as traffic flow models, are
naturally interdisciplinary and will be included in the activities of the
Center.