* 1411022
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Studies of the Properties of B-III-N Wide-Bandgap Semiconductor Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Fernando Ponce, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 210,000.00

Non-technical Description: This collaborative research project studies an
underexplored semiconductor materials system that involves boron incorporation
in the four-element alloys of BAlGaN. These materials are a new generation of
III-V alloy system compared to the AlInGaN alloys that have been developed to
provide high-efficiency lighting. The solid-state illumination and lighting
technology, based upon AlInGaN alloys, has found wide practical applications in
automotive, liquid-crystal-display back panel, mobile communications and signage
illumination, and will soon dominate in general lighting. However, there are
still important limitations for AlInGaN alloy materials. This research project
explores the advantages of incorporation of boron into these alloys with the
ultimate goal to achieve better strain matching in heterostructures, higher
efficiency and potentially p-type doping in the new alloy system. The research
is integrated with the educational activities including research training for
graduate and undergraduate students in the growth, characterization, and
processing of these novel materials, and various outreach programs at both
Georgia Institute of Technology and Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The primary focus of
this research project is to study the physical, chemical, and electronic
properties of high-quality thin films of boron-containing III-nitride
semiconductor ternary and quaternary alloys in the technologically important
range of compositions and to develop an in-depth understanding of fundamental
materials science for improved optoelectronic device designs. The research team
uses advanced metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) epitaxial film
growth systems, and performs in-depth studies of the effects of growth
conditions, substrate materials, substrate orientation, and doping. The
materials properties are studied in detail using state-of-the-art nanoscale
characterization tools: the crystal structure is studied using atomic-resolution
aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy; the electronic band
structure is determined by electron holography; and the optical properties are
measured by cathodoluminescence with high spatial- and temporal-resolution.
Exploring the effects of compositional homogeneity, phase separation, and
piezoelectric fields is also included in the research. The microstructural
properties are correlated with the optoelectronic properties to understand the
role of growth parameters on overall device performance.