* 1411963
* RUI: Novel Heme Chemistry of Cytochrome c'
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Colin Andrew, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 298,161.00

In many processes vital for life (e.g. respiration, gas sensing/signaling, and
toxicity defense) heme proteins must bind a specific diatomic gas, e.g. oxygen
(O2), carbon monoxide (CO), or nitric oxide (NO). To modulate heme reactivity
(and achieve a selective gas response), proteins utilize the structural and
chemical properties of the heme pocket environments. A major goal of this
project is to investigate how the spatial environments of heme iron sites can
dramatically affect their reactivity with gases. This knowledge is important for
understanding fundamental biochemical reactions in animals, plants, and
bacteria, as well as for the rational design of heme-gas sensors with unique
properties. Undergraduate research is an integral part of the project, providing
students and local high-school teachers with stimulating experiences and
motivation for future scientific endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus on the novel heme reactivity of bacterial cytochromes c' in which
steric constraints significantly disfavor the distal coordination of O2, CO, and
NO, while promoting an unusual distal to proximal heme-NO conversion. The
coordination of NO at both heme faces (distal and proximal) represents a new
type of heme protein reactivity that may be relevant to the proposed NO-binding
function(s) of cytochromes c', as well as to NO-selective responses in gas-
sensing proteins. By characterizing distal pocket variants of Alcaligenes
xylosoxidans cytochrome c' (AXCP), as well as other cytochromes c', the overall
goal is to define the connection between distal steric constraints, structural
perturbations, and heme reactivity, including distal vs proximal NO
coordination. A "loaded spring" hypothesis will be tested in which steric
clashes between the crowded distal pocket and diatomic gas (XO) ligands lead to
structurally perturbed high-energy heme-XO complexes with altered reactivity.
The project will utilize spectroscopy (UV-visible absorption, resonance Raman,
and Electron Paramagnetic Resonance), kinetics (stopped-flow and flash
photolysis) and other techniques (X-ray crystallography and potentiometry) to
study wild-type and variant cytochrome c' reactivity as function of distal
steric bulk and gas identity. Undergraduates and high school teachers will
receive training in these techniques and be involved in interpreting the
results.