* 1411552
* Collaborative Research:  Toward a global timeline of biological and ocean geochemical change during the early Cambrian
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Jahandar Ramezani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 358,426.00

The overarching goal of this project is to reconstruct rates and patterns in the
evolution&lt;br/&gt;of early animal life and ocean chemistry. To this end, the
principal investigators will compile 50 years of
published&lt;br/&gt;stratigraphic data, including recent geochronological,
chemostratigraphic and biostratigraphic data from China, Mongolia, Siberia and
South Australia, together with new field projects in North America and Morocco,
to develop an integrated and accessible, globally correlated and radiometrically
constrained timeline of early Cambrian fossil appearances and geochemical
change. With the new timeline, they will test hypotheses that link patterns in
animal evolution to environmental change, and vice versa, using a coupled
seawater ? pore fluid Earth-system model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
correlation of the lower Cambrian has been difficult to achieve.
Biostratigraphic correlation has been hampered by the provinciality of many
early animal groups, including trilobites, and the inevitable diachroneity of
fossil first appearance datums (FADs). Likewise, deriving correlations based
only on qualitative ?wiggle matching? of chemostratigrapic records such as
carbon (ä13C) or strontium (87Sr/86Sr) isotopes usually is ambiguous, and can be
distorted by disconformities and carbonate diagenesis. Furthermore, without U-Pb
zircon ages from interbedded tuffs and volcaniclastic rocks, even stratigraphy
that is well correlated in relative time will not constrain the rate and
duration of important biological and geochemical changes. The principal
investigators will construct a comprehensive database of animal fossil
occurrences, litho- and chemostratigraphy, and U-Pb zircon geochronology of
interbedded volcaniclastics. Multiproxy records of variable diversity and
completeness from around the globe will be correlated using the CONOP
(constrained optimization) seriation software. The resulting composite
stratigraphy will place each local record in relative and absolute time, based
not on one variable, like FADs or ä13C, but rather on all available
stratigraphic observations.