* 1411939
* Promoting 21st Century Science Technology-Enhanced Learning Across Formal and Informal Environments
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Timothy Zimmerman, Hampshire College
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 409,546.00

This project investigates the relationship between elementary-secondary students
information technology skills, their success in an inquiry ocean science
curriculum designed to target those skills, and their understanding of the new
characteristics of 21st century science. It is concerned with the design of a
curriculum and its impact on students of high compared with low digital
literacy. It also examines student engagement with the various curriculum
elements and their progress with conceptual understanding of science topics,
belief and understandings about the nature of science, and growth of digital
literacy skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates new measurement
techniques for understanding the relationship between technology skills that
students bring with them to the classroom, the science curriculum they
encounter, their understandings of the nature of science, and their "digital
literacy." The project intends to develop a digital skills assessment tool to
capture student action in collaborating with virtual environments, using social
information, and developing skills with computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will conduct an analysis of video and audio recordings of student
interviews, classroom observations, and field-trip conversations of students.
The analysis will draw associations between class-based learning and field trip-
based learning. The study will measure changes in students' epistemic commitment
to learning science and science careers as intended by the ITEST program; that
is, do the students increase their belief that they are capable of learning the
science material as it is found in nature and presented in class.