* 1411989
* Mechanism of Genome Packaging in Bacteriophage T4
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Venigalla Rao, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

This project will determine the mechanisms by which the DNA genetic material of
a virus is packaged inside a capsid. Bacteriophage T4, a virus that infects
Escherichia coli, will be used as a model to analyze the functions of a
molecular motor involved in DNA packaging. This research will also have broad
implications to the understanding of molecular motors that carry out diverse
functions in living organisms. These include: condensation of DNA into
chromosomes, transport of molecules into and out of cells, and mechanical motion
in muscle contraction. The research might also open avenues to discover novel
antivirals, and to engineer biological nanomotors to deliver therapeutic
molecules into cells. The research will serve as an excellent model to mentor
students at many levels of education; high school, undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral. Students will be exposed to the most current genetic,
biochemical, and biophysical approaches, and interact with investigators having
expertise in interdisciplinary research areas. The students will present their
research findings in international conferences on phage and virus assembly.

Large DNA viruses such as the tailed bacteriophages and herpes viruses employ
powerful packaging machines to forcefully translocate DNA into the capsid. In
bacteriophage T4 a 171-kb, 56 micrometer-long, DNA is packaged at near
crystalline densite into a capsid of size 120 by 86 nanometers. The packaging
machine consists of three key components: a dodecameric portal, gp20; a
pentameric motor, gp17; and an oligomeric regulator, gp16. The motor is
assembled on the portal, which is located at the special five-fold vertex of the
capsid. Utilizing the energy derived from ATP hydrolysis, the motor causes DNA
motion at a rate of up to ~2000 base pairs per second, and a detailed mechanism
has been proposed based on genetic and biochemical studies. In the current
project, the functions of the packaging machine will be probed deeply by asking
some fundamental questions. How is a 23Å DNA end threaded into a 40Å portal
channel? How does the motor generate >60 pNewtons force necessary to confine the
highly charged DNA molecule in a "tiny" capsid container? What are the dynamics
of motor-DNA interactions that lead to mechanical motion of DNA? How do the
motor and portal interact and communicate? Do the motor subunits fire ATPases in
a coordinated fashion? How are the motor domains synchronized at millisecond
timescale? Multidisciplinary approaches from complementary laboratories
involving genetics, biochemistry, structure, and single molecule biophysics will
be integrated to answer these questions. The results may help reconstitute the
detailed mechanism of a virus DNA packaging motor at near atomic resolution.