* 1411335
* Strain-induced modification of nanoscale materials properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Oleg Shpyrko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanomagnetism is one of the most active areas in
science with a wide range of fundamental scientific problems as well as
important and emerging technologies. New functionality requires control of
magnetic order at the nanometer spatial scale and sub-nanosecond temporal (time)
scale. Within this project, the interplay of strain and magnetism in nano-
structured magnetic materials and the control of these properties to yield new
functionality are being studied. Researchers are combining novel materials
engineering and synthesis approaches with advanced synchrotron techniques for
three-dimensional strain and piezoelectric imaging to probe the response of
nanoscale systems to perturbation by magnetic and electric fields. The goal is
to gain a fundamental understanding of strain in nanostructured materials. This
project will benefit from strong collaborations with international, national
user facility and industrial scientists. This interactive approach provides
important educational and post-graduate career opportunities for both graduate
and undergraduate students. In addition the project includes outreach efforts
aimed at middle-school and high-school students via the Young Physicist Program
at the University of California San-Diego (UCSD) and The Winston School in Del
Mar, and outreach at the undergraduate level, via UCSD's Society of Physics
Students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The first part of the project
probes the fundamental magnetostrictive response of nano-materials of magnetic
transition metals and transition-metal oxides. In doing so, thin-film
heterostructures, core-shell nanowires and nanoparticles are being imaged by
coherent X-ray diffraction techniques to obtain quantitative three-dimensional
nano-scale images of the magnetostriction and then link the magneto-elastic
response to the microstructure and micromagnetic states. This research then uses
strain to obtain and optimize giant magnetostriction in nanostructures
materials. In the next stage, materials are being integrated into devices to
actively control the strain, magnetic, transport and magneto-optical responses
with a combination of magnetic and electric fields. Finally, the response of
strain at the ultrafast timescales using synchrotron-based pump-probe techniques
probes the systems with electric, magnetic or thermal pulses and images the
response with nano-focused and/or coherent X-ray diffraction techniques.