* 1411292
* RUI: Biocompatible Electromechanical Actuators Based on Silk-Conducting Polymer Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Janelle Leger, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to Western Washington University
is to design and fabricate biologically compatible materials capable of
controlled movements, known as actuators that are highly sought after for use in
a variety of biomedical devices such as dynamic artificial tissues, drug
delivery depots and steerable surgical instruments. Recently, methods have been
developed in the PI's laboratory to construct fully-biocompatible, metal-free
actuator devices utilizing a composite material made from silkworm silk, and
demonstrated that these materials can move in response to low applied voltages
while in environments that mimic the human body. Here, the PI plans to extend
these results to further develop versatile biomaterials with stable and
efficient actuation performance. Extensive participation of undergraduate
students in research is a key goal of this work. This research program will
involve a total of 12-15 undergraduate students over the three-year grant period
in addition to a Master's level research student. These students will be
involved in every phase of the research. Beyond this project, this work will
also serve to increase the infrastructure for undergraduate STEM research, and
further foster collaborations between the Departments of Physics, Chemistry and
the Advanced Materials Science and Engineering Center (AMSEC) at Western
Washington University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop architecturally
versatile composite biomaterials composed of silk fibroin and conducting
polymers (CPs) that function as stable and efficient electromechanical actuators
in biologically-relevant environments. This project builds on the recent
successes of the co-PIs to synthesize interpenetrating network composites of
silk and poly(pyrrole) and utilize these materials as bilayer actuators. Here,
the effects of CP chemical composition, silk scaffold architecture and actuator
device geometry on 2D and 3D actuation in biological environments will be
investigated. This novel material platform also enables the development of
previously unexplored actuator device geometries and functionality. More
broadly, these studies will help inform the design and synthesis of CPs destined
for in vivo use, and will also uncover rational design metrics that will be
applied to the design of future generations of biomedical devices utilizing CP-
based actuators. Furthermore, over the three-year grant period this program will
provide the opportunity for 12-15 undergraduate students to participate in
research, and will increase the infrastructure for undergraduate STEM research
at Western Washington University.