* 1411329
* Toolbox for hybrid variable-bandwidth bacterio-mimetic antimicrobials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Gerard Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical:

This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of California Los Angeles is to develop a toolbox for creating new
antimicrobials with high specificity to control the distributions of species in
microbial communities in controlling virulent strains without harming commensal
strains. Current approaches use potent broad-spectrum antibiotics and/or drug,
inhibiting or killing beneficial and pathogenic species alike. Although species-
specific antibiotics are in principle possible, it is not practical to make
antibiotics for individualized targeting for all species of interest. In nature,
bacteria make multi-functional antibiotics to inhibit closely related strains
competing for the same environmental resources. The proposed research is to
mimic this approach, and to build molecules with tunable antimicrobial
properties, and integrate them into molecules with adjustable "windows" of
antimicrobial activity against multiple species within a specific set of
environmental condition. Antimicrobials from host-associated microbial
communities would have beneficial impact on human health by inhibiting
pathogenic bacteria without harming host cells or beneficial commensal bacteria.
These approaches would have the potential to regulate complex microbial
colonies, and leverage the natural competition between bacterial species to
"commensalize" the population. The proposed multidisciplinary research topic is
conducive to training students for different academic and industrial careers.
The proposed research topics will be incorporated into the PI's advanced
undergraduate/graduate classes. Additionally, educational modules will be
provided to an economically disadvantaged high school where the PI attended
using several mechanisms, including a new type of "reverse outreach". The co-PI
is a faculty-in-residence at the campus, and will leverage this role to broaden
the participation of more diverse student populations in STEM topics

Technical:

This research aims to develop a toolbox for creating new antimicrobial peptides
with high specificity to control species distributions in microbial communities
by controlling virulent strains without harming commensal strains. This research
program leverages recently developed sequence design rules for antimicrobial
peptides, where charge and hydrophobicity are both necessary conditions for
antimicrobial peptide (AMP) activity. With this award, the researchers will
develop: a) baseline tunable AMPs with a "threshold" activity profile using pH-
switchable charge; b) antimicrobial peptides with lo-hi-lo "window" activity
profile using pH-switchable hydrophobicity and charges; and c) multi-functional
antimicrobials that simultaneously hit synergistic bacterial targets to amplify
activity. To achieve these goals, aminoacid residues will be altered that
contribute to the hydrophobic and/or cationic activities of AMPs such that these
properties are attenuated by environmental conditions. The research plan is to
make helical AMPs that turn on and off at specific and tunable pH values, by
incorporating masking groups at arginine, histidine and/or lysine residues at
specific locations in AMPs. Such masking groups will directly control the acid
dissociation constant (pKa) at which residues become positively charged and
activating the AMP. This research will also target bacterial species within a
colony that thrive at a specific pH range using designed AMPs that only turn on
within a finite pH range, using cleavable masking groups for tyrosine and/or
tryptophan residues at strategic locations in AMPs. Finally, the design of cell-
penetrating peptide transporter sequences to chaperone traditional antibiotics
into cells will be guided by the charge/hydrophobicity design rules for
different niche environments. This will allow in targeting anaerobic bacteria
that do not uptake antibiotics, to circumvent resistance mechanisms such as
efflux pumps, and to transport antibiotics into bacteria that reside within
human host cells. With respect to broader impacts, the multi-disciplinary nature
of the research will provide students with ample educational and career
opportunities in this emerging field, and would be conducive to training for
academic and industrial careers. In addition, results from this will be
incorporated into the PI's advanced undergraduate/graduate classes. Enrichment
educational modules will be provided to an economically disadvantaged high
school in the PI's hometown with a new type of "reverse outreach" program. The
co-PI, a faculty-in-residence at the campus, plans to broaden the participation
of a diverse student population in STEM areas.