* 1411827
* Carbon in the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Kaufman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2019
* USD 412,670.00

Carbon is the 4th most abundant element in the universe, and emissions from
carbon monoxide (CO), neutral carbon (CI) and singly ionized carbon (CII), along
with neutral hydrogen (HI), are the most important tracers and diagnostics of
atomic and molecular clouds in galaxies. However, at present we do not fully
understand basic carbon chemistry in clouds, or how to interpret CO, CI, and CII
emission. This project, led by Dr. Mark Wolfire, brings to bear state-of-the-art
theoretical modeling tools to address several problems in carbon chemistry and
line emission in the interstellar medium (ISM). The result will be a
fundamentally better understanding of carbon-based chemistry in atomic and
molecular gas plus modeling tools to interpret Galactic and extragalactic
observations of [CII], [CI], and CO emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following
problems are addressed in this project: 1) The reservoir of molecular gas
available for star formation is important for understanding galaxy evolution.
This mass is usually measured by CO rotational line emission. However, there is
also molecular hydrogen (H2) gas that does not contain bright CO, and the mass
of this gas is expected to dominate at low levels of metallicity. What is the
dependence of this dark molecular gas on metallicity, and how can it be traced
by [CII], and [CI] line emission? 2)The estimated abundance of CO in molecular
clouds is typically 5-10 times lower than the measured carbon abundance in the
diffuse ISM; however, it is expected that nearly all of the non-refractory
carbon should be in the form of CO. Where is the carbon? This research team will
use observations and models to converge on an understanding of the carbon
budget. 3)The energy generation and flow in molecular clouds is a long standing
problem in ISM physics. Mid- and high-transition CO line emission is sensitive
to temperature near the cloud surface but is often brighter than predicted by
models. Can the CO line emission be understood by radiative heating plus novel
chemical pathways or are mechanical sources of heating required? 4)The freeze-
out of oxygen (O), carbon, and nitrogen (N) molecules in opaque clouds presents
a host of theoretical problems. For example, the freeze-out of water ice
produces a high C/O gas-phase ratio that radically changes the carbon chemistry.
The models developed by Dr. Wolfire will further our understanding of the
physical grain and gas conditions, depletion and desorption processes, and when
a steady-state or time dependent description applies - a distinction important
for calibrating a chemical clock for collapsing cores. 5) All models of diffuse
clouds vastly underestimate the observed abundance of even simple carbon-based
molecules. High temperatures produced by shocks or the dissipation of turbulent
energy might be required, but can an exploration of chemical rate coefficients
lead to alternative explanations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project cover several areas. Dr. Kaufman, a member of the research team,
teaches astronomy at a large, public university with a student body that
includes many first generation students, many students from underrepresented
groups, and an institutional commitment to STEM education for students in all
majors. Kaufman will disseminate the results of this work in general education
courses for non-science majors, advanced courses for majors, and student
research projects. Support for a student assistant is budgeted so that an
undergraduate or graduate student, preferably one from an underrepresented
group, may participate in the research project. Kaufman?s department has
recently created (with funding from donors) a new center for faculty/student
collaboration called the "Astro/Physics Computation and Visualization Lab,"
designed as a space for students to work on computational research problems.
Here they build skills in computation, analysis and presentation that will serve
them well, regardless of their ultimate career path. This is in line with the
NSF goal of creating a broad, skilled, scientific workforce for the nation. Dr.
Wolfire will also lead graduate students in project research. The results will
be made available through a well-known web site, the PDR Toolbox. This site has
been used by hundreds of astronomers to analyze their observations using state-
of-the-art models. The code will be listed and made available on the ASCL
(Astrophysics Source Code Library).