* 1411949
* An Auxin Toolbox for Synthetic Multicellular Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Eric Klavins, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 617,237.00

The award funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET supports
research into the auxin signaling system used by plants. Auxin is a hormone
present in almost every part of the plant and is essential for diverse cellular
responses. However, it remains unclear how each cell in the plant responds to
auxin signals differently depending on what type of cell it is, its location,
and its history. Understanding how plants use auxin signaling to coordinate
multicellular behaviors will shed light on how plants grow and respond to
stimuli and may also yield new engineering tools and methods for designing
custom cell-cell communication systems. To develop a toolbox for programming
multicellular behavior with auxin, key genes will be ported from the auxin
sensing pathway in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana into the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Lab yeast is ideal for the characterization of the pathway because
it is easy to manipulate and has all the prerequisites needed to process auxin,
but is otherwise essentially insensitive to it. Rigorous quantitative
characterization of a large variety of synthetic auxin signaling circuits that
mimic those found in plants will be combined with mathematical modeling and
engineering design tools to build an understanding of the programmability of the
pathway. More broadly, the work may lead to new applications in human tissue
engineering and new methods for improving important crop species. The project
will also support the development of new undergraduate and K-12 educational
modules on synthetic biology and cell signaling that use the auxin/yeast system
as an example.

Technical description: Synthetic cell-cell signaling circuits in yeast will be
constructed using genetic parts, pathways, and inspiration from plants. Protein
components will be varied across family members to explore how the circuits are
tuned. Mathematical modeling and characterization of subtle differences in
circuit tunings will elucidate the programmability of the auxin parts.
Demonstration of novel cell-cell behaviors will serve as proof of principle of
the approach. Specifically, auxin signal processing circuits based on auxin
receptors (TIR1, AFB2), transcription factors (ARFs), co-factors (Aux/IAAs) will
be constructed. By suitably combining these components, simple signal processing
circuits such as filters, repeaters, and pulse generators will be constructed
and their dynamic behaviors characterized in yeast. An auxin biosynthesis
module, consisting of enzymes that catalyze the production of auxin and
controlled by auxin signal processing circuits, will be constructed in yeast to
enable a novel mode of cell-cell communication. Auxin sensing circuits will
control the production of auxin to achieve signaling functions such as filters
and thresholds. The capability to send, receive, and process auxin will enable
the investigation of multicellular behaviors such as wave propagation or
consensus. The results will not only provide new tools for engineering
multicellular systems, but will also provide biological hypotheses about how and
why auxin is used so effectively by plants.