* 1411435
* Fundamental Studies of Nanocrystalline Silicon Hybrids
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Frank Bright, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 875,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Frank V. Bright of the University at Buffalo, The
State University of New York is developing reagent free optical sensors for
detecting and quantifying a wide variety of molecules. To meet this challenge,
new chemistries are developed to modify the surface of intrinsically
photoluminescent nanocrystalline materials to impart chemical selectivity. The
target molecules are selectively bound to the new surface chemistry, leading to
a concentration-dependent change in the nanocrystalline material
photoluminescence (intensity, color). The work is having a broad impact through
the potential production of new detectors and sensors. It is having a further
broad impact on the next generation of scientists through a training program
that targets women and underrepresented minorities. In addition, the team is
partnering with their university's Veterans Services office to encourage the
participation of military personnel in the research in order to facilitate their
transition into STEM-related careers.

This research is focused on the use of porous silicon (pSi) and free-standing Si
nanocrystals (SiNCs) as the basis for new sensors. The research simultaneously
exploits the attractive aspects of surface-grafted silane, hydrosilation, and
MOx chemistries (selective analyte partitioning/interaction, improved stability)
and the unique photophysics of silicon nanoscale architectures (photoemission
that depends on the nanocrystallite surface chemistry) to develop reagentless
optical sensors for detecting and quantifying a wide variety of analytes. The
research aims include: (i) establishing chemistries to create spatially unique,
analyte-responsive materials at nanocrystalline silicon surfaces; (ii)
elucidating the effects of surface chemistry and spatially-dependent
compositional gradients to optimize analyte selectivity and analytical signals;
and (iii) extending these platform technologies to a wide variety of target
analytes. The primary research tools used include steady-state and time-resolved
photoluminescence (PL), multispectral PL and infrared (IR) imaging, IR
spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning Kelvin probe microscopy
(SKPM), confocal Raman microscopy and spectroscopy, co-localized AFM/SKPM and
Raman imaging, and tip enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) imaging and mapping.