* 1411954
* Genesis of the Super-Earths
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Eugene Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 397,043.00

This project aims to improve theoretical models of origins of a new class of
planets, known as the Super-Earths. These objects have a radius that is between
1-5 times that of the Earth, and although no Super-Earths reside in our solar
system, they may be commonly found orbiting other solar-type stars. The main
goal is to find out whether close-in Super-Earth planets can form at the
locations they are currently observed (closer than the Earth is to our Sun), or
whether they must have formed further out and then moved in closer due to
gravitational effects of other objects in the planetary systems. The PI and his
team will develop and constrain models of Super-Earth formation using
calculations and numerical integration techniques along with planetary
measurements obtained from Kepler spacecraft data. They will train and mentor
two graduate students and two postdoctoral researchers in physics, planetary
science and code development. Two graduate students (including one member of an
underrepresented group) will be trained and mentored in astrophysics and
geophysics research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will use a variety of
techniques to address the larger problem of how Super-Earths form. Coagulation
histories of Super-Earth rock/metal cores will be calculated using the ?three-
groups? approximation, and core-accretion of gas from the surrounding planetary
nebula will be modeled by numerical integration of the time-dependent equations
of stellar structure. The team will also study how the planetary envelopes
undergo photoevaporative erosion using photoionization and hydrodynamic codes.
Multiplicity statistics of Super-Earths will be addressed via N-body
integrations that will be used to assess how exterior Jupiter-mass gas giants
might dynamically stir close-in planets and cause them to merge.