* 1411721
* Nonlinear spectral problems in electromagnetics: asymptotics and inversion.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Shari Moskow, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 191,670.00

Despite extraordinary advances in computing speed, the resolution of 3D imaging
problems in electromagnetics continues to pose significant challenges in a wide
range of applications, from biomedical imaging to geophysical exploration and
non-destructive detection of material defects. By sending electromagnetic
sources from probes in boreholes and reading back resulting potentials, for
instance, one can in principle infer the location of oil deposits, which have
different electromagnetic properties than the surrounding ground. Brute-force
computational approaches, however, are often cumbersome or even intractable for
large scale non-linear problems. In the proposed research, mathematical methods
will be developed where we find explicit formulas for the dependence of the data
on electromagnetic parameters, leading to fast algorithms fine-tuned to specific
geometries and having clear physical interpretations. Several students will be
trained in the course of the project, including a full time PhD student. The
project will also provide undergraduate students the opportunity to spend six
months delving deeply into a research problem, and may increase the likelihood
they will pursue a higher degree in mathematics or a related field.

The objective of this proposal is to solve several nonlinear spectral problems
and related inverse problems in electromagnetics by developing novel asymptotic
formulas based on material property perturbations. The project will involve five
main components: (i) Asymptotic formulas for resonance values in the presence of
linear and nonlinear small volume electromagnetic scatters. The asymptotics will
be based on perturbations of simplified limiting problems whose solutions are
easily computed. (ii) A dimensionally reduced formulation for the electric field
and resonances in the presence of thin high contrast materials. This formulation
will provide a high contrast Born approximation which we can invert. (iii)
Explicit calculations of the perturbations of transmission eigenvalues for
varying material properties. This will include small inhomogeneities, voids, or
holes in the materials, and periodic microstructures. The formulas will reveal
what material properties can be recovered from reading transmission eigenvalues
in the far field. (iv) The development of a fast nonlinear inversion technique
and a theory of uniqueness and stability in ultrasound modulated optical
tomography, a novel hybrid imaging modality which provides nonlinear internal
data for the recovery of optical parameters. (v) An inverse spectral method for
nonlinear strings, a project for Drexel undergraduate students. The application
of material perturbation asymptotics to nonlinear spectral problems is a
unifying theme in all of these projects.