* 1411260
* Research Initiation Award: Advancing Research on Data Analysis with High Performance Computing
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2021
* Yonghui Wang, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 238,968.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Prairie View A&M University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to advance big data analysis with research in
high performance computing. Source code from the project will be provided as
part of a library under an open-source license in an effort to promote
reproducible research within the signal-processing community. This research can
have applications in areas such as homeland security, precision agriculture, and
geospatial applications. The project will also enhance the research experience
and training of undergraduate students at Prairie View A&M University.

The research goal is to advance the ability of analyzing digital data sets,
including image, video, weather data, and DNA data sequence compression, with
novel high performance computing (HPC) based signal processing techniques. The
project will investigate how to increase the efficiency of data analysis,
including image processing, video processing, and computer visualization, in a
high performance computing environment. By efficiently integrating such
technologies, the speed of the big data analysis processes will be dramatically
increased and the analysis quality will be significantly improved. The project
focuses on strategies for establishing an HPC based digital signal processing
system, eventually extending these algorithms and simulations to other types of
data sets.