* 1411943
* The Triggering and Quenching of Star-Formation and Nuclear Activity in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lori Lubin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,816.00

Galaxy surveys in the local universe such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey have
shown that galaxies populate two broad categories: blue, star-forming disk
galaxies and red, quiescent spheroidal or early-type galaxies. In the nearby
universe, the most luminous and massive galaxies are quiescent, and they are
preferentially found in dense environments, such as groups and clusters. In
contrast, star-forming galaxies have lower stellar masses and occupy low-density
environments. Astronomers also know that star-formation in the universe was
significantly more active several billion years ago. The key question that will
be answered by this research is the following: what physical processes drive the
suppression of star formation and nuclear activity between early times and the
present day.

This award will enable for the next phase of the Observations of Redshift
Evolution in Large Scale Environments (ORELSE) survey of galaxies. This includes
a comprehensive, near-IR spectroscopic survey with the Multi-Object Spectrometer
For Infra-Red Exploration (MOSFIRE) on the Keck 10-m telescope, together with
multi-wavelength (X-ray, radio, and infrared) observations. By correlating with
the precise measures of local and global environment afforded by ORELSE, the
program will determine the cause and effect of gas-fueling and quenching events
that drive galaxy evolution over a critical 3-billion year period where star
formation and nuclear activity are rapidly declining.

This award will also expand the underrepresented student base by supporting the
Mentorship for Undergraduate Research Participants in Physical and Mathematical
Sciences (MURPPS) program at the University of California-Davis. The program
will increase the number of underrepresented students who can participate in
MURPPS by over 30% and is directly aligned with the NSF's commitment to achieve
full participation of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields.