* 1411458
* Supramolecular-Surface Photochemistry: Exploring the Excited state Behavior of Confined Molecules Organized on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 434,997.00

Light induced chemical processes play important roles in biological systems
(such as vision of animals and photosynthesis for the conversion of sunlight to
chemical energy stored in plants) and have potential applications in the capture
and conversion of light energy to other forms of energy in solar energy devices.
The understanding of the fundamentals of light induced chemical processes will
help towards efficient utilization of light for beneficial purposes. To this
end, Prof. V. Ramamurthy of University of Miami aims to gain a fundamental
understanding of the light induced energy and electron transfer processes of
small molecules confined in molecular containers on different types of material
surface. This interdisciplinary research project, which involves US and
international collaborations, provides a unique environment for training
graduate and undergraduate students on different aspects of photochemistry,
supramolecular chemistry, and surface chemistry. In addition, Prof. Rammamurthy
develops special general lectures to help students and young researchers
recognize the important role of basic science in everyday life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. V.
Ramamurthy investigates the excited state behavior of supramolecular structures
assembled on solid surfaces. The specific objectives of this project are: 1) to
study photoinduced energy transfer between organic donor and acceptor molecules
which are separated and encapsulated in cavitands aligned on passive surfaces
(e.g., saponite clay, alpha-zirconium (IV) phosphate and layered double
hydroxide); 2) to investigate photoinduced electron transfer across the cavitand
wall between an encapsulated organic molecule (as donor) and TiO2 (as acceptor)
on which the cavitand container is anchored; and 3) to explore the use of gold
clusters and nanoparticles as electron transfer sensitizers in triggering
photochemical reactions of small organic molecules encapsulated in cavitands
attached to the gold clusters and nanoparticles.