* 1411174
* Short Course on Multi-Scale Computational Approaches for Simulating Polymers and Soft Matter: From Atomistic to Mesoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2015
* USD 7,500.00

Technical Abstract This award supports organization of a short course at the
2014 March Meeting of the American Physical Society on applications of modern
computational techniques to model polymers and soft materials. The set of
lectures is designed for a broad audience including graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, faculty, and industrial scientists. The lectures will
cover topics on Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulations, atomistic and
coarse grained models, and classical density functional theory and modeling. The
basic concepts will be followed by presentations of modern simulation packages
and how to effectively use computers with new architectures. Presentations will
include practical advice of how to set up and run simulations. Together this
series of lectures will provide a foundation for multiple length and time scale
modeling targeting fundamental understanding of properties of polymeric and soft
materials. The discussed topics will enable the participants to adequately
choose and apply computational tools to model polymeric and soft materials and
utilize these tools in "Materials by Design" approach. Concerted efforts will be
made to recruit underrepresented minorities by working together on course
advertisement with the office of Career and Diversity Programs of the American
Physical Society and the Access and Equity team at the Clemson University. This
short course will provide educational materials for the next generation of
computational scientists which will significantly advance computationally
enabled design of new materials.

Nontechnical Abstract This award supports organization of a short course at the
2014 March Meeting of the American Physical Society on applications of
appropriate computational techniques to model polymers and soft materials. The
set of lectures is designed for a broad audience including graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, faculty, and industrial scientists. Together this series
of lectures will provide a foundation for multiple length and time scale
modeling targeted towards understanding properties of polymeric and soft
materials. The basic concepts will be followed by presentations on modern
simulation packages and how to effectively use computers with new architectures.
Presentations will include practical advice of how to set up and run
simulations. The discussed topics will enable the participants to choose and
apply appropriate computational tools to model polymeric and soft materials. The
skills obtained from this course provide a stepping stone toward computationally
enabled design of new materials with desired properties. Concerted efforts will
be made to recruit underrepresented minorities by working together on course
advertisement with the office of Career and Diversity Programs of the American
Physical Society and the Access and Equity team at the Clemson University. This
short course will provide educational materials for the next generation of
computational scientists which will significantly advance computationally
enabled design of new materials.