* 1411685
* Stellar Rotation and the Chronology of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Marc Pinsonneault, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/28/2019
* USD 516,343.00

Our understanding of how the universe around us changes with time is limited by
our ability to measure ages of stars. Unlike other fundamental properties, this
is not something that we are able to measure directly. We have some limited
idea, at least in a statistical sense, for some stars - particularly those all
formed together in "clusters". We have also developed sophisticated computer
models that predict how other observed properties change in time, which we can
compare to observations of real stars. Stars spin rapidly when they are formed,
but their spin slows with time. A lot of effort is going into developing a
better understanding of how this happens. The goal of "gyrochronology" is to be
able to infer the age of a star by measuring how fast it spins, with careful
consideration of its other measureable properties (not all stars with the same
spin rate have the same age). This project will attempt to resolve many of the
uncertainties through a careful comparison of theoretical models describing how
stars spin down, measurements of long-period rotators (tens of days) using the
unprecedented database from the Kepler spacecraft, and follow-up observations
from ground-based observatories. The proposed activities will directly
contribute to the training of a graduate student in observational and
theoretical astrophysics, as well as advanced statistical analysis. It will also
provide research opportunities for undergraduate students. The PI will also lead
efforts to use the new Planetarium at Ohio State as a laboratory for data
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoPIs, along with a graduate student and
two collaborators who are experts using the Kepler database, will conduct a
careful observational and theoretical study with the goal of producing a well-
calibrated rotation-age relation for field stars. This will be based on a more
careful analysis of the properties of cluster stars, measurements of longer
periods using Kepler data with follow-up observations at the MDM observatory at
Kitt Peak, and detailed models of angular momentum loss in stars. It will
benefit from the team's expertise in asteroseismology and statistics.
Gyrochronology is being applied to a vast array of astrophysical problems, from
planetary to extragalactic, yet there are serious complications involved in
establishing a single-valued function between rotation rate and age. This team
has identified all of the complications and laid out a plan that could lead to a
well-constrained and widely-applicable gyrochronology law for field stars.