* 1411516
* GOALI: Real-Time Control of Production Systems for Energy-Efficient Manufacturing: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/23/2013,01/31/2016
* Liang Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 01/31/2016
* USD 149,738.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to develop a theory for quantitative analysis of
energy consumption in production systems; to use the theory for the development
of real-time feedback controllers of machine startup/shutdown and preventive
maintenance schedule to ensure desired productivity with minimal energy
consumption; and to apply the results on the factory floor at General Motors
manufacturing plants. Specifically, the problems of performance analysis,
bottleneck identification, optimal control and applications will be investigated
for production systems with controlled startup/shutdown and preventive
maintenance. The approach of the research will be based on analytical studies
for systems that are characterized by Markov processes, and numerical
experiments for non-Markovian systems. The outcomes of this research will be
integrated models of productivity and energy performance for production systems,
measurement-based energy bottleneck indicators and algorithms for real-time
feedback controllers of machine startup/shutdown and preventive maintenance
schedules that minimize energy consumption under desired
throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of the research will
establish a novel analytical framework for integrated analysis of productivity
and energy performance in manufacturing systems. In addition, the results will
provide a solid foundation for an integrated study of cost, productivity and
energy consumption. This research will provide production floor managers and
production systems designers with rigorous, quantitative engineering tools for
analysis, improvement, and design of energy-efficient manufacturing systems to
ensure desired productivity and environmental performance. This will lead to
increased profitability and sustainability for the manufacturing enterprises.
Finally, the methodology is also transformable to other systems with variability
and resource consumption issues, such as healthcare delivery, transportation,
and communication networks, etc.