* 1411219
* 2014-2019 Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Project - Senior Level Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* LeRoy Jones II, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Illinois Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP) is a senior-level alliance
comprised of universities and community colleges throughout the state and one
federal laboratory. The specific partners include the following four-year
institutions: Chicago State University, DePaul University, Illinois Institute of
Technology, Illinois State University, Northeastern Illinois University,
Southern Illinois University (Carbondale, Edwardsville), University of Illinois
at Chicago, and Governors State University. Additional partners include five
two-year institutions (Harry Truman College, Kennedy King College, Olive Harvey
College, St. Augustine College, Wilbur Wright College) and one non-academic
partner, Argonne National Laboratory.

This project will have four primary objectives. These objectives are to: (1)
develop interventions to bridge the achievement gap by recruiting, retaining and
graduating underrepresented students of color in STEM; (2) develop partnerships
with 2- and 4-year institutions, school systems, industry, government and
veteran affairs; (3) continue international opportunities that will enable
students to understand and participate successfully in global science endeavors;
(4) continue institutionalization of effective activities begun during earlier
levels of ILSAMP. The activities proposed will be designed to accomplish the
central goal of increasing the number of historically underrepresented students
who select STEM disciplines and persist to graduation from baccalaureate-
producing institutions and who are prepared to successfully matriculate in
graduate schools or obtain professional positions in STEM. The project will
provide students with the academic and professional skills to function at the
highest levels of competency.

ILSAMP activities will broaden the participation of historically
underrepresented groups, including ethnic and racial minorities in the STEM
enterprise, by providing access to research and science programs. The alliance
will not only help to close the gap created by the paucity of underserved
individuals who are STEM professionals functioning creatively, it will also
encourage others who have been reticent to attempt baccalaureate-level science
work, e.g., veterans and students with GED education. Advisory boards and
committees will help to broaden the impact of ILSAMP through wide dissemination
of project results. Input and assistance will also be furnished by a Technical
Advisory Committee, the composition of which provides a connection with the
Illinois business community, the public high schools, graduate schools, state
and national policy makers and national research institutions. Results of
process and impact evaluations combined with internal project assessment will
provide insight on effective strategies for fostering student success in STEM
and the effectiveness of the ILSAMP model. Findings will be shared at regional
and national meetings and through social networking where the foci on
underrepresented minority student persistence, performance, and advancement in
STEM fields are discussed.