* 1411278
* Integrability and turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Govind Menon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 315,000.00

The main goal of this project is to discover mathematical results that explain
the formation and propagation of randomness in several models of fundamental
importance in the physical sciences. The most familiar example of such phenomena
is turbulence in three-dimensional flows. The project also includes the study of
nonlinear waves in one dimension and the propagation of randomness by basic
numerical algorithms. These examples are more tractable than fully developed
turbulence, and are also of intrinsic interest. The theoretical results
developed in this project assist the development of numerical methods for
uncertainty quantification.

Three projects are considered: (a) a study of exactly solvable models in one-
dimension including scalar conservation laws and integrable partial differential
equations; (b) run time statistics for widely used iterative eigenvalue
algorithms; and (c) random fluid flows modeling isotropic homogeneous turbulence
in incompressible fluids. The purpose of projects (a) and (b) is to use the
methods of integrable systems and probability theory to describe new classes of
exactly solvable stochastic models. The purpose of project (c) is to develop
solutions to the Euler equations of incompressible flow that describe fully
developed turbulence, in consonance with experimentally observed scaling laws.