* 1411218
* Silicon-Based Porous Ceramics via Freeze-Casting Preceramic Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Katherine Faber, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 680,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Capturing particulates from diesel engine exhausts,
providing channels for gaseous transport in fuel cells, and retaining heat via
insulation all rely on porous materials. Each of these applications requires
porous networks with distinctive size, shape, roughness, and connectivity to
control and ease the flow or filtering or insulating capabilities. Many energy-
related applications also require materials (ceramics) that maintain strength
and robustness to temperatures in excess of 1500 C (2732 F). Advanced ceramics
produced from preceramic polymers surpass conventional materials for high-
temperature applications. This project focuses on the use of preceramic polymers
to create new high-temperature porous ceramics by freeze casting. The polymers
are dissolved in organic solvents, that when frozen in a controlled manner and
converted to a ceramic, produce directionally porous networks that are optimized
for flow characteristics and mechanical integrity. By developing an
understanding of the chemistry of these freeze-casting systems, creating
versatile pore architectures is possible, thereby expanding the use of porous
ceramics for environmental and energy needs. Students involved in this research
are trained in state-of-the-art ceramic processing and characterization methods,
as preparation for the technical workforce. As an added benefit, porous
materials produced by these methods resemble those found in nature and offer
striking images that afford opportunities for science education through art.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The use of preceramic polymers to
create silicon- and boron-based ceramics provides a route to high-temperature
creep- and chemically-resistant materials. Traditionally, large shrinkages
accompany the conversion to ceramic by polymer pyrolysis often resulting in
cracking. To deal with this issue, components are limited to thin fibers,
plates, and foamed porous solids. This research builds on the foundation of
ceramic processing from preceramic polymers, and extends their formability using
directional freeze casting. Compared to other porous material-forming methods,
directional freeze casting affords anisotropic continuous pores, whose size,
shape and tortuosity can be tuned, and hence, opens new avenues for energy-
related applications. To make freeze casting viable for preceramic polymers, it
is necessary to develop a fundamental understanding of polymer-solvent pairs and
crosslinking catalysts using spectroscopic measurements and real-time
microscopic observation of phase separation and solidification. An added benefit
of preceramic polymers is their ability to be functionalized using reactive
additives and fugitive phases, resulting in more complex chemistries and
hierarchical microstructures for greater functionality. These materials provide
a new class of freeze-cast solids where their pore network characteristics are
of particular interest; they are explored using synchrotron techniques and
permeability experiments. Moreover, their mechanical properties, consisting of
anisotropic pores and complex pore wall structures, are assessed with respect to
conventional mechanics models for porous materials. The research seeds an
international collaboration with Prof. Paolo Colombo (Universita di Padova,
Italy), an internationally recognized expert in preceramic polymers and porous
ceramics, and provides significant international training experiences for
students.