* 1411344
* ICAM - Institute for Complex Adaptive Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Paul Chaikin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the materials of great
interest and importance for society - including magnets, novel materials for
solar energy conversion, biological or biologically inspired materials, and
superconductors - exhibit "emergence": their unique and important properties
emerge from their subunits such as atoms or proteins in an unforeseen manner
from experimental observation. A sensible goal is to elucidate mathematically
precise descriptions of the organizing principles describing these phenomena to
guide future discovery. This understanding requires an integration of approaches
from many disciplines such as physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering, and
no one institution - or nation - has the expertise to fully understand these
organizing principles by themselves. The Institute for Complex Adaptive Matter
brings together distinguished senior scientists from across the US and abroad to
cutting edge workshops on emergent phenomena in quantum matter (such as cold
atomic condensates and superconductors), soft matter (such as self-replicating
materials and active fluids), and biological matter (such as self-assembling
biomolecule matrices and quantitative neuroscience) with a goal toward making
substantive progress on advancing our understanding of these important problems.
These workshops fully integrate young graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to assure that the next generation of emergent materials scientists
will be immersed in the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the ICAM workshops are discussion oriented (at
least half the time is set aside for discussion), must include an explicit plan
for active participation and engagement of junior scientists, for interaction
between senior scientists from diverse disciplines, for video archiving of
lectures, and for production of an overview paper from the workshop. When
appropriate, workshop organizers must develop a plan to develop inputs to the
materials genome initiative for placement of relevant data and software.
Workshops are decided in consultation with the ICAM Science Steering committee
from among: (i) spin-orbit supermaterials in solids and cold atom condensates,
(ii) digital design of quantum materials, (iii) self-replicating materials, (iv)
active materials (such as fluids with engineered swimming particles), (v) self-
assembly of biological materials for materials applications, (vi) materials
science interplay with the quantitative understanding of the brain, or (vii)
important new topics proposed by the emergent matter community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the Condensed Matter
Physcis and Biomaterials Programs in the Division of Materials Research, the
Physics of Living Systems and Computational Physics Programs in the Division of
Physics, and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences