* 1411349
* Solution-Processed Organic Ratchets for Energy Harvesting
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Thuc-Quyen Nguyen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and
the Polymers (POL) Programs, both in the Division of Materials Research (DMR),
and by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Compact energy
harvesters that collect energy from the environment and direct it to useful work
can be advantageous in places where battery replacement is costly or not
possible, for instance in sensors on bridges, in large chemical plants, or in
electronic implants for the human body. The research team is working on a
polymer-based device that is a key component of energy harvesters. This so-
called "ratchet" device is capable of transforming electronic noise into stable
direct current. The project addresses fundamental questions on the physics of
organic semiconductors, organic chemistry, and material science. The project
provides great opportunities to recruit and train undergraduate and graduate
students with the involvement of more experienced post-doctoral researchers. The
energy-harvesting theme is used to increase the awareness about energy waste and
energy efficiency not only among the research community, but also among K-12
students via outreach programs. Young individuals are exposed to creative and
innovative thinking about harvesting waste energy in smart
appliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: There have been a number
of attempts to create electronic ratchets. However, previously reported ratchets
deliver low electrical current and voltage, have very complex fabrication
procedure, and/or operate at cryogenic temperatures. The main goal of this
project is to create a new electronic ratchet based on organic semiconductors
that is simple to fabricate and able to achieve high power conversion
efficiencies at room temperature. The research activity puts an emphasis on
understanding the physical processes that govern the device operation in order
to achieve higher performance and long-term stability. The team combines theory
and computational models with materials synthesis, processing and electronic
characterization such as scanning electrostatic force microscopy, scanning
Kelvin probe microscopy, x-ray diffraction, electroabsorption, and radio-
frequency engineering. The optimized ratchet device is tested within an actual
energy harvester over a wide spectral range of electromagnetic radiation.