* 1411654
* Investigations of Binary Star Properties and Evolutionary Processes with the CHARA Array Interferometer
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Douglas Gies, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2018
* USD 402,342.00

Long baseline optical interferometry allows measurement (and even imaging) of
structure on smaller scales than can be obtained even with the largest ground-
based telescopes. The investigators will continue to make excellent use of
Georgia State's Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA)
interferometer array on Mt. Wilson in California. This is the only long-baseline
optical interferometer run by a university, so it provides a unique opportunity
for student training in this state-of-the art technology. Results from this
program will be featured in undergraduate classes at Georgia State and in the
southern California public outreach efforts of the Mt. Wilson
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal presents a three-part investigation
that will use the CHARA optical long-baseline interferometer array to determine
fundamental stellar and circumstellar properties of stars in close binary
systems before, during, and after they interact and exchange mass. The high
angular resolution provided by interferometry will permit them to measure the
orbits of over 200 non-interacting spectroscopic binaries, which will allow
direct determination of component masses and indirect determination of other
physical parameters. They will also be able to image circumstellar material in
binary stars that are currently exchanging material. Finally, they will search
for the poorly-stuied donor stars in a carefully-selected sample of systems that
have already undergone mass transfer.