* 1411244
* EARS: Interference-Aware RF Theory and Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Amir Avestimehr, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 12/31/2016
* USD 347,789.00

Objective: The objective of this multidisciplinary program is to develop
disruptive Radio Frequency (RF) technologies that provide significant spectral
efficiency gains at the physical layer, by leveraging recent advances in
physical layer interference management and integrated receiver design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
this project is composed of the following three thrusts: (i) RF Front-End Signal
Projection and Cancellation for Enhanced Dynamic Range, (ii) Controlled
Reflectors for Receiver-Centric Interference Management, and (iii) Fundamentals
of Receiver-Centric Interference Management. The first thrust utilizes
information about the structure of the interference to suppress it early in the
receiver chain, shielding subsequent stages from full dynamic range requirements
of the system. The second thrust develops RF receivers which double as
controlled, coordinated reflectors, and are able to alter the effective channel
gains to nearby receivers. The third thrust develops new interference management
strategies in the light of the aforementioned new capabilities of transceivers
and studies the fundamental limits of spectral efficiency under such
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt; By developing
collaboration and communication between two fields of "information theory" and
"RF Integrated Circuits", this program opens new horizons in both fields. This
project impacts the nation's economy not only by enabling greater network
capacity, but also by spurring technological advances that can easily be
transferred to the wireless and electronics industries, driving economic growth
in those areas. This project also provides opportunities for research experience
for undergraduates and includes several outreach activities.