* 1411192
* Design, Synthesis and Modeling of Luminescent Ceramics for Application in Solid State Lighting
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Shyue Ping Ong, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Lighting accounts for 22% of the total US electrical
energy use, which translates to $50 billion per year spent on lighting
accompanied with 130 million tons of carbon emitted into the atmosphere from
fossil fuel plants. Solid state lighting, based on blue-emitting light emitting
diodes with a luminescent powder (phosphor), has emerged as highly efficient,
long lasting light sources to replace incandescent and fluorescent lighting. The
phosphor market in the US for white-emitting LEDs is currently $500M/year and is
expected to reach $1B/year by 2015. Identifying new phosphors in a reliable and
systematic way with high quantum efficiency and thermal stability is crucial for
these new energy saving devices. Nanophosphors represent an exciting opportunity
to reduce light scattering, thereby improving the extraction efficiency. This
work is interdisciplinary and spans the fields of materials science, optical
properties, chemistry, and atomic scale modeling that involves both experiments
and modeling. Graduate students are trained in sophisticated electron microscopy
techniques, theoretical and computational methods. Diversity efforts are
continued and strengthened. The involvement of students from a Hispanic-serving
Institution and a middle/high school that serves low-income students are
included. New classes are developed for the graduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Solid state lighting, based
on blue-emitting (450 nm) light emitting diodes (LEDs) with a luminescent powder
(phosphor), has emerged as highly efficient, long lasting light sources to
replace incandescent and fluorescent lighting. New diodes that emit in the near
UV (370-410 nm) have recently been recognized as chips that could improve the
extraction efficiency of the light source. This new development requires the
discovery of new phosphor systems in the nano-sized range to fully exploit this
new technology. The phosphors used in this work are wide band gap materials
(hosts) that contain a small amount of activator (rare-earth element). Depending
on the host:activator combination, colors across the visible spectrum can be
obtained. This project aims at validating the following three hypotheses: (1)
using an empirical approach combined with first principles modeling, new high
quantum efficiency, thermally stable phosphors can be identified for near UV LED
white-emitting light sources, (2) the low quantum efficiency of nanosized
phosphors can be determined and perhaps overcome and (3) modeling using a
combination of semi-local and hybrid density functional theory will provide
insight on the mechanisms for photon absorption and emission of new phosphor
systems, the phase, chemical and thermal stability and on the quantum efficiency
of nanosized phosphors. These hypotheses are tested by conducting by a variety
of experimental and computational tasks: (1) the design of phosphors in which
the excitation energy lies in the near UV spectral range of 370-410 nm, (2) the
design of phosphors in which sensitization is via the excitation of complex
functional groups, (3) using a combination of analytical tools, a systematic
approach will be conducted to evaluate the factors behind the low quantum
efficiency of nanosized phosphors (&lt; 200 nm). Surface and bulk analyses will
identify the local environment of the activator and the traps that quench the
luminescence and (4) a hierarachy of first principles methods are used to
investigate the phase stability, aqueous stability, thermal stability and
electronic structure of the phosphor materials to be synthesized and tested
experimentally. The theoretical calculations are used to guide and interpret
experiments and also to guide which compositions and structures of the phosphor
materials are most promising for UV LED applications.