* 1411565
* Dissecting the roles of histone H3 lysine 27 mono-methylation in DNA replication
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Yifan Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2018
* USD 700,000.00

Genomic DNA is compacted by association with histone proteins. Covalent
modifications of histones affect DNA compaction and therefore accessibility to
other proteins that need to contact the DNA. One example is proteins involved in
replication of the genomic DNA. The overall impact of this project is to
understand how certain covalent modifications contribute to the regulation of
DNA replication. In addition, delineating patterns of histone modifications will
be a resource for other investigators that study basic mechanisms of DNA
organization. Data generated by this project will be actively distributed to the
wider research community through the Tetrahymena Genome Database (TGD:
http://ciliate.org/) and the Tetrahymena Gene Expression Database (TGED:
http://tged.ihb.ac.cn/). This will be part of an effort to promote the
unicellular eukaryote Tetrahymena as a model organism for scientific research,
as well as a teaching tool for undergraduate students. Undergraduate students
will also contribute to the research program, mainly through collaboration with
the Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP) at the University of
Michigan. A collaboration within the framework of the Ciliate Genome Consortium
(CGC: http://tet.jsd.claremont.edu), an NSF-funded collaborative research
initiative involving undergraduate students from diverse institutes, will also
be pursued. This project will involve undergraduate students in many aspects of
biology research at a level often reserved for graduate students, providing them
experiences that will help them succeed in the pursuit of professional and
graduate school training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The histone modification that is
at the center of this project is histone H3 lysine 27 methylation, a
modification that is conserved in protozoa, metazoa and plants. This
modification has long been associated with transcriptional repression and
heterochromatin formation. Unexpectedly, a role in DNA replication has been
recently revealed for histone H3 lysine 27 mono-methylation (H3K27me1). Deleting
TXR1, the enzyme responsible for this methylation event in Tetrahymena, leads to
DNA replication stress as well as H3K27me1 deficiency. Phenotypic analysis of
&amp;#916;TXR1 cells provides an entry point to dissect the molecular connection
between histone modifications and DNA replication. By identifying histone
modifications that correlate with DNA synthesis both temporally and spatially,
this project will shed light on the chromatin environment that supports DNA
replication. TXR1 mutagenesis will dissect its function, revealing mechanisms
for its targeting to active replication sites, while direct mutation of H3 K27
will help to elucidate the connection between H3K27me1 and DNA replication.
Successful completion of this project will secure insights into the molecular
mechanisms by which histone modifications control regulation of DNA replication.