* 1411067
* Exploring unconventional pairing symmetry in topological materials and novel doped two-dimensional superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL

This award from the Condensed Matter Physics program of the Division of
Materials Research supports the University of Indiana at Urbana Champaign with a
project to determine the fundamental mechanisms behind exotic superconductors.
These are materials that exhibit zero electrical resistance, but whose
properties are poorly understood. This work will resolve current controversies
regarding the properties of exotic superconductors and reveal new physics,
thereby laying the groundwork for utilizing exotic superconductors in
applications. The collaborative structure of the research will provide a rich
environment for training undergraduates and graduate students in a broad
spectrum of nanotechnology-related work. Educational aspects will be further
integrated through the development of courses directly related to the proposed
research and through research-related seminars and workshops that target women
and underrepresented minorities.

TECHNICAL

The goal of this project is to determine the symmetry and transport properties
of superconducting materials suspected of exhibiting unconventional pairing
symmetry. The aim is to both gain key insight into complex superconducting
systems and also to lay the groundwork for utilizing novel excitation modes in
devices. The focus will be on new classes of materials whose superconductivity
is likely to be unconventional, but whose pairing symmetry has not been verified
and whose transport is poorly understood: specifically, proximity-coupled
topological insulators (possibly complex p-wave), topological superconductors
(possibly complex p-wave), and doped dichalcogenides (unknown symmetry). A suite
of complementary experimental techniques will be used to optimally probe
superconductivity, including: phase-sensitive Josephson interferometery,
tunneling spectroscopy, low-temperature transport, nano-patterned proximity-
coupling, and strong chemical or ionic doping. This work will resolve
controversies regarding the order parameter symmetry of exotic superconductors
and reveal new physics, such as the existence of Majorana modes in
superconducting topological systems or the nature of the dome-shaped
superconducting phase diagram in doped MoS2. The collaborative structure of the
research will provide a rich environment for training undergraduates and
graduate students in a broad spectrum of nanotechnology-related work.
Educational aspects will be further integrated through the development of
courses directly related to the proposed research and through research-related
seminars and workshops that target women and underrepresented minorities.