* 1411952
* Observations and Models of Storms on Jupiter and Saturn
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrew Ingersoll, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 364,071.00

This project will study moist (water-based) convection and lightning in giant
planets. Moist convection is a fundamental process on Earth and the giant
planets that occurs when excess water vapor in a rising air parcel condenses to
form a cloud. It may regulate the cooling of the giant planets, help sustain
Jupiter's Giant Red Spot, and provide energy for smaller storms. Areas of
lightning indicate where moist convection is occurring, so the researchers will
begin by combining images of the lightning storms on Saturn and Jupiter, taken
by a variety of Cassini spacecraft instruments at different wavelengths. They
will also focus on giant lightning storms on Saturn that occurred during the
years 2010-2011. They will also model the atmospheric dynamics in order to
better understand the multi-decadal intervals between Saturn's storms, the role
of convection in Jupiter's and Saturn's cooling, and the deep water abundance,
and the mechanisms for producing zonal jets. The result will be a 3-D picture of
the distribution, composition, and motion of the clouds and their relation to
convection and lightning. They will incorporate their research into university
courses, and train a graduate student, and will make publicly available the
GiantPlanetWRF modeling tool for modeling the full time-dependent dynamics of
the planetary interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two main
components: (1) Characterize lightning by analyzing archival data on both
Jupiter and Saturn from the Cassini imaging system. The horizontal width of the
flashes, their optical energy, and their spectrum are clues to the depth of the
lightning and the charging mechanism. (2) Simulate the dynamics of moist
convection with a state-of-the-art model. The proposing team will modify the
existing Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model to simulate the deep sub-
cloud layer of giant planet atmospheres. By nesting a high resolution
computational domain between eastward and westward jet streams, they will study
small scale processes like convection, precipitation, and lightning as they
interact with the large-scale flow.