* 1411897
* EAGER: Elucidation of the Potential for CAM Photosynthesis in the C4 Halophyte Spinifex littoreus, a Succulent Asian Grass with Enormous Agricultural Potential
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Craig Martin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2017
* USD 279,874.00

Recently, the PI and international collaborators discovered that a coastal grass
in Taiwan has a very unusual type of photosynthesis, the mechanism that plants
use to make food (theirs and ours). This type of photosynthesis has only been
found in one other small group of plants, and scientists are still puzzled by
its significance. This discovery is particularly interesting because the plant
is a grass, and one consequence of its unusual type of photosynthesis is a
considerable savings of water. These two observations become even more
interesting from an agricultural perspective because most of the world?s grain
crops derive from grasses, and irrigation of such grasses is depleting world
reservoirs/aquifers and creating difficulties wherever such water demands exceed
supply. The grass that is the focus of the proposed research may well provide a
source of the genetic underpinnings for conserving water and reducing irrigation
demands worldwide. The immediate work proposed by the PI comprises field and
laboratory investigations of the unusual photosynthesis in this grass with the
goal of determining under what conditions it most expresses its water-
conservative physiology. This research lays the groundwork for further genetic
and agricultural work.

Although species with CAM photosynthesis are now known from over 30 different
plant families, no species in one of the largest extant families, the Poaceae
(grasses), has been reported as having CAM. Preliminary research by the PI and
his colleagues, however, has discovered variable levels of Crassulacean Acid
Metabolism (CAM) in the succulent halophytic grass, Spinifex littoralis, a C4
species that grows in coastal areas throughout Southeast Asia. This is the first
known report of succulence and of CAM in a species of Poaceae. The goals of the
proposed research are to determine why CAM is variable and which environmental
factors are most important in promoting the greatest degree of CAM in this
succulent C4 grass. Diurnal patterns of leaf gas exchange, titratable acidity,
and PEP carboxylase activity will be monitored in the field and in the lab under
varying conditions of irradiance, water status, and soil salinity. Plants for
these investigations will be sampled from different populations in different
habitats in Taiwan, including those with and without competitors. Other
measurements to be made include light-use efficiency using PAM fluorometry, leaf
tissue anatomy (especially degree of succulence), and leaf water potential. In
addition, the proposed research, in collaboration with molecular plant
physiologists, includes preliminary work designed to determine how best to
prepare use of this plant for genetic purposes with the goal of transferring CAM
genes to agricultural grain species.