* 1411482
* A Mechanistic Modeling Framework to Link Biochemical Network Signaling and Cell-Decision Processes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Carlos Lopez, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,546,858.00

Cells sense and respond to external and internal perturbations and must make
decisions in response to these stimuli. The challenge to understand how cells
process biochemical signals that lead to phenotypic responses is largely due to
the complex multi-dimensional biochemical data able to identify the relationship
between molecular interactions and phenotypes. Thus, understanding the cell-
decision processes has wide applicability to address fundamental and applied
problems in biology. This project will study the cellular signaling switch from
proliferation to programed cell death phenotypes in mammalian cells by
developing tools necessary to extract useful mechanistic insights from dynamic
program-driven models that will be used to guide experiments. The project offers
an interdisciplinary training opportunity for undergraduate students as well as
graduate students and post-doctoral associates (including members of
underrepresented groups) who will conduct interdisciplinary research by
integrating physical, chemical, statistical, mathematical, and computer science
methods to compose computational models of cell signaling processes. In
addition, the computational tools and methods developed as part of this award
will be made freely available to the research community, having the potential to
be further employed in other applications, such as climate modeling,
communication and economics.

Cells constantly sense and respond to external and internal perturbations that
trigger intracellular biochemical reaction networks leading to cellular
phenotypic outcomes. The advent of 'omics' technologies in the last decades, in
combination with statistical approaches, have yielded a correlative
understanding between gene interactions, protein expression, and phenotypes.
However, a mechanistic understanding of biochemical interaction network dynamics
and cellular commitment to a given outcome is currently lacking. This
fundamental knowledge gap to associate genotype and phenotype is largely due to
the management and analysis of complex biochemical signaling networks that is
needed for applications such as cell reprogramming, synthetic biology
applications, and microorganism bioengineering. This project will enable the
development and implementation of theoretical and computational tools, based on
rigorous physical, chemical, mathematical, and statistical methods, to
understand how cells commit to programmed cell death (i.e. apoptosis). The
challenge is to understand how proliferating cells process external cues, and
shift biochemical signaling pathways from growth to death.

This award is supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Program in
Mathematical Biology in the Division of Mathematical Sciences.