* 1411247
* RUI: Synthesis and Characterization of Dicarboximide-functionalized Oxanorbornyl Polymers for Use in Ion Transport Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Dean Waldow, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 192,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials will be synthesized with
the goal of improving the function and safety of solid polymer electrolyte
supports in lithium ion batteries. Polymers based on two types of dicarboximide
oxanorbornyl monomers will be synthesized using ring opening metathesis
techniques creating a fairly rigid and bulky backbone. This backbone may assist
in more effectively decoupling ionic motion from polymer segmental motion.
Polymers with varying lengths of ethylene oxide side chains and molecular
weights will be investigated to maximize lithium ion conductivity. Accordingly,
the optimized monomers will be incorporated into diblock and random copolymers
with a second monomer that has a substantially higher glass transition
temperature. The random copolymers will be evaluated at compositions where the
ionic conductivity is balanced with increased modulus due to the higher glass
transition monomer. The phase diagram of a diblock copolymer system with one
block using the optimal ethylene oxide side chain and the other block having a
high glass transition will be studied to understand how the microphase separated
morphology (e.g., lamellae or cylinder) might benefit ionic conductivity.
Characterization of the polymer structure and dynamics will include dielectric
spectroscopy, X-ray and neutron scattering, atomic force microscopy, and
possibly solid-state NMR. This research also includes a shared component where
some of the characterization will be conducted on NSF funded equipment and with
collaborators at other universities, and at national user facility laboratories.
Undergraduate student researchers will carry out this research over the course
of three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will create and study
strategically tailored materials for use as membranes in lithium ion batteries.
These new membranes may lead to improved safety and performance in lithium ion
batteries, benefiting the growing necessity for better and safer energy storage
systems. These new materials might allow lithium batteries to be lighter,
smaller, and constructed out of materials that are much less flammable than
conventional materials. This research will include a number of broader impacts.
Our future scientific work force will be benefited by direct involvement and
education of undergraduate students in all aspects of this research.
Collaborations will be established with scientists at other local and national
universities, and federally supported national user facilities will be utilized
in these studies such as Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Also, increased exposure
of underrepresented high school students to science will take place through
outreach activities involving the Mathematics, Engineering, and Science
Achievement (MESA) program. These activities will include mentoring by
undergraduate research students in polymer science experiential learning
activities, chemical demonstrations, and demonstrations of modern scientific
instrumentation.