* 1411210
* Design and Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticle Interfaces for Enhancing Thermal Stability and Catalytic Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Stephen Sofie, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 475,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nano-materials offer new opportunities to
enhance technically important processes such as controlling pollutants,
restructuring advanced fuel sources, as well as enabling clean and efficient
energy conversion. High temperature applications, however, can limit the utility
of nano-materials due to high particle mobility and sintering processes. With
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Resarch, this project addresses the incompatibility of high
temperature particle instability and nano-particle catalytic activity by
securing metallic nano-particles to ceramic substrates with newly engineered
materials. These materials, also nano-scale in size, are designed to serve as
"glue" or anchors between individual nano-particles and the underlying
substrate. Linking engineering, chemistry, and materials science, this activity
provides a multi-disciplinary research environment that is preparing graduate
and undergraduate students to tackle complex problems in areas of materials
science, surface chemistry, and catalysis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;High temperature, heterogeneous catalysts play a vital role
in emissions remediation, fuel reformation, and electrochemical energy storage
and conversion. The thermodynamic instability of high surface area metal nano-
particles limits their use at elevated temperatures due to atom migration and
reduction of particle surface area. The research team at MSU is investigating
new approaches for enhancing metallic nano-particles to leverage the widely
recognized catalytic performance of metals without sacrificing the stability of
nano-assemblies at elevated temperatures. Research goals are being accomplished
by engineering new interfacial phases to chemically bind nano-particles to
ceramic supports to achieve desired functionality without compromising catalytic
activity. The project outcomes include i) optimizing methods to tailor anchoring
phase composition and location; ii) identifying the mechanisms responsible for
enabling the anchoring chemical reactions; iii) evaluating the sensitivity of
the mechanisms to thermal, chemical, and electrochemical conditions; and iv)
identifying the effects conferred by anchors to preserve catalytic function at
high temperature up to 800 Celsius. This research activity focuses on anchoring
nickel metal nano-particles to ion conducting ceramic substrates in which metal-
organic solutions of secondary phase precursors are being applied and optimized
for specific catalyst functionality where both high and low nano-particle
loading is required. To identify the atomic scale mechanisms that foster this
anchoring strategy, a suite of ex-situ and in-situ techniques are being utilized
to resolve phase compositions, spatial correlations of materials, material
stability, and reaction kinetics associated with secondary phase formation and
particle coarsening. The research project emphasizes surface chemistry designed
to inhibit metal transport associated with surface diffusion. Further, the
research team is utilizing the mechanistic analysis to expand these strategies
to other high temperature metal catalysts including those requiring precious
metals where enhancing performance at minimum loading is critical.