* 1411313
* Bacterial Chemotaxis in Complex Dynamical Landscapes
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Massimo Vergassola, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 541,260.00

Chemical signals from a cell's environment can induce motion of that cell. This
phenomenon, called chemotaxis, in the E. coli bacteria is one of the most
extensively studied biological response. The E. coli chemotaxis network has
become a paradigm for cellular behavior and signal transduction pathways and in
this project the PI aims to understand signaling and behavior in E. coli
considering them in the context of their function and the specific challenges
they have evolved to address. The current experimental project is motivated by a
recent theoretical work by the PI, which applies advanced tools of statistical
physics to such biological problems. In the proposed experiments, a chemotaxis
assay of a new type will be specially built to test those key predictions of the
new theory. This project has the potential to change a widely accepted part of
the paradigm of E.coli chemotaxis and possibly change the perspective on
directed motion of other cells and organisms. The study synergistically combines
theoretical analysis, innovative microfluidic technology, microbiology and
molecular biology techniques, quantitative experiments with cells, and advanced
microscopy and data analysis. The PI and Co-PI have complementary areas of
expertise and have known each other for more than a decade from their previous
work on mixing in chaotic and turbulent flows. Graduate students will be trained
in cross-disciplinary environment and benefit from the synergism of the two
groups involved in the proposed project with their complementary areas of
expertise. The PIs will also continue to be involved in education, instruction
and training that closely interface with the proposed work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an experimental study of the role of
adaptation in chemotaxis of Escherichia coli in different types of gradients of
chemo-attractants and of adaptation in aerotaxis and pH-taxis of E. coli. A
remarkable feature of E. coli chemotaxis is the perfect adaptation to changes in
the concentration of aspartate, a commonly used attractant. The response of E.
coli to a short-term change in aspartate concentration has asymmetric positive
and negative lobes, with the integral equal to zero. The proposed experimental
study is driven by a recent theoretical analysis by the PI, showing that the
main advantage of the perfect adaptation is optimal navigation through
environments with time-varying, complex spatial distributions of nutrients.
Environments of this type are likely to be present in liquid E. coli cultures at
the entry to the stationary phase, where E. coli motility is at its maximum.
This analysis represents an alternative to a common narrative that the main
function of the perfect adaptation is the retention of sensitivity to shallow
gradients over a broad range of background concentrations. The theoretical
predictions will be tested with a two-pronged experimental approach. First,
chemotaxis of freely swimming wild-type and mutated E. coli will be studied in
static linear profiles of attractants, for which the perfect adaptation is
predicted to be non-optimal. Therefore, perfectly adapted E. coli are expected
to have lower chemotactic efficiency than some of imperfectly adapted E. coli.
Second, E. coli chemotaxis will be studied in a custom-built microfluidic
device, which creates time-varying spatially non-uniform gradients of
attractants. Based on the theory, the perfectly adapted E. coli are expected to
outperform all competitors, securing highest average concentrations of the
attractant along their swimming trajectories. The experiments will be
facilitated by a technique recently developed by the PI that extracts temporal
responses from trajectories of freely swimming cells. The proposed study will
also apply this technique to the analysis directed motion of E. coli in well-
defined gradients of oxygen and pH in a microfluidic device recently built by
the Co-PI.