* 1411214
* Photochemical Aging of Asian Particulate Matter:   Formation of Oxygenated Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Staci Simonich, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,353.00

This project is investigating the reactions that occur on polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon (PAH) compounds that are transported over long distances. PAHs are
emitted by many types of combustion, from sources such as automobiles, power
plants, and wildfires. When these compounds undergo reactions with ozone and the
hydroxyl radical in the atmosphere, they may become more toxic. As PAHs age and
are transported over long distances, they may cause an increasing risk to human
health.

The specific goals of this research include: 1) predicting which oxygenated PAH
are likely to form from the photochemical oxidation of higher molecular weight
PAHs; 2) measuring the formation of oxygenated PAH products on Asian particulate
matter using laboratory photochemical reactor studies and new analytical
methods; and 3) measuring the oxygenated PAH composition of size fractionated
particulate matter collected from Asia and the Pacific Northwestern U.S.
Laboratory methods that will be used include 2D gas chromatography with time-of-
flight mass spectrometry (GCxGC/ToF-MS) for analysis of the PAH, the OPAH
fraction, and the hydroxy-PAH (OH-PAH) fraction, and gas chromatography with
high resolution mass spectrometry (GC/HRMS) to confirm compound identities.

Previously acquired samples from China, Japan, and Korea will be analyzed to
represent particulate matter characteristic of Asian transport. Previously
acquired samples from Washington and Oregon will be assessed for influence from
Asian transport. A hybrid single-particle Lagrangian integrated trajectory
(HYSPLIT) 4.0 model will be used to calculate four-day forward and back
trajectories for air masses sampled. Meteorological data and the concentrations
of CO, O3, NO, SO2, and aerosol scattering will be used to aid in the
interpretation of the data with respect to potential sources of PAH. The results
will lead to a better understanding of the photochemical aging of Asian
particulate matter and the potential formation of oxygenated PAH during trans-
Pacific atmospheric transport to the U.S. West Coast.