* 1411703
* Spatial Population Dynamics in Streams or Rivers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Yu Jin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 163,580.00

Spatial population dynamics and invasions of species in streams and rivers have
attracted increasing scientific scrutiny. The purpose of this project is to
understand effects of the water flow and inter- and intra- relations in species
on population spread and persistence in streams or rivers that may be subject to
temporal and spatial variations. Reaction-diffusion-advection equations and
integro-difference / differential equations will be studied. Researchers will
investigate effects of temporal and spatial heterogeneity on spreading speeds
and/or persistence conditions for a single species and for multiple species in
different river environments. The relation among hydrological factors of a real
river will be incorporated into population models. The optimal control and
observer theory will be combined to spatial dynamics theory to study influences
of global perturbations of parameters on population invasions of an invasive
species. Real rivers or streams can never be ideally homogeneous everywhere at
all times. It is crucial to introduce temporal and spatial heterogeneity and
hydrological relations into population models. It is also interesting to combine
the optimal control and observer theory and invasion dynamics. Researchers will
derive reliable predictions about influences of the water flow and physical
river conditions on population dynamics and provide suggestions on Instream Flow
Needs, biological invasion control, river channel design, and water resource
management. The following questions could be answered based on the study: How
does the total annual flow discharge influence the ecosystem health? Is it
better to have fluctuating flows or a constant flow for population persistence?
How much water can we take from a river without destroying the ecosystem? How
much spatial heterogeneity should be kept for healthy ecosystem while designing
a river channel? Will a species be persistent or extinct in a specific real
river? How to control an invasive species in a river? More questions than these
are likely to be addressed as the project progresses.