* 1411694
* Research and Education in Physical Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Michael Brenner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,493.00

This project addresses several problems of current scientific and technological
importance, from fluid mechanics, materials science, and biology. Specifically,
the first project includes a mathematical study of the events that occur before
a liquid droplet splashes on either solid or liquid substrates. This is a
problem of immense technological importance, with applications ranging from the
design of ink jet printers to the entrainment of carbon dioxide at the ocean
surface. Nonetheless, basic features of the process are still not understood,
and our mathematical models aim to resolve the critical issue. The second topic
is a mathematical study of shadow lithography, an emerging method for creating
arrays of small nanoscopic structures and new optical materials. We aim to
develop a complete mathematical description of patterns that can form using this
method, leading to a logical dictionary of structures that can be made. The
third project aims to better understand the development of biofilms, bacterial
colonies which strongly adhere to surfaces. These have been implicated as the
cause of infection and decay both in medicine and technology. The biological
transitions that lead to biofilm development are not well understood. We will
develop a mathematical model of these transitions in a model organism. This has
the potential to lead to new fundamental insights into biofilm development and
how to control it. The broader impact centers on both personnel development of
graduate students and postdocs, and the development of educational materials for
teaching science and mathematics through cooking. Our teaching initiatives on
science and cooking have reached nearly 100,000 people through an online class,
and we aim to extend the reach and content to secondary education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the splashing of droplets will start from a
description of incompressible potential flow in the liquid, coupled to the
compressible dynamics in the surrounding air. The dynamics in the air is well
captured by a lubrication approximation. Previous work has modeled the initial
dynamics in the liquid phase using potential flow. However, both theoretical
estimates and experiments indicate that viscous forces become important in the
liquid in the later stages; we will extend the mathematical description to
include this, using a boundary layer description of the viscous effects in the
liquid. The study of shadow lithography uses methods in geometry to completely
characterize the shadows made by the array of spheres. Mathematical
characterization of structures will be made with both two-dimensional masks of
spheres and will also extend current experimental methods to three dimensional
masks of opaque spheres in a transparent matrix. The latter could lead to new
method for fabrication complex devices. The study of biofilms use a new
experimental method for whole film imaging of gene expression in Bacillus
subtilis, which gives an unprecedented look at the spatiotemporal dynamics of
how changes occur in a biofilm. The project will construct mathematical models
of the nutrient field in the experiment and then investigate whether the
nutrient field itself is sufficient to explain the transitions, or whether
signaling molecules are also required. Predictions will be tested in experiments
and may lead to understanding of how development unfolds in Bacillus.