* 1411460
* Stability and metastability of coherent structures in dissipative PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Margaret Beck, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 161,989.00

This project is focused on the development of theoretical tools for predicting
the behavior of solutions to mathematical models arising in a variety of
applications, such as biology, chemistry, and fluid dynamics. One key property
is called stability. Roughly speaking, a solution is stable if when it is
perturbed it still returns back to the original behavior as time evolves. In the
real world, one expects a system to experience frequent small perturbations, for
example due to unpredictable external inputs or noise. If a particular state is
unstable, such fluctuations will drive the system away from it, towards a stable
state. Thus, it is only the stable solutions that one expects to be observable
in the long run. Mathematical models can provide insight into which solutions of
a given system are stable, and how that stability depends on system parameters.
This can help scientists in other disciplines predict which parameter ranges may
be of interest in order to observe certain behaviors, thus suggesting what to
test in experimental settings. Moreover, the models can provide information as
to which physical mechanism is of primary importance in determining stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is to develop general
mathematical techniques that are applicable to a variety of specific models,
rather than to any one particular application. There are two types of stability
that the principal investigator has focused on: (1) Asymptotic stability,
meaning that the solution attracts nearby data as time evolves towards infinity;
(2) Metastability, meaning that the solution attracts nearby data for large, but
finite, times. The notion of asymptotic stability is relatively standard, and
the fact that it allows for analysis in the limit as time tends towards infinity
greatly simplifies the associated techniques. Nevertheless important open
questions remain, such the stability of time-periodic patterns known as defects
and the potential use of the Maslov index in understanding stability in spatial
dimensions greater than one, and they will be addressed in this project.
Metastability is a more subtle phenomenon, with far fewer methods for its
analysis, and so advances in this area are of fundamental importance. Whether
asymptotic or metastable solutions are more important in determining the
observed behavior of a given system is dependent on the associated timescales.
For example, if the asymptotically stable states are approached only on
exponentially long time scales, then one would not expect to wait long enough to
observe them in practice. In that case, the metastable states, which then appear
during the long, intermediate times, become more relevant. This occurs, for
example, in the Navier-Stokes equations, an important model of fluid dynamics,
and this project will develop methods for analyzing metastability in this
context.