* 1411280
* Fundamental Influences of Grain Size on Oxidation Behavior of Nanocrystalline Alumina-Forming Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Mark Weaver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 356,112.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will elucidate
and quantify how grain refinement to nanometer length scales can influence the
oxidation resistance and thermal stability of oxidation resistant coatings and
alloys. This will be accomplished using model alloys capable of forming aluminum
oxide scales, and will utilize a combination of experimental and thermodynamic
modeling techniques to define the mechanistic influences of grain refinement on
oxidation behavior. The proposal is timely in that significant resources are
being expended to increase operating temperatures and fuel efficiencies in power
generating systems. This will require that the structural materials being used
form more stable and protective oxide scales. This fundamental research program
will provide fundamental information that will allow to stabilize and exploit
nanocrystalline microstructures to improve the oxidation resistance of
structural materials. The relevance of the project to advanced coating
technologies is important and provides a strong practical motivation for the
work. The fundamental knowledge generated will be broadly applicable to other
alloy systems subjected to high temperature oxidation. The results will be
disseminated through publications and presentations and the students in the
project will benefit from exposure to a variety of state of the art scientific
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this proposal is to elucidate and quantify how grain
refinement to nanometer length scales can influence the oxidation resistance and
thermal stability of oxidation resistant coating alloys. This fundamental work,
which will be conducted using model alumina-forming alloys, will provide some of
the necessary information to facilitate the use of nanocrystalline materials in
high temperature oxidation environments. It is well documented that grain
refinement promotes selective oxidation which can lead to the formation of a
protective oxide scale. Furthermore, it has been shown that this effect can be
greatly enhanced by nanocrystallization resulting in a rapid initial and
transient stage (i.e., stage I) of oxidation. In nanocrystalline materials, it
is hypothesized and generally accepted that the accelerated growth of protective
chromia or alumina scales results from the existence of numerous grain
boundaries which provide rapid diffusion pathways for oxide forming elements and
abundant sites for the nucleation and growth of a continuous oxide scale. Though
this hypothesis seems intuitive, it has been noted that no systematic studies
have been conducted to experimentally establish or verify the intrinsic
mechanisms underlying this behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
challenge to be addressed in this research is to provide quantitative
understanding of the relationships between microstructure (i.e., grain size and
grain orientation) and diffusivity and to apply this understanding to explain
the selective oxidation and interdiffusion processes that occur in
multicomponent coating systems containing grain refined microstructures. This
research relies on: (1) processing methods capable of delivering materials with
precisely controlled compositions and microstructures; (2) the application of
appropriately selected analytical techniques coupled with thermodynamic modeling
to quantitatively determine and validate the mechanisms underlying the improved
oxidation resistances reported in grain refined
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relevance of the project to advanced coating
technologies is important and provides a strong practical motivation to the work
in addition to offering good career options for the students involved.