* 1411780
* Collaborative Research: Decoding the Self-Organization Mechanism during Myxococcus Xanthus Multicellular Development with Quantitative Experiments and Mathematical Modeling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Oleg Igoshin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 06/30/2018
* USD 351,560.00

One of the long-standing puzzles of developmental biology is how multicellular
organisms develop from a single, embryonic cell into an organized 3-dimensional
animal with tissues and organs of diverse function. Self-organization processes
rely on ordered cell growth, directed motility, and physical and chemical
interactions between cells. Albeit a simpler system, these same processes occur
when Myxococcus xanthus cells organize into a multicellular fruiting body and
differentiate into spores. The underlying dynamics of this collective behavior
will be uncovered using genetic and biochemical experiments, cell tracking
studies, and computer simulations. Such a multidisciplinary approach is crucial
to answering complex biological questions and will train a new generation of
interdisciplinary life scientists ready for the challenges of 21st century
biology. Moreover, with a focus on a specific model system, this project is
expected to elucidate general principles of cellular cooperation and self-
organization that have broad practical implications.

When faced with nutritional stress, biofilms formed by Myxococcus xanthus cells
engage in a collective developmental program to form multicellular fruiting
bodies in which some cells differentiate into spores. Despite tremendous
progress in understanding how these cells move, signal one-another and
differentiate, a mechanistic picture of how aggregation into fruiting bodies
occurs is still lacking. Recent results call into question all existing models
of the phenomena. The goal of this proposal is to develop a synergistic
experimental and modeling approach to explore various mechanisms for
aggregation. Quantitative cell-tracking and statistical image analyses will be
performed with wild type cells and various developmental mutants or hybrid
communities to determine how cells assemble into aggregates and how cell
behavior changes in aggregates that disperse. This data will be used to
formulate hypotheses about the mechanism of aggregation that would be tested
with the help of a computational, agent-based model. Mutant strains in which
gene deletions result in aggregation defects as well as mixtures of different
strains will be used to refine the model. With each experiment and simulation,
the models will be iteratively aligned to reverse-engineer hypotheses about the
aggregation mechanism. To compare the aggregation patterns generated by
different strains and to quantify the agreement of the simulations with
experimental observations, a set of parameters (features) that comprehensively
characterize the aggregation patterns will be defined. These parameters will
allow use of hierarchical clustering to classify developmental mutants into
mechanistic pathways that affect cellular aggregation.