* 1411250
* Exploring Exchange Interactions at Perovskite Oxide Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Yayoi Takamura, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 482,777.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on the development of new
artificial layered materials that advance the fundamental understanding of
nanoscience at the atomic level. These materials have applications in next
generation devices (spintronic and orbitronic) which have been predicted to
display significant improvements in device speed and energy efficiency over
conventional electronic devices. The key lies in harnessing the unexpected
physical phenomena that result from the changes in structure and chemistry which
occur over nanometer scales at surfaces and interfaces of perovskite oxides.
Outreach activities include support for the UC Davis Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics Transfer Day which targets educationally
disadvantaged and underrepresented groups from Mathematics Engineering Science
Achievement programs in Northern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of
interfacial phenomena such as exchange coupling interactions at interfaces
between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic layers. Perovskite oxides are ideal
candidate materials for these studies due to their wide range of functional
properties that result from the strong coupling between the charge, spin,
orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom. In addition, they possess a large
number of cations and growth parameters that can be used to manipulate their
properties. The approach of this work utilizes laser-assisted growth to control
interfacial properties with atomic layer precision in combination with state-of-
the-art techniques for characterizing their structural, chemical, and functional
properties over multiple length scales. In addition, geometric confinement
effects as these materials are patterned down to nanoscale dimensions are being
investigated. These results are enabling the development of predictive models of
the emergent interfacial properties at dimensions relevant for device
applications The participating graduate and undergraduate students are gaining
hands-on training in disciplines that lie at the intersection between the
traditional fields of Materials Science and Engineering, Physics, and Electrical
Engineering through the introduction to state-of-the-art synthesis,
sophisticated characterization techniques, and theoretical calculations.