* 1411359
* Physical Platforms for Topological Quantum Computation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2018
* Kirill Shtengel, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on quantum computing by manipulating quantum states of
matter composed of many electrons. Quantum computers promise an exponential
speedup for certain computational tasks which are not feasible with modern
classical computers. The potential benefits would have impact from quantum
chemistry to designing new medicines and materials to cryptographic
applications. One of the main obstacles to building a working quantum computer
is decoherence: by interacting with its surroundings, a quantum bit, or qubit,
tends to become more and more classical. So, after a short time all potential
advantages stemming from computation based on the laws of Quantum Mechanics are
gone. The idea of Topological Quantum Computing (TQC) circumvents this problem
by encoding quantum information in a combined state of a large number of
interacting particles, as opposed to relying on quantum states of an individual
particle which are more vulnerable to the usual sources of decoherence. Such
robust many particle quantum states, called topologically ordered states, may
exist in materials or materials may be engineered to support such states. But
topological qubits and logical elements are still lacking. The goal of this
project is to study topologically ordered and related phases of matter - a
prerequisite for TQC. The PI aims to address three questions: (1) What are the
most suitable physical systems where topological phases with the right
properties may be realistically found? (2) How can candidate phases be
manipulated to prepare quantum mechanical states and perform logical operations
in a practical manner? (3) How can information be recovered from the candidate
states, particularly since they are designed to be weakly influenced by the
environment and so, not easily measured? These questions form the core of this
project; answering them involves research across many modern themes of condensed
matter physics at the interface with quantum computation and quantum information
science. The PI will build on his previous work to develop introductory seminars
on quantum computing and an outreach effort to California State campuses with an
aim, in part, to broaden participation of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the realization of quantum computing with topological phases of
matter. The main goal of this project is to study topological phases of matter
with the emphasis on their potential utility for Topological Quantum Computing.
A part of this project aims at further investigating experimental signatures of
non-Abelian anyons in quantum Hall systems at 5/2 filling, providing theoretical
support for ongoing experiments and designing realistic quantum circuit elements
based on these systems. A related activity will involve searching for similar
physics in seemingly different types of systems such as chiral topological
superconductors or itinerant electron systems interacting with local magnetic
moments. A significant part of this project aims to understand how to engineer
novel material systems with non-Abelian anyons by, for example, combining such
'building blocks' as Abelian fractional quantum Hall systems and conventional
superconductors - an approach inspired by the conceptual designs of Majorana
wires. The PI will build on his previous work to develop a conceptual framework
for such engineering, further developing it as well as designing new measurement
and manipulation techniques suitable for these systems. While much of the
proposed activity deals with studying physical properties of the systems
suitable for topological quantum computing, this research is aimed to advance
the idea of topological quantum computing. Designing realistic quantum circuit
elements based on these systems and developing new techniques for manipulating
quantum information are integral parts of the planned research activity. The PI
will build on his previous work to develop introductory seminars on quantum
computing and an outreach effort to California State campuses with an aim, in
part, to broaden participation of underrepresented minorities.