* 1411970
* RNA structures regulating ribosomal protein synthesis in gram-positive bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Michelle Meyer, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,235.00

The objective of this project is to examine how bacteria coordinate production
of ribosomes, which are crucial for their growth. Ribosomes are the biological
machines responsible for making proteins, and in actively growing bacteria they
constitute over 1/3 of the cell's contents. Thus, cells devote a large
proportion of their resources to the production of ribosomes. Ribosomes require
approximately 60 different components that must be produced in the correct
proportions. In order to use resources most efficiently, bacteria practice just-
in-time production of their ribosomal parts. This research will provide insight
into this process in bacterial strains with important roles in soil
bioremediation, agriculture, and the food industry, leading to increased ability
to engineer the growth rate and metabolism of these strains. By understanding
how this biological problem is solved in different ways by different strains of
bacteria, we will better understand how such coordination can evolve and what
the important performance parameters may be. This research also provides
significant opportunities to young scientist trainees at the graduate,
undergraduate and high school levels because it may be broken into many
individual projects with limited scope and specific testable hypotheses that are
accessible to novice scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to determine the role of RNA regulation on ribosomal protein synthesis in
gram-positive bacteria. While the regulation of this process is well understood
in the model gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli, it remains virtually
unexamined in gram-positive bacteria. By identifying and characterizing RNA
structures that accomplish this task in the model gram-positive bacterium
Bacillus subtilis, we will uncover numerous uncharacterized RNA regulatory
structures that are alternative solutions to the same biological problem, and
provide another picture of how this complex process occurs. This research will
also contribute new fodder for growing RNA structural databases and biophysical
analysis of RNA-protein interactions, and provide insight into the factors
influencing how such systems may evolve. To accomplish these goals
computationally predicted RNA structures associated with ribosomal proteins will
be computationally curated to determine whether they are transcribed, resemble
ribosomal RNA binding sites, or are associated with features that commonly have
regulatory roles. The biological function of these RNAs will then be
experimentally validated using both in vitro RNA-protein binding assays and in
vivo genetic regulatory assays.