* 1411779
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of caldera-scale rhyolitic magma systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,312,708.00

The objective of this project is to build a new understanding of the dynamic
processes that create large rhyolitic magma systems and drive them into states
of unrest and potential eruption. The natural laboratory at the Laguna del Maule
volcanic field (LdM) in the Southern Andes of Chile presents a remarkable
opportunity to investigate system dynamics while magma migration, reservoir
growth, and crustal deformation are currently underway. This project will: (1)
Ascertain the cause of the ongoing episode of unrest, including: (a) gauging the
dimensions, depth, and melt fraction of the magma body or bodies currently
beneath LdM; (b) estimating how these parameters evolve with time, and (c)
assessing whether both current deformation, and longer term, ~20,000 year,
uplift, reflects replenishment of the system with basalt; (2) Integrate
petrologic and geochronologic data to track and model crystallization, cooling,
magma mixing and heating events over the past ~100,000 years, and to determine
whether the eruptive flare-up of rhyolitic lavas during the last 25,000 years
shares a common, shallow source of melt or has more diffuse origins deeper in
the crust; and (3) Create coupled numerical models that will link the
observations to the physics and chemistry of the multi-phase magma-crust system
over a variety of timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Earth will eventually
experience another caldera-forming rhyolitic eruption, there is a need to gather
comprehensive information and create models that realistically account for the
dynamics that lead to these destructive events. Meeting this challenge will
require understanding: (1) the slow geologic processes, magmatic conditions, and
structural changes that propel assembly and growth of these systems, and (2) the
dynamics of a complex multiphase system on both long (years to millennia), and
short (days to months) human time scales. A firm grasp on the coupling among
these processes is currently lacking because they operate on scales ranging over
many orders of magnitude temporally and spatially. This project affords a unique
opportunity to investigate the dynamics of such a system while magma migration,
reservoir growth, and astonishing crustal deformation are currently underway.
Exploring this frontier through both observations and novel modeling approaches
will yield unprecedented insight into system dynamics.