* 1411884
* The unifying principles of biomolecular interactions as a predictive framework for biological mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2022
* Olga Dudko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2022
* USD 904,120.00

In this research project, the PI will develop unifying physical principles to
study complex biological systems. These developments will build a foundation for
extending single-molecule theory to molecular behavior in vivo. This program
will train junior scientists to develop physics-based conceptual approaches that
can encompass the complexity of living systems and to become leaders in this
multi-disciplinary field. Building upon her successful development of the
biological physics curriculum at UCSD, the PI will expand her efforts to
integrate biological physics into curriculums beyond her home department. The PI
will continue and expand upon her outreach initiatives in an effort to encourage
and train scientists from a diverse range of academic and social backgrounds.
The research and training activities in this project will benefit biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish the
unifying physical principles that govern the functional dynamics of complex
biomolecules. The project will provide a theoretical framework that can predict
biological mechanisms as manifestations of the established unifying principles.
Methods from nonequilibrium statistical physics will be developed and applied to
formulate theoretical approaches that are sufficiently general to be applicable
to a broad range of biomolecular systems and experimental techniques, and yet
sufficiently simple to result in an analytical theory and generate
experimentally testable predictions. This research program will extend the
methodologies, developed in the PI's group and proven successful for small
biomolecules, to more complex, large-scale multi-molecular assemblies and the
conformational changes involved in their functional behavior.