* 1411102
* Systematic Identification of Constitutive Parameters for Crystal Plasticity Models of Non-Cubic Metal Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Martin Crimp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,916.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the materials that make up
our daily-life infrastructure (transportation, power generation, etc.) are
predominantly polycrystalline and metallic, such as steel, aluminum, magnesium,
or copper. Polycrystallinity means that all atoms in the material are arranged
on a regular grid and the grid orientation is different in neighboring volumes
(which are termed "grains" or "crystallites"). To master the manufacturing steps
and predict the in-service performance of such structurally important materials,
engineers make use of models that describe the mechanical behavior of these
materials. Such models have a fair number of adjustable parameters, which are
different for each material and need to be quantified for each of them. This
parameter identification is quite involved, particularly for metals that have
complicated atomic arrangements, such as, for instance, titanium, magnesium, or
tin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the PIs replace the
traditional way of parameter identification done by observing the deformation of
difficult to obtain samples, by a new method that puts small impressions with a
specially shaped needle. Having such a cost-effective means to establish the
material model will lead to substantial savings in time, energy, and material
cost across the manufacturing chain and improved prediction of final material
properties. This program will also have broad benefits by exposing students at
multiple levels to science and engineering, including the education and training
of both graduate and undergraduate students to contribute to the nation's
intellectual infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of computational modeling into
process development and design continues to accelerate due to the potential
shortened development times, cost savings, and enhanced reliability. At the
fundamental level, the controlling factors in the mechanical behavior of
structural metals are the resistance of dislocations to slip, i.e. the critical
resolved shear stress for the motion of dislocations, and the concurrent
structural evolution (e.g. work hardening). Thus, in order to accurately
describe the deformation, possible damage nucleation, and fracture behavior of
the polycrystalline arrays that make up structural components, it is necessary
to have a sound model with physical deformation processes involved and accurate
values for the adjustable parameters that enter such models. While these
constitutive parameters can be readily determined for many cubic metals using
well established single crystal methods, they are much more difficult to
ascertain in many non-cubic metals. This is because even in cases when suitable
single crystals can be obtained, the large differences in activation stress for
different slip system types can make it impossible to selectively activate some
(set of) slip systems in standard uniaxial tests of single crystals. Multiphase
materials pose a further challenge, where historically it has been very
difficult to carry out analysis on the individual phases without the influence
of neighboring phases. Provided that adjustable parameters of a selected
constitutive model are available with confidence, full or mean field crystal
plasticity simulations of arbitrary deformation paths (occurring, for instance,
in metal forming) can then be used to understand and predict the anisotropic
deformation and damage nucleation in non-cubic metals.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research applies a newly developed approach to determine parameters of the
constitutive description in a relatively rapid and cost-effective manner to a
number of different single and dual phase alloys. In this technique, sphero-
conical nano-indentation is used to serially interrogate a sufficiently large
number of different crystal orientations at the surface of polycrystalline
samples. Atomic force microscopy is then used to measure the topography around
these indents, which is a strong function of the crystal orientation and the
specific local activity of different slip systems. Crystal plasticity finite
element (CPFE) simulation of the indentation process is then carried out with
varying constitutive parameters until an optimal match is achieved between the
measured and simulated topographies in several different indents on crystals
with different orientations/topographies. This method is effective because the
axisymmetric sphero-conical indentation geometry causes many different slip
systems to operate at different rates and along different strain paths depending
on the material location beneath the indent. In the present study this approach
will be used to determine the constitutive parameters in a range of titanium-
based alloys containing hexagonal and body-centered cubic phases as well as in
tetragonal tin of 99% purity.&lt;br/&gt;The constitutive parameters identified
for the commercially important alloys will have a direct effect on the ability
to develop integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) data and models
across a variety of length scales. This will lead to substantial savings in
time, energy, and material cost. Overall it is very important for materials
processing to be able to reliably predict heterogeneous deformation, which is
required before prediction of performance or reliability can be made with
physically-based confidence.