* 1411687
* Collaborative Research: Gaining a molecular level understanding of the sorption of model organic molecules to engineered soil surrogates
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Karl Mueller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

The funding of this project by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in
the Division of Chemistry will enable Professors Robert Cook and David Spivak of
Louisiana State University (LSU) and Karl Mueller of Pennsylvania State
University (PSU) to introduce a postdoctoral fellow, graduate students, and
undergraduate students to interdisciplinary research involving organic,
analytical, and environmental chemistry. Recruitment will focus on students from
underrepresented groups who will be introduced to the complexity of
environmental chemical issues. In his graduate-level polymer synthesis class,
Professor Spivak will show how emerging methods of polymer synthesis can be used
to mimic some of nature's complexity and can aid environmental chemistry.
Professors Cook (LSU) and Mueller (PSU), both of whom teach senior-level
environmental chemistry courses, will incorporate findings and approaches
developed in this award to illustrate how fundamental chemical interactions
apply to environmental systems and how they play a role in the determination of
the fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals in the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at a molecular level understanding
of how pesticides interact with soils by studying the uptake of model pesticide
molecules by engineered soil surrogates (ESS). Surrogates will be synthesized by
functionalizing known mineral surfaces with organic moieties of varying
composition and polarity, echoing those found in real soil. Similarly,
incorporating fluorinated pesticides of varied polarities and chemical
compositions, in concert with a range of NMR methods, will enable molecular
level characterization of the interactions. The NMR experiments will be guided
and complemented by batch sorption studies, which will report the corresponding
macroscopic behavior. Broader impacts of this work include improvement of fate
and transport modeling, better practices for pesticide use and design, and an
increased understanding of non-covalent interactions. These detailed studies
will provide molecular level insights into how pollutants interact and associate
with soils.