* 1411890
* RUI: Probing Intracellular Trafficking Decisions using Quantitative Fluorescence Microscopy and Biochemical Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Jason Burkhead, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 395,586.00

All eukaryotic cells must make trafficking decisions to maintain optimal
distribution of transmembrane or membrane-associated proteins in response to
physiological conditions. While a number of signaling pathways and essential
trafficking proteins have been described, the information on how trafficking
decisions are made is limited. This project will study an area of great interest
in the trafficking field, which is the role of copper metabolism gene murr1
domain protein in regulating copper transport. The results of this study are
potentially significant for understanding trafficking of other membrane
proteins. The societal impacts of this project are educational, and aim to build
training opportunities in molecular and cellular biosciences at University of
Alaska-Anchorage (UAA), for which there is a high demand, yet limited capacity.
This project will build an integrated research and education program at UAA and
enhance training opportunities for undergraduate students in research.
Undergraduate students will participate directly in the discovery process while
gaining experience with advanced scientific concepts, including quantitative
biological sciences. The research results of this project will be directly
integrated into classroom activities in an inquiry-based cell biology course.

All eukaryotic cells must balance outflow trafficking of membrane proteins and
lipids towards the plasma membrane with retrograde trafficking towards the
Golgi. While a number of signaling pathways and essential trafficking proteins
have been studied, the information on how cells integrate diverse signals to
make retrograde trafficking decisions is yet to be elucidated. COMMD1 (copper
metabolism gene murr1 domain) is the founding member of a family of proteins
that influences trafficking and stability of membrane proteins involved in
sodium, chloride, and copper transport. Copper is an important part of specific
enzymes that maintain normal cell functions. This project aims to understand the
role of COMMD1 as an adaptor protein in regulating trafficking of a copper
ATPase, which has an important role in copper transport. A set of quantitative
biochemical and biophysical techniques, including fluorescence microscopy,
colocalization studies, and molecular modeling of protein 3D structures will be
employed. These results are potentially significant for understanding the
retrograde trafficking of other membrane proteins.