* 1411836
* Translational Enhancement by tRNA Mimics
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Anne Simon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2019
* USD 754,812.00

This project addresses the question of how viruses, which depend on the infected
host cells for making virus proteins, use the host cell protein-producing
machinery, the ribosome, in a manner that is highly efficient. The research will
exploit and extend the novel discovery that the genetic material of a virus
contains specific structures that can bind to the ribosomes and that thereby
allow them to be quickly and efficiently reused. Key outcomes of this project
will be broadly applicable in many fields, including in biotechnology to enhance
the efficiency of protein production. The outcomes may also lead to novel
approaches to control a variety of viruses that infect plants and animals. This
project will provide educational and research training opportunities for high
school students, college undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The outcomes of the research will be presented at scientific
conferences, taught in introductory courses to biology students, and used to
introduce undergraduates and high school students to the life cycle of viruses.
The principal investigator will work with Advanced Placement students at DuVal
High School (98% under-represented minority students) to prepare them for
college, serve on the board of the National Academy of Sciences partnership with
the entertainment industry and will also serve as a scientific consultant for
programming by the Discovery and National Geographic
Channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant virus "Pea enation mosaic umbravirus"
has a bipartite positive-strand RNA genome containing two 3' proximal T-shaped
structures (kl-TSS and 3'TSS). These structures are critical for translation of
the uncapped viral RNAs into proteins. 3'TSS is an example of the long-known,
better-studied tRNA-like structures found in viral RNAs, but the existence of
the kl-TSS was unsuspected and came to light during previous research. The newly
found, internal kl-TSS, with its three-way branched secondary structure, binds
to 40S, 60S and 80S ribosomes and can simultaneously engage in a long-distance
interaction with 5H2, a coding region hairpin located near the 5'Untranslated
Region (UTR). The 3'TSS is also likely to connect with 5H2, and the whole system
will be exploited to learn how different tRNA-mimics interact with ribosomes to
enhance translation. Specifically, a novel "pick-up and delivery" hypothesis
will be evaluated, i.e., the idea that multiple TSS may be connected via RNA:RNA
interactions with the ends of virus-encoded Open Reading Frames (ORF), to gather
ribosomal subunits downstream of an ORF at the end of translation and relay them
back to the 5'UTR for another round of translation. In addition, it will be
tested whether the kl-TSS can enhance translation of capped mRNAs produced from
expression constructs. These experiments will inform our understanding of how
this novel and possibly widespread use of tRNA mimicry operates to enhance
translation and to control plant virus life cycles. The project will also lead
to the development of expression cassettes with enhanced translation of encoded
proteins with potentially extensive agricultural as well as laboratory
applications.