* 1411941
* Amphiphilic Siderophores: Biosynthesis, Iron Uptake and Effect on Microbial Growth
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Alison Butler, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2018
* USD 471,000.00

Nearly all bacteria require iron to grow. Understanding the process by which
bacteria obtain iron from their surroundings provides valuable insight into how
to disrupt the iron uptake process, and suggests potential new strategies to
limit growth of deleterious microbes. The focus of this proposal is to find out
how unique compounds called siderophores are produced for iron uptake in Vibrio
harveyi and other microbes for which their production is tied to bacterial
colony formation and survival. Siderophores are natural materials produced by
bacteria that bind iron(III) very tightly playing a vital role in iron uptake by
the bacterium. Through these investigations, graduate students will be trained
in the application of a broad spectrum of modern techniques to a
multidisciplinary research program. The graduate students will, in turn, also
gain valuable experience as mentors to undergraduate researchers in the
laboratory, and undergraduates will gain hands-on research experience.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Alison Butler from the University of California, Santa
Barbara to investigate the biosynthesis of key amphiphilic siderophores, such as
the amphi-enterobactins, to investigate their physical properties including the
ferric stability constants and membrane partitioning constants for different
forms of the amphi-enterobactins, to investigate key esterases and outer
membrane receptor proteins present in the genome of V. harveyi which are
suspected to be important in the mechanism of iron uptake, as well as to
investigate other key amphiphilic siderophores. V. harveyi is the widely studied
model organism for quorum sensing, the process by which bacteria sense cell
density. Discoveries from these investigations will provide new insights into
the importance of the fatty acid in acylated siderophores in the iron uptake
process.