* 1411495
* Preparation of Advanced Nanomaterials from Single Source Designer Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Kenton Whitmire, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program is
funding the research of Kenton H. Whitmire of Rice University to develop new
ways to make advanced metallic substances with potentially useful magnetic
properties. The work is focusing on materials made from metals such as iron or
manganese. When these metals are combined with a substance such as phosphorus,
the two can come together in many different forms. Iron combined with
phosphorus, for example, can form in at least five ways. All of these resulting
substances are different, but they all are semiconductors, some of which display
unusual behavior. One of these is called "magnetocaloric". This means their
magnetic state varies with temperature. Substances like this could be used to
produce an electronic refrigerator, in other words, a solid-state device that
does not require the use of refrigerant gases. This work is, thus, having a
broad impact: on the production of new and potentially important materials that
will find a wide variety of uses in industry, and through the training of the
next generation of scientists in advanced techniques for preparing specialized
materials.

This research is developing new ways to prepare advanced materials that are
difficult or impossible to synthesize by conventional means. In order to achieve
this goal, new molecular precursors combining one or more transition metals (M)
with the group 15 elements (E) are being prepared. The resulting E-M
compositions have important magnetic, electronic and/or superconducting
properties. This project is geared to overcoming the synthetic challenges of
preparing advanced materials of binary, ternary and higher transition metal/main
group element compositions. The approach considers single source precursors
based on transition metal carbonyl compounds containing one or more transition
metals as well as phosphorus and/or arsenic. The molecular precursors are
prepared using sophisticated organometallic techniques to achieve the desired
E/M compositions. These compounds are characterized by a variety of methods
including single crystal X-ray diffraction, multinuclear and variable
temperature nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy and
mass spectrometry among others. The conversion of these precursors to the
desired materials is examined by thermal decomposition methods. The resulting
materials, prepared either as nanoparticles or thin films, are analyzed by
scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, powder and film X-ray diffraction, energy dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy, and other electronic and magnetic measurement techniques.