* 1411853
* Modeling the Interplay of Ecology and Effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Sergei Pilyugin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 285,793.00

Within the context of the increasing need to properly manage our renewable
resources, Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are a potentially powerful tool to
enhance fisheries and conserve marine biodiversity. MPAs are regions where
fishing is controlled or prohibited. There remains much uncertainty about how
effective MPAs really are, and in particular, on how specific traits of marine
organisms impact how MPAs function. The goal of this project is to develop and
apply new modeling approaches for the analysis and design of MPAs, which will
inform both theoretical investigators and policy makers alike.

The MPA models will take the form of 2 patch, diffusively coupled nonlinear
ordinary differential equations that describe the interaction of fish residing
in the MPA and in the Fishing Grounds. Fish populations will assumed to be stage
structured, and form part of predator-prey foodwebs. The models will incorporate
density-dependent reproduction, maturation, natural death, and fishing rates,
and mobility rates. Tools from dynamical systems theory will be applied to
analyze the models. Empirical fish trait data will be synthesized from the
literature to constrain the values of the model parameters. A working group in
the final year of the grant will be organized to facilitate the synthesis and
integration of the findings, and suggest new ways to better design MPAs and
assess their effectiveness. Participants to this event will include not only
scientists but also policy makers. This project will ultimately lead to
recommendations about when to implement MPAs, where to locate them, and to
establish for which organisms they will be most effective. Also noteworthy are
the educational impacts arising from the interdisciplinary training of graduate
students, as well as undergraduate students.