* 1411420
* How important is "colored" stochasticity for plant population dynamics?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Elizabeth Crone, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 89,085.00

Ecologists need to predict the impacts of human-caused change on plant and
animal populations. These predictions are often made using demographic models,
which combine vital rates (birth, growth, and death rates) into estimates of how
population size changes in response to changes in the environment. Variation in
vital rates is usually modeled as "white noise", meaning that rates in one year
are not correlated with rates in the recent past or recent future. However,
there are good reasons to believe that variation may be "red", meaning good
years tend to follow good years (due to trends in environmental conditions or
carry-over through physiological condition), and there is evidence that some
species experience "blue" noise, meaning bad years tend to follow good years
(for example, if reproduction depletes stored resources). In the few cases where
researchers have looked for "colored" noise in plant and animal populations,
these effects have substantially changed predictions about population dynamics.

This project will develop methods for estimating "colored" stochasticity and
also evaluate how important this variation is for population dynamics. The
research will compare population dynamics of three species of perennial
wildflowers, representing different extremes: 1) a perennial wildflower of arid
environments, which experiences high costs of reproduction, typical of "blue
noise"; 2) a wildflower that lives along meandering rivers, which experiences
directional changes in the environment, typical of "red noise"; and 3) an orchid
near the northern edge of its global distribution. In this this latter species
the color of noise is unknown, but likely important for life-history evolution
and responses to climate change.

As part of this project, the researcher will also evaluate if and how hundreds
of short-term (3-10 year) studies of different plant species (more than 300 have
been published to date) can be used to infer long-term effects of environmental
change for plants in general. Additional broader impacts include developing
statistical methods for analysis of short time series, educating students in
mathematical biology and ecological forecasting, and promoting international
awareness through collaboration with botanists in Oulanka, Finland (near the
intersection of the Arctic Circle with the Finland/Russia border) and with
statistical ecologists in Brisbane, Australia.