* 1411229
* Theoretical Approaches to Multi-Scale Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Zohar Nussinov, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2019
* USD 279,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and data-centric
computational research and education with an aim to advance the understanding of
complex materials. In a perfect crystal, periodically repeating a fundamental
structural unit of atoms can generate the entire atomic structure of the
material. The theoretical description of such a structure of atoms leads to the
elegant explanation of many properties of crystalline or near crystalline
materials. By contrast, in complex materials such as glasses, additional rich
structures appear on length scales between the atomic and the macroscopic
scales. These features make understanding a wide range of materials from
ordinary window glass to high temperature superconductors which can conduct
electricity without resistance challenging.

A goal of this project is to seek and quantify important structures in glassy
materials - not by looking for particular known patterns- but rather by an
unbiased analysis of structural data while invoking general physical principles.
To address this challenge, the PI will broaden network analysis and computer
vision methods to pinpoint and quantify the salient features of complex
materials across different scales of length and time. This project will
introduce new mathematical techniques for studying complex heterogeneous
dynamics of both classical and quantum systems. The research will be done in
close contact with experimental research groups around the world. The
theoretical and data intensive computational study, in combination with
experimental observations, is expected to lead to a deeper understanding of the
structure of complex materials and systems including neural circuits, and enable
progress in other disciplines. The techniques developed in this award will
enhance cross-fertilization between condensed matter physics and other areas
with multi-scale architectures such as medical imaging, bioinformatics, and
communication networks. In collaboration with experimental neuroscientists, the
PI aims to apply theoretical and data-centric computational tools developed in
the course of research on materials to the visual neural circuits of the brain.

This project supports training graduate students as well as further developing
courses on advanced statistical mechanics and quantum information. The PI will
also engage high school and undergraduate students to design software packages
that illustrate the use of some of the methods developed during the course of
the research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and data-centric computational
research and education in theoretical condensed matter physics of materials with
complex structure. The PI aims to develop and explore a new framework involving
empirical data combined with ideas from data mining and network theory, Fokker-
Planck, and other methods, to systematically uncover natural structures across a
broad range of spatial and temporal scales. Analysis of experimental data of
structural glasses and complex electronic materials will be performed with the
aid of methods developed in the course of the project. Research will,
specifically, be conducted along several directions: (1) The PI aims to employ
ideas from statistical mechanics and network theory to unveil natural building
blocks in disparate complex materials. The analysis will be performed on both
experimental and simulation results in various materials systems including
metallic glass alloys and electronic systems. As a byproduct, new concepts and
tools will be developed and applied to optimization as well as imaging problems
of wide interest. In collaboration with neuroscientists, the PI plans to apply
developed tools to the study of the structure of the circuitry of the visual
system of the brain. (2) The project will probe for low temperature quantum
dynamical heterogeneities in cuprate superconductors and other electronic
systems through a direct analysis of experimental data. Novel quantum effects at
high temperatures will be further investigated. (3) Fokker-Planck methods will
be applied to the study of structure and evolution of viscous systems. (4) The
PI will investigate the mechanical properties of complex systems, in particular
how they may respond to external shear, and ascertain associated length scales.

This project provides a multidisciplinary research environment and an
opportunity for students to learn a multitude of valuable techniques, including:
molecular dynamics, image and network analysis, and data mining, in the context
of close connection to experiments. The PI aims to review and communicate
current ideas in network science, statistical mechanics, and condensed matter
physics to graduate students through new courses. He also plans to engage high
school and undergraduate students to design software packages that illustrate
the use of some of the methods developed during the course of the research.