* 1411563
* Collaborative Research: Variable Circumstellar Disks: Prevalence, Timescales, and Physical Mechanisms
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Lisa Prato, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 46,157.00

Stars many times more massive than our Sun are rare, but they are responsible
for producing nearly all of the heavier elements found in nature. Through
dramatic supernova explosions, they produce and shed this material throughout
the galaxy, mixing it with material out of which the next generation of stars,
and planets, are formed. One interesting class of stars, known as Be stars,
rotate so rapidly that they somehow shed material that then forms in a disk
around their equators. In order to better understand how these disks are formed
and why they occasionally seem to disappear, researchers at the University of
Oklahoma, Lowell Observatory, and the University of Toledo have formed a team to
carry out an intensive study of these systems. They will use an array of ground-
based telescopes to observe these events, and they are developing sophisticated
computer codes to aid the interpretation of these observations. This program
will support graduate students at the University of Oklahoma and at the
University of Toledo, as well as undergraduate students at all three
institutions. They will develop research-based planetarium shows that satisfy
state education standards. Undergraduates will be trained to develop content and
conduct outreach and to take these shows on the road to K-12 students using a
portable planetarium and a digital projector. These shows will be freely
released for use in other settings.

This program will determine the timescales, relative prevalence, and physical
mechanisms of disk-loss and disk rebuilding episodes of classical Be stars.
These goals will be accomplished by carrying out a statistical assessment of the
prevalence of disk-loss/renewal episodes of populations of Be stars in open
clusters, as well as intensive multi wavelength studies of individual Be stars
actively experiencing disk-loss/renewal episodes. Predictions of state-of-the-
art radiation transfer and hydrodynamical modeling codes will be compared
against the data obtained in this program, to test a range of scenarios that
have been proposed to explain how circumstellar disks may be created and
destroyed during the lifetime of the host star.