* 1411824
* Mean-field Games for Market Microstructure and Liquidity Risk
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Sergey Nadtochiy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2017
* USD 153,031.00

Nadtochiy&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1411824&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Recent technological
advances have created new opportunities for trading in financial markets.
However, the effects of these changes are two-fold. On the one hand, they
increase the competition and provide additional liquidity to the market, which,
in particular, manifests itself in reduced bid-ask spreads. On the other hand,
the new technology introduces opportunities for the better-equipped participants
(e.g. the high-frequency traders) to adjust their positions rapidly, in order to
take advantage of the trading needs of other investors. The latter may result in
a sudden reduction of the market liquidity, which was well demonstrated by the
so-called flash crash of 2010. As financial processes affect all parts of modern
life, it is crucial for society to be able to analyze and control the financial
stability of markets. The investigator develops tools for quantitative analysis
of the tradeoff between the liquidity-providing role of strategic traders and
the liquidity risk they generate. Such tools can be used to predict and avoid
future liquidity crises, as well as to test the potential effects of new
financial regulation (e.g. a transaction tax or limits on trading frequency).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops a rigorous mathematical
framework for modeling market microstructure and liquidity risk by analyzing the
real-world system of market participants (agents) who interact with each other
through trading. The macroscopic properties of this system are described by the
so-called limit order book, whose shape and dynamics arise endogenously from the
actions of individual agents, rather than being taken as an input to the model.
The approach is based on the methods of mean-field games, which allow for the
analytically tractable description of an equilibrium in stochastic games with a
large number of interacting agents. One of the challenges of the project is the
complicated dependence structure between the dynamics of individual agents. For
example, any realistic model of the above system requires that the agents
interact through their control values, rather than through their states. This
artifact introduces an additional constraint to the classical forward-backward
system describing a mean-field game model, making the analysis more complicated.
Another mathematical challenge is due to the fact that the control process of
each agent takes values in the space of measures, which represent the limit
orders submitted by the agent. As a result, the use of infinite-dimensional
analysis is required to obtain an analytic characterization of the solutions to
the associated optimization problems. Finally, an important problem arising in
this line of study is the convergence of the proposed discrete time mean-field
games to the continuous time limit. In particular, in order to address this
problem, the investigator extends the existing results on discrete time
approximation of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation to the setting that allows
for measure-valued controls. The project provides a natural framework for
quantifying the tradeoff between the liquidity-providing role of the strategic
players (e.g. the high-frequency traders) and the liquidity risk they generate.
In particular, the resulting models can be used to obtain real-time predictions
of the potential liquidity crises (e.g. flash crashes), as well as to test the
implications of new financial regulation.