* 1411382
* A STRATEGY TO OPTIMIZE THE U.S. OPTICAL/INFRARED SYSTEM IN THE ERA OF THE LARGE SYNOPTIC SURVEY TELESCOPE
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2016
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 01/31/2016
* USD 249,088.00

The Committee on Astronomy and Astrophysics (CAA) of the National Academy of
Sciences will carry out a study for A Strategy to Optimize the U.S.
Optical/Infrared System in the Era of The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope.
Driven by discoveries, and enabled by leaps in technology and imagination, our
understanding of the Universe has changed dramatically over the course of the
last few decades. The fields of astronomy and astrophysics are making new
connections to physics, chemistry, biology, and computer science. Realizing
these scientific opportunities is contingent upon maintaining and strengthening
the foundations of the research enterprise. Using the recent survey of astronomy
and astrophysics, New Worlds, New Horizons in Astronomy and Astrophysics, and
the NSF's Portfolio Review report, this study by a CAA committee will provide
conclusions and recommendations to NSF which will help NSF achieve the best
science for the investment in optical/infrared (OIR) resources and move the
field forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OIR system study committee will have a
broad impact by acting as an established forum to bring together leading
researchers from the scientific community and representatives from across the
federal government to discuss research needs and issues relevant to the U.S. OIR
system. The committee will engage the broad astronomy and astrophysics community
through its work whereby members of the research community can share their
expertise with the rest of the committee and with the public. These discussions
can lead to new collaborations and insights into neighboring activities. By
identifying cross-cutting issues and opportunities, the committee can enhance
the research and education environment. The activities undertaken by the study
committee will be disseminated broadly through distribution of reports, frequent
updates to the committee's website, and at professional society meetings.