* 1411403
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   A Novel Phylogenetic Approach to the Analysis of Bat Phylogenetics and Morphological Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2014
* Richard Stevens, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 60,336.00

Even today's broadest taxonomic groups originated in the distant past as
diversifications of single species, the progeny of which then proceeded along
their own evolutionary paths. While these ancient diversifications will never be
observed directly, patterns and processes leading to radiations of taxa that
exist today can be studied. Thus, in order to truly understand how the tree of
life came to be, ways to analyze genome-wide data at lower taxonomic levels must
be found. The research will address this goal by integrating new, high
throughput sequencing technologies with modern evolutionary analyses. The
potential of this method will be explored by applying it to a difficult problem
- the resolution of systematic relationships and patterns of morphological
evolution in New World representatives of the bat genus Myotis. However, while
the focus of this work is a single bat genus, the method will be broadly
applicable to any taxonomic group in which retrotransposons (self-amplifying,
neutral genetic elements in the genome) have been active during the radiation of
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods to be developed have great potential
in providing markers that are variable enough to resolve rapid radiations, while
also being straightforward to analyze. Moreover, because this methodology is
expected to be relatively inexpensive, it is anticipated that it will prove
appealing to small labs that focus on resolving relationships among closely
related species. The integration of multiple subdisciplines of Biology is often
discussed but rarely realized. This project represents a unique attempt to
integrate modern computational biological tools using genome level data and well
established morphometric analyses. This project will contribute to the
infrastructure of science by amassing tissue, skin and skeletal material that
will fill gaps in terms of members of the genus Myotis and nontarget taxa. These
materials will be deposited in a public repository (Museum of Natural History,
LSU) and will be available in perpetuity to the scientific community. Finally,
education and outreach to the local communities will be based on the
investigation of a charismatic taxonomic group and will improve research and
education in two traditionally underdeveloped states.