* 1411636
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Complex Interactions in the Content Distribution Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 643,656.00

Internet services such as web search (e.g, Google and Bing), social networks
(e.g., Facebook), and online video streaming (e.g., Netflix and YouTube) are now
an important human activity. Underlying such services is a vast, and
increasingly complex system of servers, networks, and software controlled by a
variety of entities such as content providers (CPs) who own or generate the
content, content distribution networks (CDNs) who distribute that content to
users, and Internet Service Providers (ISPs) who own and operate the underlying
network infrastructure. These entities form the content distribution ecosystem,
each with its own business interest, each attempting to optimize its own cost
and performance, more often individually, but sometimes in cooperation with
others. This project is focused on understanding the complex interactions among
these different entities with the view of providing better architectural
solutions to facilitate those interactions. Insights gained from the project can
help guide the evolution of future Internet services, resulting in better
quality-of-experience (QoE) for the users and greater system efficiencies for
the entities in the ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a
framework to study complex interactions in the content distribution ecosystem
from multiple perspectives -- control information, decision points, time scales
and local vs. global decision making, and applies this framework to understand
their roles and effects on user QoE. The project is organized along four main
threads: 1) Complex interactions between CDNs and ISPs: Characterize effects of
CDN actions such as content adaptation and request routing on ISP actions such
as traffic engineering and traffic shaping; 2) Complex interactions between CPs
and CDNs: Characterize CP actions such as choosing the right CDN to deliver
their content with CDN actions such as server selection; 3) Complex interactions
between (uni- and multi-path) TCP and applications: Characterize interactions
between control loops present in applications such as video streaming and
protocols such as (MP)TCP; 4) Measurement, trace-driven evaluation, and
controlled and "in the wild" experimentation. All four threads are connected by
an analytical thrust focused on the development of theoretical models, advanced
algorithms, and performance bounds based on optimization, control and economic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main premise behind this project is that
content distribution is becoming more complex with increasing numbers of
entities and varied interactions between them. This complexity requires new
analytical and algorithmic methods to model, understand, control, and optimize
content distribution. The project takes a first step towards developing these
tools and methods, and applying them to interactions that arise between CPs,
CDNs, and ISPs, and between different application-level and transport level data
transfers. If successful, the project will produce sound theoretical
underpinnings and provide general design guidelines in effectively improving the
system performance and enhancing overall user QoE and benefit CPs, CDNs and ISPs
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this project promises
to enhance the economic viability of the content distribution ecosystem and the
Internet infrastructure at large. Moreover, it will lead to a better
understanding of how to engineer large systems consisting of a multitude of
diverse interacting components. Educational activities for this project will
enhance undergraduate, graduate, and professional education lying at the
intersection of networking, modeling, control theory, and complex systems. The
PIs will accomplish these goals through 1) creation of courses and course
material on complex systems, content distribution systems, and mathematics of
interacting systems appropriate for seniors and graduate students; 2)
development of outreach activities aimed at increasing participation of
undergraduate women and minority students in research as well as engagement with
the broader networking community.