* 1411538
* Mechanism of fungal polysaccharide monooxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Michael Marletta, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2015
* USD 499,999.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Michael Marletta from The Scripps Research Institute to
investigate the recently discovered polysaccharide monooxygenases (PMOs),
enzymes that catalyze the degradation of cellulose. Cellulose is the major
constituent of biomass in nature. Despite years of study, the efficient and
economical degradation of cellulose remains a limiting factor in the industrial
production of biofuels from cellulose. PMOs could help to overcome the
prohibitive costs associated with cellulose degradation. PMOs use a copper
active site to oxidize specific positions on cellulose. This project will
investigate the chemistry by which these enzymes break the cellulose backbone
and the determinants of regioselective (i.e. specific site) oxidation. The
research contributes to the current quest for green and sustainable energy,
creates opportunities for the education of future scientists capable of work in
the field of bioenergy, and raises the awareness of college and high school
students of STEM careers.

The objective of this project is to gain insight into the mechanism by which the
newly discovered oxygen- and copper-dependent fungal PMOs catalyze the
regioselective hydroxylation and oxidation of glycosidic bonds of crystalline
cellulose. The research will focus on the direct identification and
characterization of the copper-based species in the catalytic cycle. The
kinetics of interconversion of these species, the electron transfer during
catalysis, the role of the conserved active site hydrogen bonding network, and
the factors governing the regioselectivity of the reactions catalyzed by PMO
will be studied using site directed mutagenesis, rapid kinetic techniques,
spectroscopic methods and biochemical assays. The proposed studies will
contribute fundamental knowledge to the metal-catalyzed oxygen activation
chemistry and to the development of alternative fuels.