* 1411014
* Ceramic Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 342,244.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Quasicrystals are made from building blocks of
regular size and shape that can fill up the space but do not have a repeatable
pattern. Macroscale quasicrystals have been known since ancient times to
mathematicians and artists who made are mosaics with such patterns. Molecular
quasicrystals are very rare. They are found only for limited number of alloys
and some meteorites. This unusual structure (tiling) makes them promising
candidates for exceptionally strong materials because the lack of periodicity
prevents the propagation of cracks. Vast majority of load-bearing structures
built today are from ceramic materials but ceramic quasicrystals are not known.
This project is aimed at developing general methods for preparation of
quasicrystalline ceramics from nanoparticles that can make it both simple and
diverse. Such ceramics materials may be of value for national defense,
automotive industry, aviation, and electronics. The project includes an
integrated multifaceted training of students in the cutting edge materials
engineering and computer simulation technologies. It also includes an integral
Outreach and Education Program, centered on early science education and
quasicrystalline tilings which unite scientific and aesthetic
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The key to the preparation of
ceramic and composite quasicrystals will be self-organization of ceramic
nanoparticles into quasicrystalline phases. This approach will allow the
manufacturers to avoid extremely high temperatures and pressures. The
nanoparticles selected for the project are spherical SiO2 modified with a
polymer. Such nanoparticles feature two competing long-range interactions that
inhibit crystallization in traditional phases in favor of quasicrystals. The
synergy of experiment (Kotov) and simulations (Glotzer) make it possible to
experimentally realize bulk ceramic quasicrystals from SiO2 under mild
conditions. Quasicrystal phases simulated initially on the computer are
assembled in aqueous dispersions. Following the three-dimensional
crystallization into aperiodic structures, the initially soft materials are
annealed to make robust bulk monoliths interconnected by strong covalent bonds.
The composite quasicrystals are being made by monomer infiltration or layer-by-
layer assembly. Different quasicrystalline ceramics are being comparatively
investigated for mechanical properties and crack propagation mechanisms. They
are expected to reveal set of properties previously unseen for any other
materials. The combination of toughness, transparency and simplicity of
preparation may lead to transformative changes in ceramics and their
applications.