* 1411984
* Constructing Plant Cuticle Barriers: from molecular architecture to mechanical integrity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2022
* Ruth Stark, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,166,552.00

Terrestrial plants regulate their interactions with the environment via
insoluble hydrophobic molecules assembled within epidermal or peridermal cell
walls: cutins, suberins, and waxes that share some building blocks and formation
pathways. To understand the macromolecular structure and mechanical performance
of these essential protective membranes, gene-silenced tomato fruits and potato
tubers as well as leaves from several model plants will be targeted for study. A
coordinated protocol of biophysical measurements will link the biosynthesis of
plant coverings with their molecular architectures and macroscopic attributes
such as mechanical integrity and environmental persistence. The project can
benefit food crop yields and recycling of plant litter, also aiding the design
of paints, textiles, and coatings. Interdisciplinary training teams spanning
high school through postdoctoral levels will conduct this research, which will
also form the basis of an undergraduate laboratory curriculum for non-
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this program is to
transform the current phenomenology of protective plant cuticles and periderms
into a comprehensive predictive scheme for the versatile barrier functions of
hydrophobic membranes. In addition to benefits related to food crop protection
and plant litter recycling, the project outcomes can inform the design of
superhydrophobic paints, textiles, and coatings. Recent improvements in genetic,
analytical, and biomechanical technologies are making it possible to achieve an
understanding of plant cuticular architecture that spans length scales from
molecular to macroscopic, development from biosynthesis to biodegradation, and
mechanical integrity at the surface or in bulk. This project will examine the
biosynthesis, macromolecular organization, and mechanical performance of
cuticles and periderms from tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) and potato (Solanum
tuberosum) plants with known genomes. As a complement, the polymers that resist
chemical degradation and modulate plant cuticular function will be identified
structurally. Specific hypotheses will be tested to address several issues:
specificity of two fruit cutin synthase enzymes; metabolic rerouting of gene-
silenced potato tuber periderms; macromolecular organization of suberized potato
cell walls; nanomechanics and tensile strength of cuticles and periderms,
respectively; environmental persistence of cutins and suberins.