* 1411792
* Geometric Numerical Discretizations of Gauge Field Theories and Interconnected Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Melvin Leok, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 140,785.00

Practical engineered systems, such as electro-mechanical systems in human
prosthetics, typically involve components described by coupled, distinct
physical theories. This research project develops methods to easily model
complicated systems by connecting simpler models together, which allows
sophisticated mathematical and modeling tools to be more readily accessible to
the engineering community. This will reduce the barrier to constructing high-
fidelity mathematical models that can be used for rapid prototyping in the
rational design process, leading to better, cheaper, and faster translation of
conceptual designs into commercially realizable products. In addition to
modeling, the research also involves designing controllers for interconnected
systems. This is relevant to the control of distributed networks of autonomous
aerial and underwater vehicles, which have applications to search and rescue,
ocean exploration, and distributed sensor networks for both disaster monitoring
and homeland security. To further facilitate the dissemination of this research
to the engineering community, the investigator and his collaborators will
develop a two-volume graduate textbook that will be accessible to a broad
technical audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dirac and multi-Dirac mechanics and
geometry provide a unified mathematical framework for describing Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian mechanics and field theories, as well as degenerate, interconnected,
and nonholonomic systems. Variational integrators yield geometric structure-
preserving numerical methods that automatically preserve the symplectic form and
momentum maps, and exhibit excellent long-time energy stability. This project
studies far reaching generalizations of the variational integrator approach for
discretizing covariant gauge theories, such as electromagnetism and general
relativity, and interconnected systems, such as electrical circuits and
multibody systems. This involves: (i) a systematic framework for constructing
and analyzing multi-Dirac variational integrators for Lagrangian partial
differential equations; (ii) the connection between discrete covariant and
instantaneous formulations of covariant gauge theories, and group-equivariant
finite-element spaces using spacetime finite-element exterior calculus and
Lorentzian metric-valued geodesic finite-elements; (iii) discrete
interconnection theory for Dirac mechanical systems and their associated control
theory.