* 1411887
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Can Long Bone Cross-Sectional Properties Reliably Reveal Interpopulation Genetic Distance?
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Brigitte Holt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2016
* USD 24,872.00

Skeletal remains of past human populations provide invaluable windows onto the
evolution of human morphology, as well as enhanced understanding of functional
variation in modern human morphology, in part because the range of behavior in
ancient humans was more varied than is seen today. Limb bones are especially
important in this respect, as they dynamically respond to physical activity via
a process called bone functional adaptation, or "BFA." As a result, arm and leg
bones are often treated as a "behavioral proxies" that provide critical
information about mobility, lifestyle change, and technological innovation in
past populations. Evidence shows, however, that BFA is under some genetic
control that regulates bone sensitivity to mechanical environment. Variation in
long bone structure and associated function therefore may reflect genetic
ancestry, as much as behavior.

The pelvis and skull vary in accordance with genetic expectations and can
therefore reflect important aspects of population history (e.g., migration,
divergence or population reduction). The primary question driving this
dissertation research by doctoral student Gina Agostini (under the supervision
of Dr. Brigitte Holt, University of Massachusetts Amherst) is whether the same
is true of long bones, a question to be answered by comparing patterns of
cranial and long bone variation among European populations and their South
African descendants. Using caliper measurements and digitized bone casts, data
will be collected on cranial and long bone shape for each population. These data
will be analyzed using population genetics software to predict the genetic
distances (relationships) among the populations under study. If long bones do
reflect genetic variation, then the relationships produced by long bone shape
should generally match those produced by the crania. If they do not match, this
suggests that cranial and long bones primarily reflect different biological or
environmental processes. Results will either advocate the novel use of long
bones to infer population history or will reinforce their usefulness at
discerning behavior (or other environmental stimuli).

Clarification as to whether long bones primarily reflect genetic or behavioral
signals is crucial for studies of human origins which must routinely extract
information from limited skeletal data. Furthermore, because BFA is the same
process that regulates bone plasticity, maintenance and healing, this project
will show whether our ancestry influences the response time of our bones to a
new exercise regime, sport, or fracture. This research also supports growing
public interest in ancestry, a trend evidenced by the wide popularity of
commercial ancestry kits and genealogical programs. In addition to publicly
accessible reports, data generated by this project will be integrated into a
series of community-based lectures, social media interactions, public workshops,
and lifelong learning opportunities already conducted by the researchers.