* 1411502
* Molecular Basis of DNA Specific and Non-Specific Site Recognition by ETS Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2015
* W. Wilson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 510,364.00

Genetic information inside the cell is managed by proteins known as
transcription factors, which are essential to life. 'ETS' (short for E-26) is a
family of related transcription factors found in all multi-celled animals and
they participate in a wide range of biological functions in the cell. To perform
their functions, ETS proteins must interact with DNA at specific sites
identified by the sequence of four chemical constituents in DNA (A, C, G, and
T). This research will investigate how ETS proteins recognize their target DNA
sites, and in turn inform the broader process by which cells develop and adapt
to their biological environment. Knowledge from this project will serve as the
basis for training several graduate and undergraduate students, as well as for
developing curricular material at Washington State University and Georgia State
University. The particular demographics of these institutions stand to benefit
significantly from NSF support in STEM disciplines in general and biophysical
science in particular.

The ETS family of transcription factors is ubiquitous in animals (the Metazoa)
and regulates the transcription of large networks of genes. Their biological
functions depend on site-specific DNA recognition as determined by a
structurally conserved DNA-binding domain (known as the ETS domain). Although
ETS domains share strong structural conservation, their amino acid sequences are
also highly divergent. Preliminary data on PU.1 and Ets-1, two ETS members that
represent the extremes of primary sequence divergence, indicate that this
diversity encodes distinctive differences in DNA recognition by ETS members.
This project is aimed at delineating the mechanisms of sequence recognition
utilized by ETS proteins through the kinetics and coupling of the thermodynamics
of site recognition to the solution environment. A major focus of this proposal
is to systematically define the diversity among ETS members, using PU.1 and
Ets-1 as model systems, under solution conditions that mimic the cellular
environment, in which binding sites are embedded within nonspecific DNA and the
solution environment is semi-dilute.