* 1411266
* Collaborative Research: Summer School for Integrated Computational Materials Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mark Asta, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 51,328.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports the Summer School for Integrated
Computational Materials Education which will be held at the University of
Michigan and the University of California at Berkeley. The use of computers
plays an increasingly important role in the discovery of new materials and the
design of products down to the materials from which they are made. The Summer
School for Integrated Computational Materials Education will train and assist
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and professors who intend to
incorporate computational materials science tools into materials science and
engineering education. The participants who complete the program are ambassadors
of computational materials science and engineering - they return to their home
universities and implement the modules and approaches presented in the Summer
School. Previous offerings of the Summer School have reached over 500
undergraduate students through its participants. It also provides the
participants the first step towards more in-depth learning of the computational
techniques. This will in turn stimulate the advancement of computational
materials science, and thus will have ripple effects in the broader field of
materials science and engineering. Graduate student participants are both
trained in research and teaching, providing them an opportunity to prepare for
future career path in higher education.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports the Summer School for Integrated
Computational Materials Education which will be held at the University of
Michigan and the University of California at Berkeley. Computational approaches
have transformed many scientific and engineering disciplines in the last decade.
While the complexity of the physics and multiscale nature of materials makes
modeling challenging, modern methods of computational materials science are also
beginning to produce widespread impact in the design and development of new
materials. In response to the needs and challenges identified by the community,
the team has established the "Summer School for Integrated Computational
Materials Education," a two-week program that includes an intense course on
computational materials science and engineering and focus sessions on
educational modules that can be adopted into existing materials science and
engineering core courses. Specifically, the team has developed modules that can
be integrated into existing undergraduate-level core courses on material
thermodynamics, kinetics, electronic properties, and mechanics. Using these
modules, the Summer School aims to "educate the educators." Following the events
in 2011, 2012, and 2014, the Summer School will continue to be offered in Years
2015, 2016, and 2017. The Summer School for Integrated Computational Materials
Education has helped enable the rapid increase in the rate at which universities
and colleges are incorporating computational materials science tools into their
core curriculum, thus having an impact on a large number of young materials
scientists. In addition to the educational component, the Summer School will
also include advanced topics from the forefront of computational materials
research, which provides a forum for dissemination of state-of-the-art research.
Furthermore, the participants will learn about computational tools that could be
incorporated into their research, resulting in a training of future workforce
capable of taking advantage of the increasing availability of computational
tools for materials design and development. The Summer School will also provide
a case study for a method of transforming undergraduate education to embrace
technology in a Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics subject.