* 1411476
* Evolutionarily Stable Dispersal Strategies in Spatial Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* King Yeung Lam, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Unraveling the mechanism with which natural selection influences the evolution
of dispersal is the key to understanding the life history of organisms. A key
component in the study of species sorting is to understand how local abiotic
factors influence the behavior as well as composition of resident communities.
For instance, how does the increase in turbulent diffusion in water columns
affect the persistence of phytoplankton populations? Can a river organism
persist with increased river discharge? If it persists, how will its range limit
be changed? Understanding the answers to these questions can facilitate the
development of better management strategies for natural resources. The
investigators study these and related questions in this project under the
framework of evolutionary game theory. Since its inception in the 1970s,
evolutionary game theory has proven itself to be invaluable in explaining many
complex and challenging aspects of biological processes. However, most studies
in evolutionary game theory have, until recently, ignored the effect of space.
This is partly due to the mathematical difficulty arising from the analysis of
spatially explicit models. The investigators and their colleagues will undertake
the investigation of the evolution of dispersal, via discrete as well as
continuous mathematical modeling approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
precisely, this project studies the evolutionarily stable strategies in
dispersal models. An evolutionarily stable strategy is a strategy which, if
adopted by a population in a given environment, assures that the population
cannot be invaded by a mutant that is initially rare. This project focuses on
finding evolutionarily stable dispersal strategies in homogeneous or
heterogeneous environments in two distinct directions: (i) Previous studies have
shown that a balanced dispersal strategy for continuous-time and discrete-space
models can replace any other unbalanced dispersal strategy. On the other hand,
studies have also shown that a balanced dispersal strategy for discrete-time and
discrete-space models may not be able to replace some unbalanced dispersal
strategies. This project seeks a unified approach to study the evolutionary
stability of balanced dispersal in discrete, continuous and nonlocal models, and
to resolve the disparities between different modeling approaches; (ii)
Unidirectional flow in water columns often pushes individuals away from
favorable environments and also induces a net loss of individuals from the
habitat. Previous studies show that advection often puts slow dispersers at a
disadvantage. The investigators will study whether larger dispersal rates will
always evolve or if some intermediate dispersal rate will be selected, in
homogeneous or heterogeneous, open or closed environments. Connections between
the evolution of dispersal and range limit of species will be investigated. The
mathematical tools include variational method, elliptic and parabolic regularity
theory, monotone dynamical system theory, and numerical simulations.