* 1411708
* Astrophysical Studies of Quark Deconfinement
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Fridolin Weber, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

This project concerns the theoretical exploration of the properties of strongly
interacting matter at ultra-high densities (10 to 20 times denser than atomic
nuclei) and temperatures (several hundred billion degrees). It is generally
accepted by the scientific community that the universe was filled with super-
dense matter shortly after the Big Bang. Super-dense matter continues to be
created in the final stages of catastrophic stellar events, such as core-
collapse supernovae and gamma-ray bursts, and it may be present deep inside the
cores of collapsed stars, known as neutron stars. Neutron stars are typically
about 20 kilometers across and spin rapidly, often making many hundred of
rotations per second. A thimble full of neutron star matter would have a mass of
one billion tons! At such extraordinary conditions atoms themselves collapse,
and atomic nuclei are squeezed so tightly together that new fundamental
particles are generated and novel states of matter are created. This makes
neutron stars, and the catastrophic stellar events creating them, into excellent
astrophysical laboratories for a wide range of physical studies, which are
addressed in this project. Theoretical predictions concerning the equation of
state of matter under these extreme conditions can be used to compare the
results of simulations with observational data accumulating rapidly from both
orbiting and ground based observatories spanning the radiation spectrum from
X-rays to radio wavelengths.

This project focuses on the role of quark deconfinement for (proto) neutron
stars and core-collapse supernova events, using a state-of-the-art (non-local
3-flavor Polyakov-Nambu-Jona-Lasinio, n3PNJL) model for the description of quark
matter. The n3PNJL model accounts for the dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry
and mimics quark confinement via the Polyakov loop potential. In recent years,
the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model has become the workhorse for various studies in
theoretical nuclear physics, as it provides a very versatile and numerically
treatable approach to the theory of the strong interaction (quantum
chromodynamics, QCD). This research will consists of five intertwined activities
concerning (1) the equation of state of cold quark-hybrid matter; (2) color
superconductivity treated in the framework of the n3PNJL model; (3) quark
deconfinement in (proto) neutron stars; (4) the properties of a quark-hadron
Coulomb lattice that may exist in the cores of neutron stars; and (5) the role
of quark deconfinement for core-collapse supernovae. The best available data
from heavy ion collisions and neutron star observations will be used to impose
the strongest possible constraints on the equation of state that will be
developed in the framework of this research project. The equations of state will
be made available to the wider nuclear and astrophysics community to explore the
birth, structure and evolution of (proto) neutron stars and the events which
create them.