* 1411376
* Vacuum Ionization Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Sarah Trimpin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 429,516.00

Professor Sarah Trimpin of Wayne State University is supported by the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to explore
the recently discovered ion generation method for mass spectrometry, matrix-
assisted ionization in vacuum. Mass spectrometric analysis requires the sample
molecules to be volatilized and electrically charged (ionized) so that they can
be identified according to the way they behave in the magnetic and/or electric
field of the instrument. While traditional methods of sample ionization require
electron beams, lasers, or other energetic processes, the Trimpin laboratory
will develop methods wherein chemical samples can be volatilized and ionized
simply by exposure to vacuum conditions. The better we understand how the ion
generation processes work the better we can exploit them for biomolecular
analysis, the major application of contemporary mass spectrometry. During the
course of conducting this research, graduate and undergraduate students and
postdoctoral researchers will gain valuable skills in mass spectrometry
instrumentation and its applications in biochemical analysis. The outreach plans
include participation in active recruitment of women, members of
underrepresented minorities and undergraduates through Wayne State University
initiatives to enhance diversity in academic programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the proposed research are organized in three specific aims: (1) to
determine the mechanism of matrix-assisted ionization in vacuum (MAIV) and the
physical processes that occur when matrices with analytes are exposed to
conditions that spontaneously produce analyte ions by studying the fundamentals
of ion formation with optical methods, atomic force microscopy, microbalance,
and high speed photography; (2) to obtain a predictive understanding of how MAIV
matrices function in relation to pressure, temperature and solvent conditions.;
and (3) to explore the potential analytical applications of MAIV in biological
mass spectrometry, mass spectrometry imaging, and in portable mass
spectrometers.