* 1411609
* ELT Collaborative Research:   Beyond the boring billion: Late Proterozoic glaciation, oxygenation and the proliferation of complex life
* GEO,EAR
* 09/27/2013,08/31/2016
* Noah Planavsky, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2016
* USD 211,202.00

ELT Collaborative Research: Beyond the Boring Billion: Late Proterozoic
Glaciation, Oxygenation and the Proliferation of Complex
Life&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Timothy Lyons, Univ.
California, Riverside, EAR-1338299&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas Planavsky, Dartmouth
College, EAR-1338208&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Reinhard, Georgia Tech,
EAR-1338290&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The middle chapters in
Earth's history, roughly 1.8 to 0.8 billion years ago, were defined by
remarkable stability in generally low but persistent oxygen levels in the ocean
and atmosphere and stifled development of early organisms for a billion years.
How and when this cycle was broken are among the central unanswered questions in
the history of life on Earth. The eventual rise to higher oxygen levels and
ultimately the appearance of animals correspond generally with history's most
extreme climatic events and mountain building episodes, and the timing and
cause-and-effect relationships among all these events and processes are
frontiers ripe for study. To this end, we will construct an unusually
comprehensive chemical data set for rocks from Australia and Arctic Canada
deposited directly within the transition between the stable 'boring' billion and
the major milestones that followed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The onset of global-
scale glaciation 0.7 to 0.8 billion years ago is without question one of the
most dramatic environmental transitions in Earth history, and the generally
synchronous radiation of eukaryotic organisms, with greater complexity than
their microbial ancestors, and the emergence of animals are among the most
remarkable evolutionary events in the long history of life. The proposed
multidisciplinary team will illuminate the timing of these key events and their
likely links to Earth's oxygenation, while probing the cause-and-effect
relationships among biological innovation, oxygen, and the onset of global-scale
glaciation. The study's full range of impacts will reach far beyond the
intrinsic scientific merit, including high-level research opportunities for the
diverse undergraduate populations at all three institutions. We will also reach
out into the community through sponsorship of science fair projects and through
many different contributions to the new Riverside STEM Academy, including
organization of a lecture series that will bring prominent scientists and
engineers into the school. The study also includes plans for collaborative
mentoring of graduate students, including student exchanges, and is an important
step in the early careers of two new professors.