* 1411715
* Collaborative Research: Glycoengineering Without Borders: Bacterial Cell-Free Glycoprotein Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Carbohydrates, or glycans, are involved in almost every biological process. In
vivo, proteins are decorated with glycans that play an important role in protein
function. However, the science behind understanding how these glycans are added
to proteins and the role of position and structure of these glycans has lagged
behind other fields of biological sciences. This lag in glycan science is
because glycan structural analysis is tedious, synthesis is challenging, and
tools are in short supply. Thus, the ability to understand and engineer
glycosylation (the addition of glycans to proteins) is severely restricted. To
address these challenges, this award focuses on the integration of experimental
and computational approaches to enable a first-of-its-kind cell-free
glycoprotein synthesis system that permits biosynthesis and conjugation of
glycans to target proteins of interest. By merging bottom-up engineering design
principles with innovative molecular biology methodologies in a cell-free
environment, the team of investigators will create a greatly simplified
framework for studying and engineering glycosylation. For example, by studying
and controlling protein glycosylation outside the restrictive confines of a cell
will help answer fundamental questions such as how glycan attachment affects
protein folding and stability. Answers to these questions could lead to general
rules for predicting the structural consequences of site-specific protein
glycosylation and, in turn, rules for designing modified proteins with
advantageous properties. Further, the cell-free platform could serve as a model
for deciphering the "glycan code." From an engineering perspective, the research
in this grant will enable scalable glycoconjugate biosynthesis, opening the door
to cheaper and more effective biomanufacturing. Beyond technological impact,
this award will also promote interdisciplinary education, including the specific
expansion of STEM education and career opportunities for underrepresented
minorities and women. Students will be trained to integrate principles from
computational biology, systems biology, and synthetic biology. The investigators
will develop experiential learning modules that bring glycan research to K-12
and undergraduate classrooms and connect students to the science being done at
the host institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the proposed
research is to develop a novel cell-free glycoprotein synthesis (CFGpS) system
capable of producing useful glycoproteins. The research team also seeks to build
computational models of the underlying complex biological processes that can be
used to guide their experimental program. To develop the CFGpS system, the
researchers will: (i) activate a eukaryotic glycosylation pathway that produces
human-like glycans, (ii) introduce authentic glycoprotein targets to CFGpS
system, and (iii) engineer an all-in-one host strain for producing CFGpS crude
extracts. In parallel, they will gain an integrated systems-level understanding
of gene products made by the host strain that positively and negatively
influence CFGpS. To accomplish this goal, the investigators will develop a
mathematical framework for in silico assessment of CFGpS. Then, information
gained from these efforts will be used to guide forward engineering of improved
all-in-one CFGpS strains. The work will establish for the first time efficient
cell-free glycosylation methods integrated with a cell free protein synthesis
system. Further, this work will advance the knowledge of glycosylation and will
reveal the extent to which synthetic systems can be engineered. Looking forward,
the investigators believe that the CFGpS platform will provide an entirely new
framework for understanding the fundamentals of universal glycosylation
pathways, dissecting their role in important biological processes, and defining
the rules governing structural consequences of site-specific glycosylation.