* 1411032
* In Situ Determination of Phase Equilibria and Thermal Expansions in the Ternary Hafnia-Tantala-Titania System
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Waltraud Kriven, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 11/30/2019
* USD 402,344.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The determination of phase diagrams, the underlying
thermodynamics for designing new materials is a long and arduous process, but it
is necessary to provide the basic scientific knowledge upon which new electronic
and structural ceramics are based. This research is focused on how to accelerate
and improve the gathering of such information, thereby introducing new
methodology which can be applied to technologically-relevant systems. The
approach taken in this research is to make in situ measurements at temperatures
up to 4,000 F in air, using high intensity, rapid X-ray synchrotron measurements
coupled with accurate data analysis. It is estimated that more scientific
information can be obtained in one-fifth of the time currently taken to
determine a phase diagram, with significantly more crystallographic information
than what is usually obtained. A doctoral student and several undergraduate
students are engaged in the research. As well, the PI participates in a variety
of activities to promote science and engineering to middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research aims to
demonstrate a new, efficient and highly accurate method to determine ternary
phase diagrams, using rapid, in situ, in air synchrotron instrumentation,
coupled with accurate, quantitative data analysis by the Rietveld method. This
work aims to revolutionize the slow, ex situ methods of collecting data and
reduce the process five-fold. In addition, thermal expansion coefficients and
crystal structures will be analyzed for any new phases discovered in the ternary
phase diagram. The hafnia-titania-tantala ternary was selected as the model
system. The ternary system is largely unexplored, but even the elements are
technologically interesting. For example, tantala is a promising candidate next
generation material for application in a wide range of microelectronics and
integrated micro-technologies. Its dielectric constant is six times that of
silica. Tantala compounds have applications as dielectric layers for storage
capacitors in dynamic random access memories (DRAMS) in computers, gate oxides
in field effect transistors, insulating layers in thin film electroluminescent
devices, sensor layers in biological and chemical sensors, anti-reflection
coatings for silicon solar cells, charge-coupled devices and corrosion resistant
materials. Hafnium is a good absorber of neutrons and is used in the control
rods of nuclear reactors and hafnium tantalate is of interest for structural
nuclear applications. Hafnia is also used as an ultra-high temperature
structural and thermally insulating material. This work is timely because
current research into the next generation of electronic devices is based on
doped, amorphous tantala, and the current knowledge of metastable and stable
phases in crystalline tantala is unknown, even though its crystalline dielectric
properties are significantly superior to its amorphous properties. An additional
strategic benefit is the training of a doctoral student in this cutting-edge
research technique. As well, undergraduate students are engaged in the research
by helping to make samples for the synchrotron experiments and assisting at the
around-the-clock beam line experiments. The PI participates in a variety of
activities to promote science and engineering to middle and high school students
(e.g., Project Lead the Way for grade school and high school teachers, and GAMES
(engineering experiences for girls).