* 1411467
* 2014 Hilton Head Workshop for Regenerative Medicine, March 26-29, 2014, in Hilton Head, NC.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Robert Guldberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 22,000.00

PI: Guldberg, Robert E. Proposal Number: 1411467

Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine is an interdisciplinary field
requiring the integration of bioengineering principles, fundamental biological
discoveries, and industry collaboration and partnership to achieve the ultimate
goal of restoring function to injured or degenerated tissues. Damaged
musculoskeletal tissues collectively represent the most common cause of pain and
functional disability worldwide. The three-day Hilton Head Workshop for
Regenerative Medicine is an annual workshop series that brings together
regenerative medicine experts from a variety of scientific disciplines in a
small conference setting to effectively convey knowledge and stimulate new ideas
and work to overcome current gaps in the knowledge base that are needed to
advance the development of regenerative medicine applications. Another important
aspect of convening such experts in one location is the opportunity it presents
to foster the development of new researchers and future leaders in the field.
The workshop provides important opportunities for graduate student and
postdoctoral trainees and young investigators to fully participate in the
conference scientific program and to interact socially and connect with world
renowned leaders and mentors in the field. The conference theme for the 2014
Hilton Head Workshop, to be held March 26-29, 2014 in Hilton Head Island, SC, is
"Discovery-Driven Transformative Research" and will focus on highlighting
research that has the potential to shift traditional research paradigms, pioneer
discovery, and lead to the development of new and innovative technologies. A
one-day pre-conference workshop is scheduled for Wednesday, Mach 26, 2014,
titled "Challenges and Opportunities in Central Nervous System Regeneration"
that will address current research advances in the field of neurobiology and
neural cell regeneration.

Intellectual Merit: The conference will advance knowledge within the broad,
cross disciplinary community of those engaged in tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine through the presentation of knew and transformative
research. The conference engagement and networking opportunities have the
potential to launch new collaborative research and education initiatives in the
U.S. and will potentially foster new international collaborations.

Broader Impacts: The multidisciplinary focus of the workshop and diversity of
attendees has the ability to impact many sectors of engineering and science and
to advance progress in academic-industry collaborations. While the workshop is
kept intentionally small in participant numbers, the attendees and speakers come
from all over the U.S. and abroad to offer new perspectives and forge new
collaborative relationships. This conference has the ability to impact several
levels of attendees, with particular focus on women, trainees and young
investigators through the activities and events planned. This conference will
inspire and help train the young future leaders of tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine.