* 1411008
* Strain physics in graphene - from  friction to pseudo magnetic fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 539,294.00

Nontechnical abstract: Graphene, a single atomic layer of carbon atoms, has a
wealth of very extreme properties, e.g. being impermeable to gases even at only
one atomic layer thickness, being extremely elastic, and having extremely high
heat and electrical conductivity. The research group at Boston University is
exploring how applying strain to graphene manipulates these properties for novel
and interesting applications from mechanical resonators, and electronic and
optical devices, to thermal management devices. In order to use strain
engineering for these purposes, it is necessary to know how much friction is
there to anchor the strained graphene. The researchers use miniature chambers
covered by graphene to measure friction and how to control it by patterning the
substrate. Graphene covered microchambers are strain tuned by applying a
variable external pressure that deflects the suspended graphene membrane
creating strain in both the suspended and supported regions. The strain response
is measured using optical spectroscopy. Certain exotic strain distributions are
predicted to affect the electrons in graphene in such a way that they get
trapped and no longer can conduct electricity. The BU team is working on
developing chamber shapes and friction patterning to achieve this state which
can be turned on and off by varying the external pressure. The team is also
studying how pressure can vary the heat conductivity in graphene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract Graphene is a good candidate for strain
engineered devices since it can withstand a 20% extension without breaking.
Hence huge strains can be induced and engineered for novel and interesting
applications. Strain engineering affects many types of devices, from mechanical
resonators to electronic and optical devices. Strain engineering also opens up
new areas of exotic physics and applications, perhaps most spectacularly from
creating magnetic pseudo fields with quantization of electrons and holes into
Landau levels at room temperature. Therefore it is important to have a solid
understanding of graphene-substrate interaction and friction under variable
strain. &lt;br/&gt;The research team at Boston University has developed a method
of applying variable strain by placing graphene to seal microchambers with
variable external pressure. The graphene membrane deforms over the chamber and
slides due to finite friction. With micro-Raman measurements the team is able to
map out the strain profile and determine the friction coefficient which is
pressure dependent. Knowledge of the friction dependence on substrate treatment
allows strain patterning. Variable friction is achieved by patterning the
surface treatment and hence local coefficient of friction. The varying friction
is tailored to create strain distributions that will create high local pseudo
magnetic field. The researchers are combining the strain-created high local
pseudo magnetic fields with plasmonic patterning to overlap the plasmonic
hotspots with the high pseudo field regions. The pseudo field response is then
read out via Raman spectroscopy using phonon and Landau Level exciton
interactions. Another application is graphene as high thermal conductivity
conduits. Suspended graphene has been shown to have extremely high heat
conductivity. Theory predicts that the out-of-plane phonons that carry the heat
are much less efficient than the in-plane acoustic modes. Strain is predicted to
remove the scattering of the in-plane modes into the out-of-plane modes as well
as reducing the density of states so strain could drastically increase the
already high thermal conductivity. The researchers are using their tunable
strain on suspended graphene to experimentally measure the effect of strain on
the thermal conductivity of graphene.