* 1411272
* Network Governing Sporulation during Myxococcus Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Lee Kroos, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 599,998.00

In nature, bacteria exist as members of communities in which cells respond to
signals from each other and the environment. Microbial communities impact global
processes like cycling of elements between soil, water, and air, and primary
productivity of the oceans; they impact ecosystems and all the organisms that
inhabit them. Limited understanding of how microbes control complex behaviors in
response to each other and their environment impedes our ability to harness them
for pollution and climate control, and for increased bioenergy and food
production. Understanding how bacteria integrate signals and respond
appropriately is a fundamental challenge of great practical significance.
Manipulation of microbial communities to improve life and solve global problems
will depend on knowledge of how bacteria interact with each other and their
environment. To advance knowledge of how thousands of Myxococcus xanthus
bacteria interact with each other and their environment, experimental and
mathematical modeling methods will be used to better understand the biochemical
switch which controls spore formation. Undergraduate and graduate students, and
a postdoctoral scholar will receive interdisciplinary research training as a
result of this project, and there will be outreach to non-scientists through
presentations to 5th grade females, participation in the MSU Science Festival,
and an informal Science Caf√©-style seminar series involving local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. Myxococcus
xanthus provides an attractive experimental system. When starved, cells change
their gene expression and metabolism, send signals to each other, alter their
movements to construct multicellular mounds (nascent fruiting bodies), and some
of the rod-shaped cells differentiate into spherical, dormant spores. Other
cells remain outside of fruiting bodies as peripheral rods and the majority of
cells undergo lysis. Previous work funded by the National Science Foundation
focused on understanding how genes are regulated in response to C-signaling
during fruiting body development. C-signaling involves CsgA, a protein that
becomes associated with the cell surface and mediates short-range signaling
between cells. C-signaling regulates not only gene expression, but cell
movements, lysis, and sporulation. Several C-signal-dependent promoters were
discovered to be under combinatorial control of two transcription factors, MrpC
and FruA. Recently, one such promoter was found to drive transcription of devT,
whose product positively regulates mrpC. Since MrpC activates transcription of
fruA, the three proteins form a network. Understanding how this network
integrates multiple signals and governs multiple behaviors during M. xanthus
development is a formidable challenge requiring systems analysis, including
modeling and synthetic biology approaches like rewiring the naturally occurring
network. The central hypothesis to be tested is that the MrpC-FruA-DevT (MFD)
network integrates the starvation and C-signals, functioning as a biochemical
switch (or part of the switch) that governs commitment to spore formation. To
address this hypothesis, the following aims are proposed: 1) measure dynamical
changes in the MFD network components and output before and during commitment of
wild type and mutants, and use the data to build a mathematical model of the MFD
network, 2) use the model to explore whether the network can operate as a switch
that becomes irreversible and test this by measuring MFD network dynamics after
addition of nutrients to developing cells, 3) use the model to explore if the
MFD network can achieve an ultrasensitive response and test this by measuring
MFD network response as a function of added C-signal or nutrients, and 4)
construct synthetically rewired MFD networks, measure their dynamical responses,
and analyze the results using mathematical models of rewired networks.