* 1411734
* Dynamics in Photosynthetic Oxygen Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Bridgette Barry, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 544,850.00

Solar power has the capacity to meet the world's increasing needs for energy. In
plants and algae, natural photosynthesis uses light energy to remove electrons
from water to form oxygen, and then directs the electrons to biochemical
reactions that power the cell. This NSF funded research project will give new
insight into the chemical steps necessary to carry out photosynthetic oxygen
production. In particular, information will be gained about how the photosystem
II protein complex binds and activates water, along with the roles played by
other participants in the process such as calcium, chloride. Many different
spectroscopic approaches will be employed to study this light-induced water
oxidation cycle. To help interpret the spectra, the proteins will be modified to
contain non-natural amino acids that will serve as unique probes of structure
and function. The intellectual merit of this project is a more complete
understanding of the photosynthetic water oxidation process, which will lay the
groundwork for new design strategies to address the pressing global need for
inexpensive and renewable sources of energy. The research activities will
advance the teaching, training, and learning of underrepresented groups who are
at different stages of training and from different types of academic settings.

The water splitting process is initiated by light-driven excitation of
chlorophyll. This event causes a charge separation across a membrane. This
electron transfer is mediated stepwise by a chain of electron acceptors and
leads to the conservation of solar energy. The water splitting reaction is
catalyzed in the photosynthetic reaction center, photosystem II, by a manganese-
calcium metal cluster and a redox-active tyrosine residue. Photosystem II
consists of multiple protein subunits. One, termed PsbO, is an intrinsically
disordered protein, which, along with chloride, plays an important role in
facilitating catalysis. The oxygen-evolving cycle involves a coordinated light-
driven process, in which negatively charged electrons and positively charged
protons are removed from water bound to the metal center. A critical feature of
natural photosynthesis is the use of sunlight to oxidize water. Artificial
systems, which use water as an electron source, would provide affordable and
sustainable fuel production. To understand photosynthetic water oxidation
chemistry, it is necessary to decipher the precise coordination of light-driven
proton and electron transfer reactions. Also, the functional role of the
intrinsically disordered subunit, PsbO, calcium, and chloride must be
elucidated. The work includes participation by underrepresented groups in
science and collaborations with non-PhD granting colleges, including an
historically black college for women.