* 1411086
* Broadband Nonlinear Absorbing Iridium(III) Complexes: Optimizing the Linear and Nonlinear Absorption via Rational Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Wenfang Sun, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 463,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research and by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program (CSDM B) in the Division of Chemistry
(CHE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Nonlinear optical
materials with strong and broadband nonlinear absorption (the absorptivity of
the materials changes with the incident light intensity) are needed for numerous
applications in information and image processing technology, such as optical
switching, optical rectification, up-conversion lasing, three-dimensional
optical data storage, and photodynamic therapy. This project focuses on studying
the structure-property correlations in heavy transition-metal complexes with the
aim to better understand how the chemical structural modifications influence
their linear and nonlinear optical properties. With this understanding,
synthesis of transition-metal complexes with broadband spectral (400-900 nm) and
temporal (from picoseconds to continuous-wave) coverage can be a reality. The
success of this project could provide a comprehensive picture of the
relationship between nonlinear absorption and molecular structure, which enables
a systematic design procedure for nonlinear absorbing materials. The structure-
property correlations explored in this project could also be readily applied to
other transition-metal complexes. This research is highly interdisciplinary. It
provides students and postdoctoral researchers opportunities to gain knowledge
and skills in organic synthesis, coordination chemistry, spectroscopic
characterization, nonlinear optical measurements, and theoretical simulations.
The interdisciplinary training motivates students' interest in research, and
strengthens the workforce for the 21st Century. In addition, as part of the
project effort, educational outreach activities involve the Native American
students and high school students and inspire them to pursue future careers in
materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Mononuclear and
dinuclear heteroleptic cationic iridium(III) complexes with substituted
2-(2-quinolinyl)quinoxaline (quqo) ligand and various cyclometalating ligands
are selected with the aim of understanding the structure-property correlations
and achieving broadband nonlinear absorption in the Ir(III) complexes. These
complexes are chosen because the strong spin-orbit coupling induced by the
Ir(III) ion could lead to high triplet excited-state quantum yield, not only
through rapid intersystem crossing but also through direct transition from the
singlet ground state (S0) to the lowest triplet excited state (T1). The spin-
forbidden S0-to-T1 absorption gives rise to broad and weak ground-state
absorption in the 500-800 nm regime when appropriate diimine ligands are used,
which is desirable for broadband reverse saturable absorbers. In addition, many
of the Ir(III) complexes possess broadband excited-state absorption in the
visible to the near-IR regions; and the structures of the Ir(III) complexes
could be readily modified. In this project, mononuclear and dinuclear Ir(III)
complexes with different pi-conjugations, substituents, and varied substitution
positions on the quqo and/or cyclometalating ligands are synthesized. Their
ground-state and excited-state properties, and nonlinear absorption, as well as
the effect of inter- and intramolecular interactions on the photophysics and
nonlinear absorption of these complexes in high concentration solutions and
solid state are investigated systematically via a combination of spectroscopic
characterizations and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The combined
experimental-theoretical approach allows the team to establish the correlations
between nonlinear absorption and molecular structure of Ir(III) complexes and
enables a rational design of materials with well-controlled broadband nonlinear
absorption.