* 1411262
* Seeing is believing: Submicroscopic visualization of semiflexible polymer networks and extraction of structural and mechanical parameters
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Ernst-Ludwig Florin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical: Biological fibers are multifunctional materials that form a
variety of structures with unique properties that have been an inspiration for
material scientists for some time. Fibers that make up the cell's cytoskeleton
and the extracellular matrix transmit signals between cells as well as determine
the fate of cells. This strong dependence of cell response on the mechanical
properties and structure of the environment opens new opportunities to control
cell growth and tissue formation by well-designed biocompatible and
biodegradable materials. The research that will be carried out will increase our
intuitive understanding of the submicroscopic changes that take place in these
materials in response to local or global forces. As a result, we expect our
research to facilitate the creation of novel materials for the three-dimensional
control of cell growth, for example for the creation of artificial tissue, and
for drug delivery. The three-dimensional super resolution images acquired in the
process of this project will be used for educating students as well as the
public about this important class of materials. Teachers as well as K-12
students will have direct access to the research through visits, summer research
and presentations at their schools. The project will enhance the infrastructure
for research and education through international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Cytoskeletal and extracellular
filaments belong to the large class of semiflexible polymers whose elastic
response arises from entropic and enthalpic elastic contributions. On a
macroscopic scale, networks of semiflexible biopolymers show a unique, nonlinear
elastic response (strain- stiffening). The microscopic origin of this nonlinear
response remains in many cases unclear because of a lack of submicroscopic data
that can be linked to the macroscopic scale such as local network architecture,
cross-linker elasticity or the distribution of tension in the network. The goal
of this project is to visualize the submicroscopic network architecture, its
response to global and local forces and the resulting force distribution in the
network. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in an
interdisciplinary environment on a state-of-the-art three-dimensional scanning
probe microscope developed by the PI's group.