* 1411445
* Collaborative Research: Perception and Use of Infrared Radiation by Insects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Nanfang Yu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The project will investigate the ability of insects to detect and respond to
infrared light, which is a type of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths
longer than that of visible light. It is known from insects as diverse as
honeybees, beetles and butterflies that animals have evolved diverse strategies
to perceive and utilize electromagnetic waves. Organs evolved for perceiving or
controlling electromagnetic waves often surpass similar man-made devices in both
sophistication and efficiency. To date, most of the focus in this area of
research has been on the abilities of insects to perceive shorter wavelengths of
light; much less is known about how animals respond to longer wavelengths, in
part because the tools to investigate this end of the spectrum have only
recently become commonly available. In this research, physicists and biologists
will collaborate in studying a few model systems, including the antennae of
moths and specialized wing scales of butterflies, to understand how insects can
perceive and utilize infrared light. Understanding and harnessing natural design
concepts through "biomimicry" will deepen our knowledge of complex biological
systems and inspire ideas for creating new technologies. The research will
provide training opportunities in nanotechnology for graduate students in
biology and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to
understand the physical mechanisms underlying the ability of insects to perceive
and respond to infrared light, and to obtain engineering insights that can be
used to create novel infrared materials, devices and systems. Infrared signals
may play a critical and underappreciated role in a wide variety of insect
behaviors. This project will provide a quantitative understanding of insects'
abilities to sense and respond to broadband thermal radiation and narrowband
fingerprint infrared radiation by analyzing two systems: (1) Scent pads and
patches on the wings of butterfly species in the hyperdiverse tribe Eumaeini
(Lepidoptera: Lycaenidae) that show extremely broadband, close-to-unity
absorptivity/emissivity, and (2) Specialized sensilla on the antennae of
different moth species that are able to capture infrared light with high
wavelength-specificity and efficiency. The model insects will be studied using a
multidisciplinary research platform. The infrared-sensing organs will be
identified using single-sensillum electrophysiological recordings and behavioral
bioassays with spectrally and temporally controlled infrared stimulation. The
morphology of the infrared-sensing organs will be studied using scanning
electron microscopy and X-ray micro-tomography. The optical properties of the
sensilla will be studied using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, infrared
microscopy, and finite-difference time-domain electromagnetic wave simulations.
High-fidelity replicas of the infrared-sensing microstructures or their scaled
models will be fabricated using nano- and micro-fabrication to systematically
analyze how material properties, structures and arrangement of the sensilla
affect the sensitivity and wavelength-specificity of infrared detection.
Detailed studies of the mechanisms by which insects perceive and respond to
infrared signals have not been carried out before, and a greater understanding
of this phenomenon is likely to catalyze a new area of research for the
scientific community. The project will expand our understanding of how natural
selection can shape exquisitely adapted behaviors and structures.