* 1411868
* Collaborative Research: The Gemini Planet Imager Exoplanet Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,02/29/2020
* Jennifer Patience, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 02/29/2020
* USD 331,003.00

This award supports the Gemini Planet Imaging (GPI) exoplanet survey, which is
an extensive observational project using a new instrument to obtain images and
spectra of extrasolar planets. The data will be used to directly image Jovian
planets (Jupiter-mass gas giants) around other stars, and measure the chemical
composition of the planets? atmospheres. The results will be used to test models
of planet formation and evolution. The funding will train and mentor two
graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar in research. The team will also
carry out public outreach with the SETI Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GPI
instrument is a new coronagraphic integral field unit commissioned at the Gemini
Observatory. It is capable of detecting and spectroscopically characterizing
young Jovian planets reaching 10 million times fainter than their parent star at
separations as close as 0.2 arcseconds. Direct imaging of planets will yield
information on planets typically not, or rarely accessible, by other methods
(such as radial velocity measurements, transit observations, and gravitational
microlensing). The investigators will target over 600 young stars of spectral
type A-M, and use the data to test formation paths of giant planets, dynamical
evolution constraints and explore the bridge between giant planets and brown
dwarfs