* 1411993
* Microanalytical Techniques to Study Single Cell Biochemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Susan Lunte, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 650,000.00

With support of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation,
Professor Susan Lunte, in collaboration with Professors Christian Schöneich
(University of Kansas), Christopher Culbertson (Kansas State University) and
Christian Amatore (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS), will
develop new analytical methodologies that can be used to investigate chemical
reactions in single biological cells. A central focus of the research will be
the development of microfluidic devices for manipulating single cells and
conducting measurements of cell chemical reactions using electrical and optical
techniques. Microfluidic devices are ultrasmall plumbing networks of channels
and valves which can precisely manage small volumes of liquids (one-millionth to
a few billionths of a liter). Microfluidics thus enable the study of small
systems such as living cells, and also the rapid collection of data. This
project is a multidisciplinary/international collaboration between four research
groups, each providing unique expertise and facilities. Graduate students will
be part of an interdisciplinary team and will acquire training in the fields of
chemistry, microfluidics, cell biology, and neurobiology. As part of this
project, microfluidics will be integrated into the problem-based learning
portion of the instrumental analysis course at the University of Kansas.

The proposed methods are based on microchip electrophoresis with electrochemical
detection. Microchip electrophoresis permits the separation of multiple species,
and electrochemical detection is particularly well-suited for interrogating the
redox status of cells. The focus of the proposed studies is on methods for the
detection and identification of reactive nitrogen and oxygen species and
endogenous antioxidants such as glutathione. A high throughput single cell
analysis system with combined electrochemical and fluorescence detection that is
capable of monitoring cell redox status as a function of cell phenotype and
activation state will also be developed. These new tools will be used to
investigate the processes involved in inflammation and neurodegeneration at both
the chemical and biological levels.