* 1411678
* Measuring Metallicities of M Dwarf Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Marshall, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,019.00

Stars known as "M dwarfs" are the most numerous stars in the Galaxy, yet they
are perhaps the least well understood. They constitute over 70% of the nearby
stars and are likely candidates for extrasolar planets. They can also serve as
probes of the history of the Milky Way galaxy. The study of M dwarfs is
difficult: even the nearby ones appear very faint, and their spectra are a
complex myriad of atomic and molecular absorption lines all blended together.
The PI and her students will carry out an observational study to develop and
calibrate a much more efficient way to measure the elemental composition of a
large number of M dwarf stars. The project will constitute a PhD thesis, and
undergraduate students will assist with the observations and the data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their primary goal is to measure the metallicity of any
single M dwarf using only low resolution optical spectroscopic measurements. The
technique uses common proper motion pairs of binary stars in which the brighter
(primary) star in the pair is an F, G, or K dwarf, while the fainter (secondary)
member is an M dwarf. The metallicity of the primary stars are measured directly
using standard high-resolution spectroscopic techniques, while low resolution
spectroscopy of the secondaries yield a set of spectroscopic line indices based
on broad molecular absorption features in their spectra. The basic assumption is
that the binaries were formed from the same natal material and thus have the
same metallicity. The information derived from spectroscopic measurements of the
primary and secondary star are combined to form an empirical relation of the M
dwarf metallicities. The resulting empirical relation will allow the metallicity
of any M dwarf to be estimated using only low resolution optical spectroscopic
observations of the M dwarf.