* 1411144
* Contact, Adhesion and Friction: From Atomic Interactions to Macroscopic Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Mark Robbins, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

Nontechnical Summary Friction and adhesion affect almost all aspects of
technology and everyday life. Despite their importance, our fundamental
understanding of their origins and our ability to predict them in practical
applications has remained limited. In large part, this is because of the wide
range of length scales that are important. Adhesion and friction forces between
surfaces result from interactions in regions where atoms are separated by less
than a nanometer, but the geometry of these contact regions and the forces
within them are determined by subsurface deformations on micrometer and longer
scales. Over the last decade, advances in computational algorithms and hardware
have begun to allow us to capture all of these length scales for the first time.
The results have revealed qualitative shortcomings of traditional engineering
models and resulted in simple equations that predict the area and stiffness of
the contacts between rough surfaces. The proposed research will extend these
studies to calculate friction and adhesive forces. The goal is to provide new
understanding of fundamental processes that will allow predictive models for the
relation between surface roughness and macroscopic friction and adhesion to be
developed. New computational tools will be developed and shared as open source
software.

Technical Summary Contact, adhesion and friction are complex problems that
involve a wide range of length scales. Atomic-scale interfacial interactions
determine adhesive and frictional forces, but the area where these forces
operate is determined by surface roughness and substrate deformation on
nanometer to micrometer or longer scales. Traditional models of contact,
adhesion and friction are based on macroscopic continuum equations with
phenomenological constitutive relations for the interfacial interactions and
macroscopic deformations. By their very nature, continuum equations do not
include effects associated with discrete atoms, but most of the adhesive energy
comes from changes in separation by a few angstroms and lateral frictional
forces on a crystal are periodic with displacements by a lattice constant. The
proposed research will address fundamental questions associated with the gaps
between atomistic and continuum descriptions. These include the relation between
atomic structure and detachment forces, the origins of friction and its
connection to roughness, plasticity and disorder, and the extent of correlations
in the dynamics at the interface. The goal is to provide new understanding of
the physical processes at different scales and develop macroscopic models that
incorporate atomic level processes. Efficient multiscale methods that retain
atomistic detail at the interface and capture the long-range response of the
substrate will be extended, ported to open source simulation packages, and used
to simulate contact and friction. The simulations will examine contact of planes
and spheres with self-affine or experimentally measured surface roughness. The
response of crystals, polymer glasses and elastomers will be studied in elastic
and plastic limits with different atomic-scale roughness and adhesive
interactions. Studies of contact and adhesion will determine how the contact
area and detachment force are related to interfacial interactions, material
properties and surface roughness. Studies of friction will address how
interactions within these contacts lead to static and kinetic friction, how
roughness and plasticity contribute to friction, and examine precursors to
steady sliding where only part of the surface slips forward.