* 1411204
* Collaborative Research: New Methods for Inference in the Presence of Instabilities, Weak Identification and Mis-specification
* SBE,SES
* 07/31/2013,08/31/2014
* Atsushi Inoue, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 41,422.00

Economic models are limited by many factors, both theoretical and practical.
Three fundamental hurdles of economic models are the presence of parameter
instabilities, weak identification and mis-specification. "Parameter
instabilities" in a model are when the models' parameters vary over time. For
example, the volatility of output growth has increased in the late 1980s; it is
unclear whether this increase may be explained by changes in monetary policy, or
by changes in the private sector behavior, or simply by unknown causes. If an
economic model is compatible with observed data for two different parameter
values it is known as "weakly identified;" this implies that, with the available
data, the true model of the economy may not be estimated precisely enough. "Mis-
specification" means that the economic model used to estimate the impact of
economic policies may be a fundamentally incorrect representation of reality.
The presence of instabilities, weak identification, or mis-specification may
invalidate the results from an estimated model, leading to incorrect conclusions
by researchers and to incorrect policy decisions by policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent literature suggests that instabilities,
weak identification and mis-specification are widespread phenomena. Clearly, a
successful understanding of the economy and the implementation of economic
policy in practice depend on understanding the causes of changes in these
parameters. They also crucially depend on using reliable models where any weak
identification or mis-specification issues have been resolved. As a result, much
effort has been devoted to designing new and improved tests to address these
issues, and researchers have paid more attention to such tools in their
empirical works. However, notwithstanding the recent developments, we still lack
methods to identify the exact sources of instabilities, as well as tests that
are robust to weak identification and mis-specification, with the result that
researchers are currently left with little guidance on how to deal with these
issues in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose new and useful
econometric methods in these realistic and empirically relevant situations. In
the first research project, "Identifying the Sources of Instabilities in
Macroeconomic Fluctuations", the PIs propose new methods for searching for and
detecting the sources of instabilities in the data. The PIs overturn
conventional findings by showing that previous results in the literature depend
on imposing stability constraints on ad-hoc sets of parameters. In the second
research project, "Testing for Weak Identification in Macroeconomic Models", the
PIs propose a new test for identification whose novelty is the robustness to the
presence of weak identification. In the third research project, "Selection
Criteria for IRFME and Other Estimators of DSGE Models", the PIs propose new
methodologies that &lt;br/&gt;guarantee consistent and efficient estimation of
models' parameters even in the presence of mis-specification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: These methodologies will provide practical
guidance to applied researchers, economists and central bankers on how to deal
with such issues in practice. This proposal describes important economic
applications where these methods will be useful. The methods will be shared with
practitioners within the scientific community and students alike, and will
contribute to understanding the role of instabilities in the economy.