* 1411031
* Research Initiation Award: Arsenic speciation in sulfidic environments
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2021
* Jianye Zhang, Voorhees College
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 218,872.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
project at Voorhees College has potential broader impacts in a number of areas.
The goal of the project is develop an analytical methodology for the speciation
analysis of various arsenic species in the natural environment, particularly
those with high sulfide levels. The project will also enhance the research
experience and training of undergraduate students at Voorhees College and
promises to provide collaboration between the College and the local community
through public education and environmental monitoring services for municipal
facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commonly encountered arsenic species in
natural aquatic environments include arsenite, arsenate , monomethylarsonic
acid, and dimethylarsinic acid. Another type of arsenic species,thioarsenates,
has been found recently in environments with high sulfide levels. This project
seeks the simultaneous detection of thioarsenate species and common inorganic
and organic arsenic species, which has not been previously reported. The project
will consist of three stages. First liquid chromatographic techniques will be
explored to determine their suitability for the separation and analysis of both
inorganic and organic arsenic analysis. A methodology based on chromatography
and mass spectrometry will be developed and validated. Then, laboratory
experiments will be conducted to analyze arsenic speciation in simulated
sulfidic waters, and finally field samples will be collected and analyzed to
investigate the fate of arsenic in real sulfidic environments. The occurrence
mechanisms and the results on the fate and transport of thioarsenate species
will provide helpful background for the development of strategies in controlling
and remediating arsenic mobilization in a sulfidic environment.