* 1411107
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Graphene THz/IR Optics: Fundamentals and Emerging Photonics Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Tony Heinz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 292,723.00

Non-technical Description: Graphene is an ultrathin material made of pure carbon
atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure of single atom thickness. It has
unusually high electrical conductivity and has been investigated as the basis of
new electronic devices. The high speed and fast response of the electrons in
graphene also render this material an attractive candidate for controlling
electromagnetic radiation in the terahertz and infrared, for which the electric
field oscillates on a time scale shorter than a millionth of a millionth of a
second. In this project, researchers at two academic institutions and the IBM
Research Division aim to gain fundamental understanding into how electrons in
graphene respond to electric fields on a very short time scale and to apply this
understanding to develop new devices for controlling electromagnetic radiation
in the terahertz and infrared. This spectral region, while very useful for
purposes such as environmental monitoring, does not currently benefit from
technologies comparable to those available for electromagnetic radiation at
either higher or lower frequency. The project provides graduate and
undergraduate students with training in an integrated academic-industrial
research setting, allowing the students to benefit from the special expertise
available in both types of institution.

Technical Description: This GOALI project investigates light-matter interactions
of graphene and nanostructured graphene in the terahertz and infrared region of
the electromagnetic spectrum. The goal of this research is to obtain a thorough
understanding of the electronic response of graphene in the region of strong
free-carrier processes and Pauli blocking of the interband transitions. These
investigations on the fundamentals of the graphene electromagnetic response are
complemented by studies of the use of graphene for basic building blocks of
different photonic devices, including light modulators. The approaches include
advanced spectroscopy techniques for characterization of both the static and
dynamic response of graphene in the terahertz-infrared spectral region and the
development of high-quality gated graphene samples and structures. In this
integrated academic-industrial team, Professor Heinz leads the Fourier-transform
infrared spectroscopy measurements of graphene materials and structures and also
has responsibility for studies of photonics applications; Professor Shan leads
the terahertz time-domain spectroscopy measurements and has responsibility for
studies of the fundamental optical response of graphene; the industrial
participants at IBM Research provide materials and fabrication capabilities and
expertise.