* 1411320
* Ultrathin Deformable Materials and Protective Coatings Bio-inspired by Scaled Skin
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Franck Vernerey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical:

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Colorado, Boulder, is co-funded by the Mechanics of Materials
program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation
(ENG). Natural and human-made materials are often designed to perform the same
functions, for example for structural support, robustness, protection, or being
lightweight. Nature is therefore a significant source of inspiration for new and
alternative designs for engineered materials, even for cutting-edge technologies
such as flexible/stretchable electronics. Scaled skins in nature have remarkable
mechanical properties including being compliant, resistant to penetration, and
lightweight, all of which is achieved within an ultrathin membrane structure.
This project will study the mechanics in scales and scaled skins in order to
design and microfabricate a new bio-inspired material that can serve as a
deformable, damage resistant, and robust protective coating. The resulting
artificial scaled skins will be ultrathin, lightweight, transparent, and robust
to mechanical deformations (puncture, bending, stretching, and compression)
making them attractive for a wide range of applications. As part of these
efforts, remote interactive sessions with the scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
facilities at the University of Colorado will be developed and will be
implemented in the high schools of rural communities in western Colorado.

Technical:

The mechanical behavior of scaled skin makes it attractive for application as a
protective coating on flexible and stretchable engineered materials, in which an
'engineered scaled skin' will be able to conformally cover the substrate
throughout the applied deformations and provide resistance to puncture or
excessive bending, twisting, or stretching. Modern designs and implementations
of human-made scaled skins, although sharing some mechanisms and duplicating
some performance features of natural materials, have not achieved a systematic
biomimetic transfer-of-technology because of a limited understanding of the
fundamental mechanics in such systems. The objective of this project is to
design, fabricate, and characterize an engineered scaled skin material using an
integrated set of experiments and novel multiscale computational methods. This
project will lead to (i) design principles for artificial scaled skins with
mechanics comparable to those observed in nature, (ii) microfabrication
techniques to produce artificial scales and scaled skins from microscale
structures, and (iii) direct measurements and computational modeling of the
behavior of the artificial scaled skins in response to mechanical deformation.
Artificial scaled skins will be uniquely positioned as an engineered material
for coating and protecting flexible/stretchable electronic devices by providing
enhanced mechanical properties, robustness and durability, and transparency,
thus enabling application on specialized flexible electronics such as surface
mounted tactile probes and implantable bio-sensors. These efforts provide a
platform to attract and train engineers in the computational design of
materials, microfabrication, and experimental/computational mechanics.