* 1411672
* Probing the Metabolic Network in Salmonella and its Response to Perturbations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Eberhard Voit, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,996.00

A fundamental question in biology is how metabolic pathways are integrated to
result in the robust and efficient physiology characteristic of living cells.
Current efforts to understand physiology as a complex system are comprised of
modeling and reconstructing metabolic networks, and predicting their robustness
from genomic sequences. Fundamental knowledge of biochemistry and metabolism,
gained over several decades, provides the basis on which these global approaches
are built. The proposed research focuses on integrating quantitative analysis
into the study of a metabolism. Toward this end, investigators with diverse
expertise will work together to quantify the metabolites of the system to assess
the effect of specific perturbations; generate mathematical models from the
metabolomic data; and iteratively test these models using genetic and
biochemical approaches. This collaborative effort is anticipated to generate
novel insights into the complexity and dynamics of integrated metabolic
networks.

The proposed work is a collaboration between a microbial physiologist, a systems
biologist with expertise in modeling and predicting metabolic networks, and a
synthetic chemist with expertise in metabolomics. The team will utilize state-
of-the-art techniques to define the integrated metabolic network of purine,
histidine, and thiamine biosynthesis of Salmonella. A key focus is on a strain
that lacks the purH gene, which results in the accumulation of the
aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide intermediate metabolite. This mutation
reveals the unpredicted metabolic connections between the purine, histidine and
thiamine metabolic networks. The accumulation of this metabolite in other
organisms, including mammalian systems, is the basis for a number of severe
hereditary disorders. The project will train students and postdoctoral fellows
at the intersection of biology, mathematics, chemistry and computation, and
hence, will lead to a highly skilled next-generation workforce. The
investigators have a track record of training minority students.