* 1411240
* Design and Processing of Conjugated Polymers with High Charge Carrier Mobilities
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Guillermo Bazan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Recent studies have revealed that certain plastics can display electrical
conductivity much higher than originally anticipated. Indeed, when introduced
into transistor devices the conductivity of these plastic materials can be
higher than certain forms of the commonly used silicon. Such a discovery opens
new options for thinking about how plastic electronics can be utilized in a wide
range of applications, including flexible solar cells, bright impact-resistant
cellphone displays, and more energy-efficient white light sources. However, to
reach high levels of electrical conductivity the polymer molecules that comprise
the plastic material need to be very well organized across two important length
scales. First, the molecular units that form the polymer chain have to be linked
in a way that eliminates variations of structure. Second, the polymer chains
themselves need to come together so that they pack into nanoscale fibers, which
then coalesce to make up a conductive film. The latter can be achieved by a
simple procedure that allows solutions of the polymer to dry on a substrate
under controlled conditions. While these advances have been significant, the
maximum possible conductivity of organized polymers remains unknown. The goals
of this NSF-funded program are therefore to examine the properties of new
polymer structures designed to increase electrical conductivity along the chain
and to promote efficient interchain packing of molecules. Special attention will
be paid to examine how these long molecules relate to each other as the
solutions dry up, since this poorly understood process determines interchain
relationships. Successful completion of the program will provide the scientific
and engineering communities with new guidelines on how to design and process a
new generation of highly conductive plastics for application in a range of
emerging technologies.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This program is centered on understanding unprecedented high
charge-carrier mobilities in organic semiconductors based on conjugated polymers
introduced into transistor devices. These materials comprise novel regioregular
backbones with electron rich and electron poor heterocycles arranged along the
backbone vector in a strict alternating sequence. Highly ordered registry
between polymer chains in films is also a requirement, and this organization can
be achieved via control of evaporation processes. While these findings have the
potential of transforming our perspective of how to take advantage of plastic
electronics, there are large gaps on how such high mobilities can be attained
and the physical limits of this transport. One important question to address is
how molecular weight determines carrier mobility, particularly because the
carrier velocity appears to be dominated by motion along the polymer chain.
Preparation and fractionation of specific average molecular weight systems will
be carried out and subjected to characterization. Well-defined model compounds
of intermediate dimensions will also be designed, synthesized and measured to
understand the possible role of structural defects and to gain insight into the
geometry of the interchain contacts. These materials will be incorporated into
field-effect transistor devices to extract quantitative measures of charge
mobility. Another important aspect of the work involves efforts to detail the
self-assembly and evolution of the supramolecular structures with highly co-
linear polymer chain crystals. Polymer chains with chiral side groups will also
be prepared. Concentrated conditions or low temperatures lead these to form
aggregates that exhibit strong circular-dichroism signals revealing the presence
of chiral secondary (e.g., helical) structures. This simple spectroscopic tool
will be used to understand the aspects of the molecular structure and the
influence of substrate and solvent on the transition from isolated polymer
chains to the highly ordered solid state.