* 1411046
* Cold Zone Annealing for Directed Assembly of Multicomponent Block Copolymer Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Brian Berry, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 494,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold zone annealing is a novel technique
that utilizes a dynamic thermal gradient to orient block copolymer thin films.
The thermal gradient in this technique can be shallow (CZA), sharp (CZA-S), or
coupled with a shear force (CZA-SS). This proposal examines multicomponent block
copolymer films as an important class of functional nanostructured films to
understand and address key scientific issues in CZA induced ordering of complex
BCP systems from a fundamental perspective: 1) What synergistic or disruptive
effect does the presence of multicomponents have on the order of BCP thin film
systems undergoing directed assembly? 2) How does nanoparticle location in the
domains affect ordering? 3) How should the nanoparticle be treated conceptually?
Our approach entails exploiting the non-monotonic molecular coupling between CZA
and CZA-S dynamic parameters for parallel and vertical orientation of
multicomponent BCP systems, notably where additives and nanoparticles can have
very different coupling dynamics with CZA than the BCP. CZA-SS will be used to
break the symmetry of multicomponent BCP ordering, with the possibility of
different dynamic coupling to different components. By zone annealing the
multicomponent BCP films at continuous different sweep rates, radially and
tangentially with CZA-R in angular co-ordinates, and serial and parallel solvo-
thermal methods (CZA-SVA), we will leverage high-throughput character and fast
processing to order and align multicomponent BCP films at the molecular level in
different and versatile ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation advanced manufacturing requires
innovations in continuous production techniques that are applicable to dynamic
processing methods such as roll-to-roll (R2R) manufacturing rather than batch
processing. This research will address this issue through the development of
such a dynamic R2R compatible method, known as zone-refinement, for thermally
processing multifunctional polymeric films and coatings to exhibit anisotropic
properties. Once heated the microstructure of polymers can be altered to
increase properties such as strength, rigidity, porosity, crystallinity,
refractive index, or dielectric strength. This project will seek to understand
the complexities associated with producing highly ordered multicomponent and
hybrid/nanocomposite polymeric films using the zone refinement method, with an
eye towards demonstrating continuous and scalable R2R manufacturing with a high
degree of versatility in handling diverse polymeric materials used by industry.
This project will also provide training to graduate students in an
interdisciplinary area of block copolymer processing and functional hybrid
materials, with detailed knowledge development of nanoparticles. The co-PI will
mentor STEM and local high-school students in his laboratory. High-school
students will also be recruited by each of the PI and co-PI to work on this
project.