* 1411898
* Building a Community to Pursue Quantitative Cell Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Wallace Marshall, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,300,000.00

The cell is the basic building block of all life, and the development of methods
to understand (and more important, predict) how cells "compute" decisions about
their behavior would mark a major advance in our ability to understand, build
and control living organisms. While most of the molecular components of the cell
have been identified, the emergence of cell structure and behavior from
molecular interactions remains a fundamentally mysterious process. Computer
simulations, mathematical models, and quantitative measurement approaches
inspired by physics are being brought to bear on the cell biological question of
how cells are put together and function. But in contrast to many established
fields within biology, such as biochemistry or genetics, quantitative cell
biology as a field of its own is still relatively new and not strongly
established. The goal of this project is to bring together disparate researchers
working on quantitative approaches to the cell, to help them join into a
community with its own identity and share the methods and ideas that individual
researchers have developed in their own groups. This will be achieved through a
variety of mechanisms that include the web-based community exchange of ideas and
social coding to develop novel computational tools. Multiple focused workshops
will be held as well as larger community meetings, and the support of
undergraduate and graduate student interdisciplinary training will be supported
through laboratory exchange visits and facilitation of their participation in
workshops and conferences. The community will be inclusive of all researchers
interested in furthering the goals of quantitative cell biology, and efforts
will be directed towards reaching out to, inviting and supporting the
participation of women and groups under-represented in the field. By bringing
together researchers sharing a common interest in quantitative cell biology,
using web-based activities, a series of focused workshops and laboratory
exchange opportunities, this project will accelerate the pace at which this new
field develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental unsolved problem in biology
is to understand the cell as an emergent living structure resulting from
thousands or millions of components working collectively; in order to achieve
this, quantitative and computational approaches are required that do not
currently exist. Only by re-thinking cell biology as a fully quantitative
science on a par with condensed matter physics will it be possible to go beyond
"one protein at a time" studies and understand how the cell as a whole is able
to function. To advance this goal a series of highly interactive and focused
workshops will be organized on topics that include the framework for
standardization of data and algorithms for the analysis of microscope images;
the challenge of scale in modeling cellular processes; the development of
numerical methods and the application of information theory in cell biology; and
the training of a new generation of quantitative cell biologists. Inter-
disciplinary scientific laboratory exchange visits for undergraduate and
graduate students will be supported, as well as the attendance of students
(including especially women and groups under-represented in the field) at
workshops and meetings in quantitative cell biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is supported jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Program in
Mathematical Biology in the Division of Mathematical Sciences.