* 1411393
* Resonance Phenomena in Wave Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Stephen Shipman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

Shipman&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1411393&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Optical and electronic
devices, as varied and complex as they come, are based on a common underlying
physical principle called resonance. This principle lies behind lasers, filters,
antennas, and light-emitting diodes, as well as devices whose components operate
at the nanoscale. The investigator studies efficient and robust ways to exploit
the phenomena of resonance in device design and how to control variations in
device performance resulting from inevitable manufacturing imperfections. The
theory of resonance has deep mathematical roots, which are developed to gain a
better working understanding of new physical phenomena for the design of modern-
day devices. The project trains graduate and undergraduate students to develop
skills at the interfaces of mathematics, physics, and engineering, paying
special attention to bridging communication gaps between the disciplines.
Undergraduate students are involved in creating an online computational tool for
virtual experimentation and design of optical structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Four problems of resonance are studied. (1) An electromagnetic resonance of a
doubly periodic waveguide is associated with a complex eigenvalue of the Maxwell
equations, which encodes the frequency and spectral width of the resonance. The
investigator considers new waveguide structures that allow both characteristics
of a resonance to be tuned by varying the angle of incidence of a source wave.
This ability to tune is precluded in existing constructions of resonant
waveguide modes due to the symmetry that they utilize. This symmetry is broken
by exploiting non-reciprocal materials, special geometries, and bifurcations of
symmetric guided modes into antisymmetric modes, to construct asymmetric tunable
waveguide resonances. (2) Embedded eigenvalues in locally perturbed periodic
quantum graphs are responsible for resonance phenomena in two-dimensional
molecular structures such as bi-layer graphene. Building on a recent result of
his on embedded eigenvalues, the investigator employs asymmetry to control
resonant scattering characteristics in quantum graphs. (3) Even in materials
with small coefficients of nonlinearity, field amplification due to resonance
causes strongly nonlinear effects, such as bistability and hysteresis. The
investigator quantifies these effects in a tractable model in which a photon
transmission line is coupled to a local exciton field, producing a nonlinear
field of photon-exciton quasiparticles known as polaritons. (4) Random
fluctuations of a waveguide's material properties and geometry introduce
variability into features of resonance, such as their central frequency and
spectral width. The investigator calculates this variability using perturbation
analysis of the scattering matrix where the perturbative parameters are random
variables.