* 1412927
* Application of Large Deviations to Genetic Evolution of Bacterial Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ilya Timofeyev, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 297,729.00

Populations of bacteria or viruses exhibit strong adaptivity through emergence
and fixation of beneficial mutations. For instance, such mutations can be
related to bacterial resistance to antibiotics or emergence of viral strains
transferable from animal to humans. Currently, there exist various mathematical
models which describe the evolution of bacterial or viral populations, but
mathematical tools which can be used to study evolutionary trajectories of large
bacterial or viral populations are still lacking. Therefore, the main goal of
this work is to develop proper mathematical tools for studying rare mutational
events in bacteria or viruses. In particular, the investigators will use the
large deviation approach for population trajectories to develop theoretical
foundation and practical computational tools to study the evolutionary
trajectories of bacterial populations with concrete applications to the analysis
of long term laboratory experiments on Escherichia
Coli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large deviations technique will be developed in a
novel context of discrete models for population histograms. In contrast with the
classical Wentzell-Freidlin approach for "small" diffusions, there is no general
derivation of cost functions for discrete Markov chains with continuous state
space, so that concrete analytical and numerical results for discrete models are
rather scarce. However, large deviations offer significant computational
advantages in the context of evolutionary dynamics described here due to the
special structure of this problem. In particular, the cost function for
evolutionary trajectories will be derived in an explicit form. This will lead to
the development of a novel discretized difference equation for cost minimizing
trajectories, thus enabling an efficient numerical "geodesic shooting" in
reverse time to compute the most likely population evolution between given
initial and terminal states. This novel algorithm will be used to estimate (very
small) probabilities of rare genetic events such as the transitions between two
successive genotype fixations and to compute the most likely sequence of
genotype fixations leading from an ancestor genotype to a currently dominant
genotype. Moreover, the numerical codes developed in the course of the proposed
research will be used to study various epistasis scenarios. Thus, this work will
generate innovative computational and conceptual tools leading to a better
understanding of genetic evolution of bacterial or viral populations.