* 1412238
* Analysis and Control of Mathematical Models of Fluttering Plates
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,11/30/2014
* Justin Webster, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 11/30/2014
* USD 72,607.00

One of the fundamental problems in the field of aeroelasticity is the prediction
and control of the instability known as aeroelastic flutter. Flutter occurs in a
flexible structure immersed in a gas flow when aerodynamic loading excites the
natural oscillatory modes of the structure; the result is a potentially
violent interaction between the displacements of the structure and perturbations
in the gas flow field. This phenomenon may occur in a multitude of applications
including: buildings and bridges in strong winds, flag-like structures, the
human respiratory system, and panel and flap structures on air and land
vehicles. In the context of aircraft, flutter is a key concern. If the magnitude
of the structural displacements due to flutter is sufficiently large, structural
failure can occur. Small oscillations sustained over long periods of time may
also bring about costly and/or hazardous fatigue in the structure. Very
recently, the idea of harnessing flutter (naturally occurring, or induced) has
been suggested to provide an alternative source of energy via
piezoelectric "harvesting". For these reasons there is great interest in
producing mathematical models that describe the flutter phenomenon in order to
gain insight into the mechanisms of flow-structure coupling and predict the
dynamics of the system based on its physical parameters. This project comprises
a control of partial differential equations (PDEs) analysis of the principal
model associated to panel and flap flutter. Results derived from PDE analyses
are valuable for a variety of reasons. They: (i) guide and streamline
experimental and numerical flutter threshold determination, (ii) can improve
cost-effectiveness of experimentation and cut-down on design time of
prototypes, (iii) indicate what types and locations of damping will be effective
for a given flow-plate configuration. 

The proposed investigations are based upon very recent progress in
aeroelasticity that has permitted extensions of a classical flow-plate model
used over the last 50 years. Obtaining results for flow-structure systems is
demanding, as problems arise in the mismatching regularity of dynamics at the
interface and ill defined or unbounded trace terms in the coupling. Recent
advances in hyperbolic trace regularity theory, abstract coupled models, PDEs
with delay, and geometrically constrained damping make modern PDE analysis of
flow-plate models tractable. This proposal centers on well-posedness and
stability in the presence of feedback controls for a class of nonlinear flow-
plate models which include partially free plate boundary conditions and dynamic
flow boundary conditions near plate edges. Fully nonlinear models accounting for
both in-plane and out-of-plane motion in the structure, as well as nonlinear
fluids, are considered. Moreover, recent stability analyses will be extended to
the intermediary "transonic" flow regime and the piston-theoretic, hypersonic
regime. Beyond well-posedness of these models, time convergence properties
(i.e., attractors) of the dynamics will be considered to determine the
sensitivity of non-transient behavior of the system to the plate's boundary
conditions and external loading. The current proposal can be viewed as an
analysis of models arising in aeroelasticity by providing a comparison between
qualitative properties of well-posed PDEs to experimentally observed and/or
numerically approximated behaviors.