* 1412748
* Analysis of nonlocal effects in nonlinear parabolic partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Maria Pia Gualdani, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 170,000.00

It is a fundamental scientific and mathematical problem to understand how
microscopic interactions influence physical phenomena at a macroscopic level.
This project investigates this question for a class of mathematical models of
systems that arise in several scientific disciplines. Applications range from
game theory, which includes decision strategies, investors' behavior, and
socioeconomic sciences, to astrophysics and plasma physics. A fundamental
component of this project concerns the contribution to mathematical education
and training of undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will study a class of partial differential
equations where microscopic effects are described by certain non-local
operators. This research contains two different projects. The first project
concerns the study of global well-posedness of non-local kinetic equations, with
particular attention to the Landau equation. The Landau equation is a well-known
equation that is used to model plasma with predominant grazing-type collisions.
At present the well-posedness of the Landau equation for degenerate potentials
is still an open problem and has given rise to several unresolved conjectures.
The second project is related to a class of free boundary problems. The
theoretical understanding of these and related projects presents analytical
challenges and requires mathematical techniques that come from analysis,
probability, and geometry. The skills developed through participation in this
research project will be taken by students into the workforce.