* 1412260
* Co-Evolving Genomes: The Impact of Mitochondrial Genome Instability on the Nucleus
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Daniel Sloan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 330,697.00

Essentially all eukaryotic cells, including those of humans, contain multiple
genomes, and key biological functions depend on the interaction between the gene
products that are encoded in each of these genomes. This project will address
fundamental questions about how changes in one genome within a cell can elicit
compensatory changes in another to maintain basic cellular functions. This work
will provide training in cutting edge molecular genetic and computational
techniques to students all the way from the undergraduate to the postdoctoral
level, and findings from this research will be integrated into undergraduate
education through the development of a new capstone course in molecular
evolution at Colorado State University.

This research project will compare species of flowering plants that exhibit
enormous natural variation in the rate of evolutionary change in their
mitochondrial genomes. The project will generate and analyze large datasets of
gene sequences from the nuclear genomes of these species. Analysis of sequence
variation within and between these species will be used to identify changes in
the nuclear genome in response to the different rates of evolution in the
mitochondrial genome. Findings from these comparative analyses will be
complemented by performing genetic manipulations in a well-established model
species to test the biochemical and physiological effects of changes in specific
genes.