* 1412095
* Contemporary methods in calculus of variations and differential equations with applications to materials science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Giovanni Leoni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 286,230.00

The central theme of this project is the application of modern applied
mathematics to materials and biological sciences and mechanics. Thematic areas
of focus are: 1) Phase separation and domain formation in biomembranes. Many
important biological processes such as virus budding and immune responses are
believed to be linked to membrane rafts. 2) Motion of defects in elastic
materials. Dislocations are the most common defects in crystalline materials,
and their mobility is responsible for the plastic behavior and the ductility of
most metals. 3) Evolution problems for epitaxial growth. Understanding the
epitaxial deposition process of a thin film onto a substrate is of central
importance in the manufacturing of semiconductor electronic and optoelectronic
devices, such as quantum well lasers. As part of this project the investigator
continues training of students through several activities that integrate
research and education, including: topics courses, summer schools, working
groups, course design workshops, and career-building
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives in the three main thematic
areas of focus are:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Phase Transitions of Membranes and Vesicles; A
common feature of models issuing from materials instabilities is that they often
exhibit several scales, and effective behavior is interpreted via asymptotic
analysis. The goal here is to study analytically a variational model introduced
by Andelman, Kawasaki, Kawakatsu, and Taniguchi to describe the shape
deformations of unilamellar membranes undergoing an in-plane phase
separation.&lt;br/&gt; 2) Motion of screw dislocations in crystalline materials.
The main objective of this work is to use the theory of differential inclusions
developed by Filippov to study a model of Cermelli and Gurtin for the kinetics
of a finite number of screw Volterra dislocations.&lt;br/&gt; 3) Evolution
problems for epitaxial growth. Here the investigator obtains rigorous analytical
results for the nonlinear morphologic evolution of the surfaces of anisotropic
epitaxially strained films and the formation of islands, driven by stress and
surface mass transport in three dimensions.