* 1412580
* Self-Assembly of Peptide-based Nanosheets for 2D Nanoarchitectonics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Vincent Conticello, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 429,072.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vincent Conticello of Emory
University is designing structurally defined, nanometer-sized two-dimensional
assemblies from peptides, a basic structural building block of proteins. A major
challenge to science at nanometer scale dimensions is the ability to prepare
structures with complete control over their sizes, shapes and chemical
compositions. Biology has shown that peptides, chemically linked sequences of
amino acids, can assemble into a range of well-defined structures, so Professor
Conticello is learning how to make synthetic versions of peptides and discover
the rules by which they can be assembled into sheet-like structures. The
development of these relatively environmentally benign fabrication methods will
promote the design and synthesis of nanoscale assemblies for use in a variety of
applications that utilize optical, electronic, magnetic, or biological
functions.

To meet this challenge, the Professor Conticello employs synthetic peptides of
defined sequence and molecular architecture. The molecular-level information is
utilized within a given structural context to direct highly specific intra- and
inter-molecular interactions that promote self-assembly of thermodynamically
stable and structurally defined two-dimensional assemblies. Synthetic peptide
structural motifs, including the collagen triple helix and the alpha-helix, are
being examined as building blocks for the creation of the nanosheet assemblies.
Structural characterization methods (X-ray fiber diffraction, solid-state NMR
spectroscopy, and cryo-electron microscopy) are employed to define conditions to
control the growth of the two-dimensional assemblies. Experimental conditions
are being defined that will promote the integration of the nanosheet assemblies
into more complex structures as a prelude to the creation of functional devices.
Under the direction of Professor Conticello, and in conjunction with the
graduate students involved in this project, an outreach program is planned that
will recruit undergraduate and high-school students to work on these inter-
disciplinary studies at the interface of chemistry, biology, and materials
science. In addition, a one-semester seminar session of the Emory course ORDER,
On Recent Discoveries by Emory Researchers, is planned as a potentially
sustainable trial to connect faculty, graduate students, post-docs and other
materials-oriented investigators within the local EMORY community, to engage
undergraduate students in order to more fully develop the connection between
biological molecules and materials.