* 1412776
* Unravelling the Complexities of the Chemical and Physical Properties of Colloidal Nitride Semiconductor Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Remi Beaulac, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

Remi Beaulac of Michigan State University is supported by an award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry to investigate the chemistry and physical properties of nitride
nanomaterials. These materials are expected to play a significant role in the
design of new light-emitting devices, biomedical imaging methods, information
and telecommunication applications, as well as in future solar-based energy
storage and conversion schemes. At the moment, simple and reliable methods to
prepare high-quality nitride nanomaterials by direct solution-based chemical
approaches are unknown, and their electronic, optical, magnetic, and chemical
reactivity properties are consequently ill-understood. The work conducted under
this award is expected to change this situation by virtue of a new chemical
scheme that allowed the group to prepare uniquely high-quality indium nitride
(InN) nanomaterials. Both indium nitride and gallium nitride (GaN) are
archetypical members of the so-called III-V semiconductors family that have long
been difficult to prepare chemically. Therefore chemical synthesis of
nanocrystals of both materials is being pursued.

Professor Beaulac's efforts are divided into three main categories: (1) Design
of rational schemes for the synthesis of nitride colloidal nanomaterials; (2)
Reversible control of n-type doping in these materials; (3) Investigation and
tuning of the physical properties of nitride nanomaterials. Under the first
heading, the mechanisms behind the efficacy of the approach uncovered for InN
are studied, extending the approach to produce more complex structures such as
ternary alloys and heterostructures, anisotropically-grown nanostuctures
(platelets, rods, and wires). Particular attention is given to unravelling the
complexities of the synthetic approaches devised by studying the energetics and
kinetics of the nucleation and growth processes in nitride materials chemistry,
which is a key step toward the optimization of these synthetic approaches to
reproducibly obtain high-quality colloidal nitride nanomaterials that exhibit
high homogeneity in size and shape. In a parallel step, the Beaulac group is
undertaking a broad and detailed analysis of the potential of nitride
nanomaterials to reversibly act as heavily-n-type doped materials. Indium
nitride is postulated to be a very potent oxidant in view of its very low-lying
conduction band, which is most certainly the basis for the difficulty in
preparing the material in the undoped form. Finally, in-depth characterizations
of the physical properties associated with this new class of materials are also
conducted with regards to three potential fields of impact, namely photodetector
devices, photovoltaics applications, and spintronics technologies.