* 1412646
* Computational Modeling of Interiors of Sub-Neptunes and Gas Giant Planets
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Burkhard Militzer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2018
* USD 369,548.00

The PI and his team will carry out a theoretical effort to improve understanding
of the interior, formation and evolution of ice- and gas-giant planets in our
solar system and other extrasolar planetary systems. They will apply computer
simulations techniques to study planetary interior materials exposed to extreme
temperatures and pressures that cannot be reproduced in the laboratory. They
will do this by simulating thermodynamic properties of the gases, such as the
equation of state (EOS), which gives the mathematical relationship between
temperature, pressure and density of a material. The investigators will apply
their models to a collection of ice giant planets with masses less than that of
Neptune. They also plan to develop a new model for Uranus' and Neptune's
interior that includes a diamond layer, in order to explain these planets'
peculiar magnetic fields. They will work with collaborators to prepare
complementary high-pressure experiments, and to update models of Jupiter and
Saturn. Computational results will be provided to the astronomical community for
use in planetary and stellar interior models. They will also train graduate and
undergraduate students in computational research techniques.

The investigators will accomplish this by incorporating the group's new ab
initio Hydrogen-Helium EOS into existing code in order to model rotating giant
planets. They will also update phase diagrams for liquid and superionic water
and simulate the mixtures of water, methane and ammonia in these planets. They
will use these results to improve evolutionary models of Jupiter and Saturn, and
magnetic field models of Uranus and Neptune. They will also incorporate the EOS
tables into the stellar evolution code MESA, and provide results to the
community about ab initio Gibbs free energy calculations in solid, liquid,
superionic and lower-density molecular systems.