* 1412924
* CHS: Large: Collaborative Research: Achieving Development Goals with Information Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Diane Bailey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,089,490.00

This research seeks to discover the factors that can predict project success and
guide decisions about funding, designing, and implementing major projects
intended to use information and communication technology for socio-economic
development. In the past five years, over ten billion dollars of US and
international government funding have been invested in such projects, with
private technology funding adding substantially to that figure. Yet, many of
these projects fail. Existing theories emphasize the inability of technology
designers in developed countries to understand the needs and context of users in
developing countries. But that approach is at best incomplete because it focuses
on the technology while ignoring the link between the technology and development
outcomes. This research will go beyond a strict technology focus by exploring
the interplay between technology plans and development goals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will be organized in a series of steps employing multiple
research methodologies, that logically build on each other. Case studies of four
existing information technology development projects, including interviews and
extended observation, will provide a deep conceptual basis for the subsequent
work. Based on analysis of the observational and interview data, a questionnaire
survey will be developed and administered to about sixty other comparable
projects. Following analysis of the survey, a set of ten to twelve shorter case
studies will then explore a diversity of projects and their contexts, to expand
the theoretical system of analysis and identify issues that were not apparent in
the first four case studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting extensive,
mixed-methods base of data will allow identification of the factors that shape
project success or failure, as well as building and testing of emerging
hypotheses so that the research team can construct strong theory. The resulting
theory will provide the groundwork for future research, and enhance the existing
scientific literature on this problem with the development scholarship and
sensibility that currently is missing from it. This effort to better understand
and predict project success and failure will have the potential to reap
significant benefits for the populations that these projects target, for the
nations whose development is at hand, and for the entities who provide the
funding and who share the aspirations of those who seek to see life improved.