* 1412774
* Developing Direct Observational Tests of the Formation of Multiple Stellar Populations in Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Stephen Zepf, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2018
* USD 181,603.00

The scientists will investigate how dense groups of stars form. The dense groups
of stars, known as globular clusters, are some of the oldest objects we know of
in our Milky Way galaxy. Traditionally, these dense groups of stars were thought
to have formed together at the same time and with the same composition of
chemical elements. However, recent observations have found striking variations
of the chemical elements among individual stars in these dense groups. This
overturns the textbook understanding of how these clusters of stars form. In
this program, more precise observational tests of models for cluster formation
will be carried out. They will work with undergraduate and graduate college
students as well as high school summer students. The work will be communicated
to many school groups. The scientist will present the work to the community as a
part of revitalizing the Abrams Planetarium, on the Michigan State University
campus, which reaches more than 10,000 K-8 students each year.

The investigators will develop and carry out observational tests of models for
how these different populations of stars formed in the same compact star
cluster. A key aspect of these studies will be to observe the youngest known
globular clusters in the local universe, which are critical testing grounds for
how these objects form. The observational tests that will be carried out include
multi-wavelength studies of enriched gas in young star clusters at different
ages and optical spectroscopic observations of possible signatures of multiple
generations of stars in young star clusters. The results from these
observational tests will then be fed back in to models of globular cluster
formation and the interpretation of observations of young cluster systems.