* 1412730
* Collaborative Research: Redshift Measurements of the Swift Serendipitous Cluster Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Joel Bregman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 12/31/2017
* USD 98,049.00

One of the primary objectives of extragalactic astronomy is to understand the
formation and evolution of structures over cosmic time. Clusters of galaxies are
the largest gravitationally bound structures in the universe, and so a better
understanding of their formation and evolution leads to deeper knowledge of the
physics of the cosmos. In order to fully probe the physics and evolution of
clusters, however, a co-ordinated multi-wavelength campaign is needed: while
observations with X-ray telescopes are excellent at finding clusters, follow-up
observations with optical telescopes are critical to measuring their distances
from us. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will use the Michigan-
Dartmouth-MIT (MDM) 2.4m, Magellan, and Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) optical
observatories to measure the redshifts and distances to clusters identified in
the X-ray Swift Serendipitous Cluster Survey (SSCS). The program will produce
one of the largest X-ray selected cluster catalogs to date, and make it
available to the entire astronomical community. The increased numbers of high-
redshift clusters as a result of this work will lead to a better understanding
of the evolution of cluster properties over cosmic time. The team will also
study the relationships between the optical and X-ray properties of clusters as
a function of redshift. Finally, they will use the sample to constrain
cosmological parameters, such as the energy densities of dark matter and dark
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two Principal Investigators of this
collaboration will also launch an innovative series of outreach events that are
designed to further develop the STEM workforce. At the University of Oklahoma-
Norman, Dr. Xinyu Dai will use a portable planetarium to deliver presentations
to high schools in the Greater Oklahoma City area. At the same time, Dr. Joel
Bregman will develop new shows for the on-campus planetarium at the University
of Michigan Ann-Arbor. The results of their scientific efforts will also be
distributed to the general public.