* 1412985
* Collaborative Research:  Well-Defined Polyelectrolyte Nanocages via Crystallized Miniemulsion Nanodroplets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Honggang Cui, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 254,748.00

In collaborative research funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program, Chong Cheng of the State University at New York at
Buffalo and Honggang Cui of John Hopkins University are developing new
techniques for the controlled preparation of tiny nanometer-sized polymer cages.
These small structures have enormous potential for the development of new
methods to deliver drugs or other substances directly to tissues and cells. The
research is focused on a specific type of nanometer-sized cage, or nanocage,
that is crystalline but coated with a soap-like molecule known as a surfactant.
The strategy is meant to stabilize the resulting surfaces and make it possible
to more closely control the size of the resulting cages. The group is also
carrying out systematic studies to investigate precisely how this stabilization
occurs, in order to learn more about the molecular-level events involved. This
will allow application of the results of this research to other systems. The
work is having a broader impact on the development of new systems for the
delivery of drugs and other therapeutic agents to precise locations in the body.
It is having a further broad impact through the production of a series of videos
that explain the work. These videos are being distributed via YouTube, helping
to bring the results of this research to members of the public.

This project focuses on the precise synthesis of polyelectrolyte nanocages via
"crystal-forming" miniemulsions. A second aim of the study is to obtain a
molecular level understanding of the stabilization mechanism in this template
system. Systematic studies are being conducted to obtain crystallized
miniemulsion nanodroplets with high surfactant efficiency and predetermined
sizes. This is allowing the synthesis of a great diversity of nanocages with
well-controlled dimensions and varying cross-linking densities via free-radical
polymerization. The stabilization mechanism study is being performed to identify
whether the surfactant monolayers are stabilized on the surface of crystallized
miniemulsion nanodroplets through hydrophobic interaction or via co-
crystallization of surfactant alkyl chains with oil molecules. This "crystal-
forming" stabilization strategy may lead to a practical solution for the
decades-long technical problem of dynamic instability of surfactant monolayers
in various emulsion systems. Successful implementation of this project will lay
the foundation for further optimization of monolayer systems with both enhanced
stability and controlled dimensions.