* 1412542
* Nonlinear dynamics with applications to physical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Mark Levi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 330,000.00

This project will develop mathematical tools with the goal of understanding some
important physical phenomena, in three different but related areas. The first of
these areas deals with the study of mechanical systems subjected to high
frequency, high intensity vibrations. Laser tweezers used to manipulate objects
inside biological cells belong to this class of systems, as does the Paul trap
-? an ion trap for the invention of which W. Paul received the 1989 Nobel Prize
in physics. This project aims to develop a new, more intuitive and geometric
understanding of these and related phenomena. In addition to explaining physics
in a simpler new way, this research would develop new connections between
different mathematical areas. The second part of the project deals with Hill's
equation, a system of fundamental importance in many areas of mathematics,
physics, and engineering. The main aim of this part of the project is to explain
a fundamental and elegant feature of this system which has been observed
numerically but the reason for which is still not understood. The third part of
the project deals with a basic problem of understanding the long-time effect of
tidal dissipation on the motion of celestial bodies.

The proposed research consists of three areas unified by the common goal of
understanding dynamical systems arising in physical settings. The first of these
areas deals with the study of mechanical systems subjected to high frequency,
high intensity vibrations. The research will develop a new geometric
understanding of related phenomena (as a possible benefit to applications), and
will relate averaging theory with differential geometry (as a bridge between two
areas of mathematics). The second part of the project will explore the geometry
of the bifurcation diagram associated with Hill's equation, to understand
qualitatively how the system depends on parameters. The main aim of this part of
the project is to explain the collapse of resonance gaps in the Stark effect,
which is observed numerically but the reason for which is still not understood.
The third part of the project deals with analysis of models for the long-time
effect of tidal dissipation on the motion of celestial bodies.