* 1412532
* Effects of Cellular Environment on Protein Structure and Folding Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Margaret Cheung, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 692,294.00

In this research project, the PI will study the effects of the cellular
environment on the structure and folding dynamics of proteins and will train
students in this area of research. Proteins perform a variety of biological
specific functions inside cells, operating in a crowded matrix with many other
macromolecules. The PI will recruit minority and female undergraduate students
for her research program from introductory physics courses that she teaches to
retain their interest in science. The University of Houston (UH) is a designated
Hispanic-serving institute with over 40,000 students. The PI is a director of
the Physics Science Teaching Equity Project (Physics STEP), a professional
develop program for continuing education. The focus of Physics STEP is to
provide training to 20 in-service non-physics teachers who are assigned to teach
high-school physics each year. These 20 teachers teach a total of 3000 high-
school students from high-need school districts at the greater Houston area. The
opportunity for young students and teachers to learn physics would greatly
improve the science literacy of our future generation. In collaboration with the
College of Education at UH, the Physics STEP offers each teacher content
knowledge and pedagogy, including "inquiry-based" experiments on selected
physics topics through a yearly curriculum. The PI plans to recruit high-school
students to join her research program by pairing them with teachers who
participate in the Physics STEP. Additionally, through coordination with science
teachers of elementary schools in STEP, the PI will reach out to fourth- and
fifth-grade students by participating in a Career Day and by hosting science
field trips at the UH campus. The PI will use her extensive teacher's network
and experience to enhance the broader impacts of the research. In the long term,
this methodology may help reveal molecular mechanisms of cellular adaptation and
regulation of protein networks in response to stress cues. The dissemination of
the developed computer program through the internet will promote modeling tools
that are freely available to study protein-folding in cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to characterize the
effects of the cellular environment on the structure and folding dynamics of
model proteins. Most experiments, theories, and simulations on the structures
and folding dynamics of proteins have been addressed in dilute solutions in test
tubes, which are not representative of the congested biological environment in
cells. The extent to which the competing effects of the cellular environment
affect protein biophysics is poorly understood. There is an urgent need for the
development of theories and computational methods to provide a quantitative
understanding of the environmental effects that dictate protein structures and
conformational dynamics in cells. Only with tools to quantitatively assess
protein biophysics inside cells can a fundamental understanding of protein's
behaviors in response to cellular signaling cues be achieved. The research
includes three integrated directions: First, the principal investigator (PI)
will apply computer simulations to quantify folding kinetics in the presence of
chemical denaturants and crowded media and relate these results to similar in
vitro experiments. This will allow the investigation of transition-state
structures and possible movements of the transition states of protein folding in
cell-like media, which can then inform the design of further in vitro
experiments. Next, the PI will develop a quantitative description between energy
landscape profiles and protein-folding kinetics in crowded environments, which
is essential to better understand the underlying physical principles behind
computer simulations and in vitro experimental data. Finally, the PI will
combine computer simulations, development of improved theories, and
collaboration with experimentalists to advance the knowledge of how competing
cellular effects, such as macromolecular crowding, electrostatics, and
hydrodynamic interactions, tune the structures and folding kinetics of proteins
in cells. The research is significant because the outcome will offer molecular
explanations and predictions that connect residual details of proteins to their
folding processes in cells. This project is jointly supported by Molecular
Biophysics in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Computational Physics Program in the
Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.