* 1412283
* Multiscale Models for Synthetic Biological Antibiotic Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Gary Dunny, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 343,339.00

1412283&lt;br/&gt;Kaznessis, Yiannis N. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to
build tools that facilitate development of new antibiotic technologies. For
eighty years the life expectancy and the standards of living of humans greatly
improved largely thanks to antibiotics. But the era of antibiotics may be coming
to an end, as bacteria are developing resistance to all available antibiotics
and rendering important therapies obsolete. The specific challenge addressed is
related to foodborne bacterial gastrointestinal infections that jeopardize food
safety and sustainable agriculture practices. These infections are significant
causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. It is proposed to explore the
therapeutic potential of probiotic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) that express and
release antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) by developing a toolbox for testing LAB as
'smart' AMP-delivery vehicles against foodborne bacteria. The proposed work will
have significant broader societal impact, as it constitutes a new strategy to
reduce over-consumption of antibiotics. In addition, high school students will
be trained in elements of microbiology, antibiotic technologies and
bioinformatics. These students will be recruited from inner city schools with
large percentages of students from ethnic or racial minorities. These students
will also benefit from rich interdisciplinary interactions in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tools will be developed to detect and inhibit
three Gram-positive bacterial species: Clostridia spp., Listeria spp. and
Enterococcus spp. (in short CLE). In particular, experimental tools will be
developed that facilitate modification of LAB to detect CLE and then produce a
molecular arsenal that targets CLE pathogens. Detection will be based on
pheromone-responding genetic promoters, moved from CLE into LAB. The molecular
arsenal will consist of AMPs and phage endolysins. In parallel, multiscale
modeling tools will be developed that provide mechanistic understanding and aid
in experimental design of both the promoters and the antimicrobial molecules.
There are two major objectives: (1) Develop a toolbox of protein expression and
secretion systems in LAB. Libraries of promoters will be constructed to express
AMPs and endolysins in LAB. Aided by multiscale modeling techniques, three
libraries of promoters will be constructed in LAB: (i) promoters that respond to
CLE pheromones; (ii) environment-sensitive promoters; (iii) constitutive
promoters. (2) Develop a toolbox of methods for high-throughput discovery of
peptide antibiotics by discovering and characterizing effective AMPs combining
high-throughput AMP screening experiments with multiscale mathematical models,
and by testing phage endolysins, a distinct class of potent antimicrobial
enzymes.