* 1412673
* Collaborative Research - A Panchromatic Imaging Survey of the Galactic Bulge
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Catherine Pilachowski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2019
* USD 132,148.00

The researchers will study our Milky Way galaxy and the great star clouds of
Sagittarius, which are easily visible on a dark summer night, low on the
Southern horizon, from the anywhere in the United States. Their observation plan
is to precisely measure the colors of stars in the brightest part of the Milky
Way, including the bulge of stars near the center of our galaxy. Their
scientific target is understanding the origin and history of formation of stars
in the bulge. The investigators will use the Dark Energy Camera (currently most
powerful on any telescope) on the 4m telescope at the Cerro Tololo observatory
in Chile. They will produce a sequence of color images, from infrared, optical
to ultraviolet wavelengths. The broader impact of this program has several
components. Foremost is providing professional astronomers and public with tools
to view the multi-color images online. The investigators will give the public
access to the same data as are used by professional astronomers. The
investigators will report the results via popular journal articles, public
lectures and sky viewing events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration will
use these detailed images of the bulge of our Milky Way to map the structure of
its stars, deduce their age and metal content, to shed light on the structure
and formation history of the bulge stars. An additional bonus will be detailed
images of over 30 globular star clusters in the six filters observed by the
collaboration. Over time, the space motions of stars will be measured, enabling
study of the stellar orbits that support the structure of the bulge. The bulge
of stars surrounding the core of our galaxy was likely formed as the result of
three processes, 1) rapid, violent merging within the first billion years after
the Big Bang, 2) ongoing mergers of massive stellar clusters and 3) formation
from the early disk of the Milky Way, by slower dynamical processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration's images and derived measurements,
combined with additional studies, have the potential to transform our
understanding of the formation of the Galaxy.