* 1412864
* Collaborative Research:Recognition of RNA Structure Motifs Using Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Edward Nikonowicz, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2018
* USD 310,000.00

With this award, Drs. Edward Nikonowicz (Rice University) and Shuxing Zhang (M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center) will identify and characterize small molecules that
selectively bind to unique RNA structure motifs. This award is being made
through the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program of the Chemistry Division,
the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering
(CDS&E) Program at NSF. The central role of ribonucleic acids (RNAs) in biology
has long been recognized, but the large number of "non-coding" RNA molecules,
which are not translated into a protein, and the diverse functions of these RNAs
have only come to light in the last decade. The goal of this project is to
identify a collection of chemical compounds that bind with high selectivity and
affinity to small elements of unusual structure found in non-coding RNA
molecules. These compounds could be used as new tools for biotechnological and
biochemical research and for applications in medicine. In addition to supporting
the training through research of graduate students, this project will support
training of high-school and undergraduate students in the use of modern
chemical, biophysical, and computational tools to address fundamental problems
in RNA and chemical biology. Students present their work at local scientific
meetings, giving them exposure to the scientific community and the opportunity
to communicate their results to a scientifically literate, yet broad audience.

Non-coding RNAs (nc-RNA), including rRNAs, riboswitches, and pre-microRNAs,
often have an architecture that includes a variety of non-canonical features
important for the molecules' structures and function. Therefore, the detailed
structure provides an important backdrop to interpret functional and mechanistic
studies. Small molecules that bind to specific RNA structure motifs can become
powerful tools for probing RNA conformation and folding and to facilitate the
study of specific RNA activities in vitro and in vivo. NMR spectroscopy will be
used to define the breadth of conformational space accessed by a set of
frequently occurring non-canonical RNA elements. A computational workflow that
integrates the NMR-defined structure information and the in silico screening of
virtual chemical libraries will be developed to identify chemical compounds that
selectively bind to specific non-canonical elements. The interactions of these
small molecules with RNAs will be characterized using biophysical and high-
resolution structure methods including NMR spectroscopy and X-ray
crystallography.