* 1412628
* Collaborative Research: Overproduction and Harvesting of Methylated Triterpenes in a Heterologous Host
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Andrew Koppisch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2018
* USD 75,000.00

In the face of dwindling fossil fuel reserves, a high priority has been placed
on the development of strategies capable of producing viable replacements for
transportation fuels from renewable resources. Even with a dramatic recent
increase in domestic natural gas production in the U.S., renewable fuels remain
a priority for countries that lack comparable natural resources, and thus
represent a potential area for growth for U.S. biotechnology. The challenges
associated with accomplishing this task are extensive, and success in this
endeavor ultimately depends upon the ability to generate a good yield of a
target molecule in a biological source and an efficient isolation and recovery
of the molecule from the source. The focus of this proposal will be twofold: 1)
the production of a fuel-like compound in a bacterial host, and 2) the design,
screening, and implementation of biocompatible materials to efficiently isolate
the compound from the bacteria. As a proposal from a predominantly undergraduate
institution, this collaborative approach to an immediate and relevant
alternative energy source will help catalyze the development of an undergraduate
research program in chemistry at the interface with biology at Dixie State
University (DSU), located in the remote southwest corner of Utah. This rural
community is comprised of students with diverse backgrounds who, through the
proposed research plans, will engage in collaborations with established programs
at complementary universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division and NSF-EPSCoR are
funding Drs. Rico Del Sesto (Dixie State University, Utah), Blaine Pfeifer
(Univ. Buffalo, NY) and Andrew Koppisch (Northern Arizona Univ.) to address the
issues above through multiple approaches. First, new extractants will be
synthesized for the purpose of efficient sequestration of biofuel products from
biological host systems. The extractants to be produced will be applicable to
any host generating relevant isoprenoid compounds, but they will particularly be
utilized in this proposal with a heterologous production platform. The known
biosynthetic pathway for C32-botryococcene will be transplanted into E. coli. In
particular, the proposed E. coli host has been engineered to support high-level
production of isoprenoid compounds (reaching g/L levels of the Taxol precursor
taxadiene). Furthermore, the new heterologous system will be subjected to a
range of readily-available engineering and characterization strategies to
optimize production of C32-botryococcene. The overall production process will
therefore be complemented by a heterologous production host, and the novel
introduction of extraction techniques. In addition to a clear applied goal of
high level C32-botryococcene production through E. coli, the proposed plan is
dedicated to fundamental knowledge of isoprenoid biosynthesis, extractant
synthesis and extraction potential, and the cellular-extractant dynamic that is
crucial for the success of this application. As such, the proposal features both
science and engineering towards a meaningful and timely problem. The applied and
basic themes of the proposal are also mirrored by the collaborative team driving
this proposal and their collective expertise available to support and enable the
overall production process proposed.