* 1412596
* Innovative Morphological Analysis with a Panchromatic Galaxy Atlas Enabled by Citizen-Scientist Volunteers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Timothy Heckman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2018
* USD 465,098.00

This proposal undertakes an innovative galaxy survey meant to become a treasury
for astronomers and, just as importantly, a valuable science education platform
for the public. It primarily uses a data set from the Pan-STARRS1 (PS1)
telescope located on Maui, Hawaii. This data set, called the "PS1 Optical Galaxy
Survey (POGS)" covers 75% of the sky, and will be combined with data from the
ultraviolet, infrared, and radio regimes. When combined, this information will
provide transformational insight regarding the variety and current state of
galaxy structure in the nearby Universe. In order to accomplish this work, which
is computationally intensive and also requires individual inspection, the
proposers plan to use involvement of volunteer citizen scientists. This results
in a natural, world-wide opportunity for astronomy education. In fact, this work
is already underway, with a rapidly growing user base (5,800 volunteers at
present). In addition, summer mentoring of female high school students as
participants in science analysis of POGS products, providing an opportunity to
train an underrepresented group in the STEM fields in scientific methods.

To measure galactic structural properties unbiased by the mask of recent star
formation and dust, the proposers are conducting a citizen-scientist enabled
nearby galaxy survey based on the unprecedented optical imaging from Pan-STARRS1
(PS1), but also incorporating ancillary multi-wavelength data from the
ultraviolet and infrared regimes (via GALEX and WISE). The PS1 Optical Galaxy
Survey (POGS) will cover 3pi steradians (75% of the sky), about twice the
footprint of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). For each cataloged galaxy,
publicly-distributed computing contributed by thousands of volunteers will
enable pixel-by-pixel spectral energy distribution (SED) fitting, which in turn
provides key physical parameters such as the local stellar mass surface density,
star formation rate (SFR), and dust attenuation. Sufficiently nearby galaxies
will be processed using complete UV-optical-IR SED information as part of a base
sample, whereas distant but more numerous galaxies will be processed with
optical only data due to the resolution of ancillary observations. With pixel
SED fitting output the proposers will then constrain parametric models of galaxy
structure and measure non-parametric morphology indicators in a more meaningful
way than ordinarily achieved, by operating on images of estimated physical
parameters.