* 1412920
* The secret life of DGPP: Physicochemical Properties and Function of an enigmatic Signaling Lipid
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Edgar Kooijman, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 12/31/2019
* USD 336,244.00

Worldwide, crops are affected by water scarcity and salinity of the soil which
results in a loss of yield and a reduction in the quality of the crops produced.
Up unto now it has been difficult to breed crops that are tolerant to drought
via conventional methods. New methods to target increased crop tolerance are
thus needed. This work will target a specific component of the biological
membrane of plant cells. Biological membranes are crucial for life as they form
a barrier to protect cells from the environment. Since plants are unable to move
in order to find a more favorable location, this protective function is critical
for survival. Plants have thus evolved intricate ways to cope with environmental
stress, such as pathogen attack, drought, and salt stress. A key component of
this response to stress is that plants make a membrane molecule called DGPP. The
goal of this work is to unravel the function of this molecule through diverse
biophysical and biochemical approaches. Graduate and undergraduate students will
work together with international leaders in the field of plant stress. This work
is expected to yield novel insights in the process of drought tolerance in
plants and may lead to novel ways in which crops can be grown in challenging
environments.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Edgar E. Kooijman from Kent State University to unravel
the function of diacylglycerolpyrophosphate (DGPP) in the stress response of
plants via the characterization of the physicochemical properties and protein-
lipid interactions of DGPP. Ionization properties of DGPP in complex model
membranes and modulation of membrane curvature by DGPP will be determined by
diverse biophysical methods including, but not limited to solid state NMR
spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction, and differential scanning calorimetry. Novel
protein binding partners will be characterized via affinity chromatography using
DGPP functionalized beads, and protein-lipid interaction will be characterized
via liposome binding, surface plasmon resonance and isothermal titration
calorimetry. The function of lipid binding by protein partners will be explored.
This work is expected to yield novel insights in drought stress tolerance,
including the function of signaling proteins. As such, this project holds a
promise for a new set of tools.