* 1412909
* SusChEM: Mechanisms of small molecule activation in constrained molecular environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2018
* Elena Rybak-Akimova, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

In the modern era of scarce resources, developing chemical processes that can
eventually generate useful materials and fuels from readily available, cheap,
renewable starting materials is of paramount importance. Small molecules (such
as oxygen or its close relative, hydrogen peroxide) are ideal sources of oxygen
atoms in synthetic applications. New strategies for utilizing oxygen in chemical
synthesis and energy production may lead to environmentally clean oxidations
that generate water as the only byproduct and rely on readily available
reagents. Dr. Rybak-Akimova at Tufts University conducts research to gain a
detailed understanding of the pathways in oxygen and peroxide binding and
reactivity in selected examples of chemical systems. She aims to identify the
"bottlenecks" of these reactions and gain fundamental knowledge important for
informing the design of efficient and non-toxic reagents in synthetic
applications. This research project provides opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to be trained in high-level mechanistic studies while
also participating in collaborative efforts to design, prepare, characterize,
and apply new synthetic systems for small molecule activation. Dr. Rybak-Akimova
plans to actively recruit female and minority students for the project through
the Tufts Center for STEM Diversity. Outreach to high-school students from
public schools in the area includes visits to and presentations at science
fairs, field trips by groups of Medford and Somerville high school students to
research laboratories at Tufts, and recruitment of high school students as
summer researchers.

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program and the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry jointly support the research
group of Dr. Rybak-Akimova to study the role of secondary sphere effects,
including hydrophobic interactions with sterically bulky substituents and
hydrogen bonding, in selected chemical systems. More specifically, this project
investigates: (1) O2 binding and activation at sterically protected metal
centers capable of multi-electron oxidations (e.g. Pd(0)/Pd(II) or V(III)/V(V)),
and the reactivity of thermally unstable end-on dioxygen adducts (metal-superoxo
intermediates) compared to analogous stable side-on metal-peroxo species; (2)
encapsulation of peroxide guest inside carboxamide cryptand host and the
reactivity of this peroxocryptand with externally added oxidants or reductants;
(3) generation and reactivity of metal-bound oxygen intermediates in amide-
containing three-dimensional cages and analogous "open" tripodal or two-
dimensional macrocyclic hosts; (4) anion recognition of high-valent peroxy
anions (e.g. peroxyvanadates) with amide-containing tripods, macrocycles, and
cages for selective substrate oxidations. This research aims to establish the
mechanisms of stepwise coordination of dioxygen to low-valent metal centers
supported by ligands with controlled level of steric bulk and/or the number and
location of proton-donating groups at the periphery, measure the reactivity of
these species with externally added substrates in direct double-mixing kinetic
experiments, identify competent oxidants, examine steric and H-bonding
modulation of peroxide reactivity encapsulated in metal-free hosts in reactions
with external oxidants or reductants, and determine the mechanisms of electron
transfer and atom transfer. Stopped-flow instrumentation and expertise in
technically demanding kinetic measurements of rapid reactions developed at Tufts
continues to have significant impact on the infrastructure for mechanistic
research.