* 1412869
* Firebug: A Living Cell that Propagates Plasmids Built from an Artificial Genetic System
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Our view of life is very much influenced by the life on Earth around us. All of
the life on Earth (that we know of) descends from a single common ancestor, and
it all has fundamentally the same biochemistry. This means that our view of
biology is very much biased, reflecting only what we know of our surrounding
biosphere and ourselves. The scientific goal of this project is to expand this
view, something important to understand the intimate connection between the
phenomenon that we know as life and the molecules that underlie it. This
expanded view will be important, for example, should we encounter alien life in
our search of the cosmos. It is equally important if we wish to use life-like
processes in commerce, manufacturing, and medicine. The "grand challenge" to be
met by this project is to create a cell that is able to use an entirely
synthetic form of DNA; one built from 6 nucleotide "letters", which is two more
than the number of nucleotides found in natural DNA. In pursuing this challenge,
more will be learned about the chemistry of metabolism, reproduction, and
genetic regulation. In addition to its scientific interest as a second example
of a genetic system able to evolve, the cell will also have practical value.
This cell will be used to manufacture molecules for human and animal
diagnostics, for homeland security, and for manufacturing as a bio safe
platform. Undergraduate students will participate in the research activities,
and the findings will continue to provide useful insights and perspectives on
the origins of life and the nature of extraterrestrial life. This project is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster within the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes in the
Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engineer a strain of
E. coli ("Firebug") that can propagate plasmid DNA carrying nucleotides from a
"second-generation" artificially expanded genetic information system (AEGIS). In
its broadest form, AEGIS increases the number of independently replicable
nucleotides in DNA from 4 to 12. This project will begin by adding just two
AEGIS components, named (Z and P), to the four natural nucleotides (GACT),
exploiting prior work that has (1) optimized second-generation AEGIS components
for their chemical and enzymatic performance; (2) developed in vitro molecular
biology to support AEGIS DNA, including six-letter GACTZP PCR, sequencing, and
endonucleases, ligases, and kinases that use GACTZP DNA; (3) demonstrated in
vitro evolution of GACTZP DNA, including generation of aptamers by evolution in
the laboratory; and (4) engineered kinases that convert dZ and dP to their
triphosphates inside cells. To pass the next milestone in synthetic biology that
makes the expanded code functional in the cell, Firebug will be constructed.
This will involve managing E. coli's error-prone polymerases and repair systems,
moving enzymes encoding biosynthesis of Z and P into the chromosome, and placing
the engineered cells under selection to improve their fidelity of replication of
plasmid-borne Z:P pairs.