* 1412769
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Simulation of Out-of-Equilibrium Processes in Epitaxy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Dionisios Margetis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2019
* USD 260,491.00

Ratsch/Margetis/Gibou&lt;br/&gt;1412392/1412769/1412695&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Epitaxial growth is a process in which one material is deposited on top of
another. It is of fundamental technological importance, as many modern opto-
electronic devices are fabricated by this process. Important examples include
transistors in microelectronics, quantum dots for photonic crystal lasers,
quantum dot-based product enhancements in the energy sector, and nonvolatile
storage media, which are sought to replace hard drives, flash memories, and RAM
memories. Other applications include, for example, catalysts (speeding up
chemical reactions), which often rely on metal epitaxy. Catalysis is used in the
energy sector, in food processing, in environmental science, and elsewhere; a
well-known example is the catalytic converter for vehicle emissions control. The
investigators of this collaborative project develop models that lead to a better
and more fundamental understanding of epitaxial growth. Results of the work are
of interest not only to mathematicians but also to physicists, material
scientists and engineers, and medical scientists to whose problems the
mathematical results apply. Three graduate students are included in this
interdisciplinary project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the project is to
develop analytical and computational tools to seamlessly and efficiently connect
several length and time scales in epitaxy. These tools encompass asymptotic
methods for linking atomistic models to mesoscale phenomena as well as efficient
numerical methods on adaptive quadtree/octree grids in a parallel computing
environment to enable the simulation of large material systems. The
investigators design and implement a hierarchy of growth models that combine
atomistic master equations in the context of kinetic solid-on-solid models,
density-functional theory (DFT), a partial differential equation-based island
dynamics growth model, and an efficient scheme to solve the elastic equations to
include elastic strain. This collaborative effort provides the means to address
a long-standing controversy about the role played by kinetic and thermodynamics
effects in the formation of crystal structures such as mounds and quantum dots
(QDs). Three graduate students are included in this interdisciplinary project.