* 1412499
* Structure and Interactions of a Bacterial Condensin
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Martha Oakley, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2017
* USD 485,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Martha
Oakley of Indiana University for research aimed at fully characterizing a key
protein that helps maintain the structure of chromosomes in E. coli bacteria.
Chromosomes contain genes and, as cells grow and divide, they must activate
internal mechanisms to ensure that the appropriate parts of the DNA that make up
these genes, are distributed into the correct cells. In this research, a
specific form of these structural maintenance of chromosomes, or SMC proteins,
is being studied. SMC proteins have an unusual structure containing a long rod-
like portion flanked by two globular regions. In previous studies, the structure
of the rod-like portion has been difficult to determine. Here, new techniques
for structure determination are being used to overcome the difficulties
previously encountered. The new techniques are being applied to an SMC protein
in a common bacterium that has served as a model organism in many scientific
investigations. The goal of the work is to improve our understanding, not only
of the protein in E. coli, but also of similar proteins at work in other types
of cells. The work is having a broader impact on a wide variety of scientific
and biomedical fields through the development of new and better analysis
techniques. It is having a further broad impact on the training of the next
generation of scientists through the participation of young investigators at
both the graduate and undergraduate level in this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research, the investigators are characterizing the structure, flexibility,
and interactions of a specific E. coli SMC protein, MukB. The investigators are
bringing their prior experience with determining the structure and function of
antiparallel coiled coils to the study of this new system. Although the
importance of SMC proteins is clear, the molecular mechanisms by which they
achieve their biological functions are not well understood. SMC proteins share
an unusual five-domain structure, in which the globular N- and C-terminal
domains combine to form an ABC-like ATPase domain. The "head" domain is
connected to a smaller, globular dimerization domain, also called the "hinge,"
by an unusual 50-nm-long antiparallel coiled-coil domain. It is this latter
domain that has proved to be a major obstacle in prior work. The current project
focuses on mapping the binding surfaces involved in DNA binding and in inter-
domain interactions revealed by atomic force microscopy studies of accessible
MukB conformations. The long term goals of the work are to understand the
structure of uncharacterized regions of MukB, more fully characterize the
intramolecular interactions stabilizing the remarkably broad array of MukB
conformations, and characterize interactions within dimers and with other
binding partners. In addition, the team is also extending its studies to coiled
coils in other bacterial SMCs. This information will produce a large database of
validated, pairwise (or higher-order) interactions in antiparallel coiled coils,
analogous to the large databases currently available for parallel coiled coils.