* 1412454
* Nonlinear Dynamics in Structured Biological and Epidemiological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Shigui Ruan, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,000.00

Human health and the integrity of ecosystems face increasing challenges from
biological invasions. The movement of various nonindigenous vectors (e.g.,
mosquitoes) has resulted in epidemics and the spread of human diseases such as
dengue, malaria, and West Nile virus. West Nile virus is a not only a threat to
human health, but also to native ecosystems, since vulnerable native species can
be driven into extinction by this introduced pathogen, creating detrimental
effects that can cascade through an ecosystem. Ecosystems may also be disrupted
directly by certain animal invaders. An example is the pike killifish, a non-
native fish in the Everglades that can migrate into freshwater marshes and prey
on the small forage fishes that would otherwise support the wading bird
community. The emergence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria is another type of
biological invasion and infections caused by antimicrobial-resistant bacteria
are a serious public health threat. Thus, it is essential to have simulation
tools to forecast the spatial spread and effects of such invasions. Each of
these biological and epidemiological problems can be studied by using structured
population models to determine the birth, growth and death rates of individuals
and their interactions with the environment and with each other. The goal of
this project is to construct such forecasting tools and to investigate how the
essential structuring variables (e.g., age, size, maturity level, location,
latency) affect the properties of these invasive systems the associated
epidemiological outcomes.

The goals of this project are: (i) Study the transmission dynamics of West Nile
virus in the U.S. and explore useful and effective prevention measures. Based on
the features and characteristics on the transmission of West Nile virus, both
ordinary differential equation models and structured models will be applied.
(ii) Develop spatially-structured models to investigate the role of
environmental contamination on the clinical epidemiology of antibiotic-resistant
bacteria in hospitals focusing on the interactions between health-care workers,
patients and the environment. (iii) Investigate the invasion by small
piscivorous fish in freshwater marsh landscapes in the southern Florida
Everglades by constructing and analyzing advection-reaction-diffusion models.
Since various structured models can be written as abstract semilinear equations,
the nonlinear dynamics of semilinear equations with non-dense domain will be
studied and the theoretical results will be applied to specific biological and
epidemiological problems.