* 1412218
* Genetic, molecular, and biochemical analysis of RNA splicing factors critical for maize endosperm development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Shailesh Lal, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 897,722.00

This project will investigate how plants process RNA to influence maize grain
composition and quality. All organisms express genes by transcribing their DNA
into RNA, with most RNA molecules getting translated into protein. In plants,
animals, and fungi, genes that code for proteins typically have a modular
structure made up of exons, which are needed to express a protein, and introns,
which need to be removed by RNA splicing factors. This project will examine the
role of four RNA splicing factors in removing introns from genes needed to
develop a maize kernel. The research will integrate genetic, molecular, genomic,
and biochemical approaches to define functional networks of genes influenced by
these splicing factors and may identify genes that could be used to improve seed
set or grain-fill in crop plants. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in biological research through multiple activities aimed
at helping the students to develop into professional scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Splicing of pre-mRNA is critical to expressing genes as
phenotypes. However, the molecular mechanisms by which plant RNA splicing
factors influence splice site selection and how alternative splicing influences
plant phenotypes are largely unknown. There are significant gaps in knowledge
about the target introns for individual splicing factors. It is not known how
individual splicing factors influence splicing decisions to control the proteome
and, ultimately, the phenotype of the plant. This project will focus on splicing
factors with strong evidence for functional importance in maize seed
development. RNA splicing events required for seed development will be
identified in splicing factor mutants that cause seed defects. Reverse genetics
analysis will determine the roles of a plant-specific putative splicing SR
protein known to be expressed in seeds. Cell-type specific and direct targets of
two RNA splicing factors critical to the maize endosperm will be identified.
Integrating the data from the aims will elucidate mechanisms by which individual
RNA splicing factors influence gene expression to differentiate endosperm cell
types and ultimately influence multicellular phenotypes. Because seeds are the
primary product of maize crops, understanding RNA splicing in seed development
will both advance fundamental molecular biology and identify pathways and
proteins for future crop improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, both in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.