* 1412183
* Computational Investigations of the Biomechanics of Protein-protein Interactions Involved in the Control of Microtubule Disassembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ruxandra Dima, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 546,741.00

The conversion of energy into mechanical work and the conversion of physical
force into biochemical signals lies at the heart of cellular function, and both
of these processes are mediated by protein-protein interactions. Understanding
the pathways and mechanisms that couple the action of forces from the physical
world with changes in cellular and molecular conformations is a challenging
ongoing effort in modern biology. This project addresses, through computational
modeling at multiple scales within the cell, the behavior of microtubules and
associated proteins which are components of the dynamic structure (the
cytoskeleton) which controls cell shape and responds to external physical forces
on the cell. This project will elucidate underlying principles that govern the
behavior of cellular systems with crucial roles in transducing mechanical forces
and that can be used to design bio-inspired materials with enhanced stability
and fatigue behavior. The project will provide education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students in computational biophysical chemistry and
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in science through the
outreach "Girls in Science and Technology Program" at local middle-schools and
through research experience opportunities for freshmen students participating in
the "Women in Science and Engineering" program at the University of Cincinnati.
The results of the project will be disseminated to the general public by the
investigator and students through publications, conference presentations, and
visits to local schools.

The project will address the role of structural fatigue in microtubule
disassembly. The computer simulations proposed here will reach the long time-
and length-scales required to investigate the mechanical behavior of
microtubules and will supply details about the changes that accompany the
formation of defects in the lattice. Lattice defects are high-affinity binding
sites for proteins involved in the disassembly of microtubules and modulate the
macroscopic elastic behavior addressed experimentally in this project. The
project will also determine the origin of molecular-level changes in microtubule
filament disassembly induced by the mechanical action of microtubule-associated
proteins. Multiscale modeling of filament and microtubule-associated protein
complexes will be used in forced disassembly simulations to determine molecular-
level information about the role of kinesins in inducing highly curved
intermediates during microtubule depolymerization. The combination of
simulations and experiments in this project will establish the link between
microtubule-severing protein interactions and the nature of intermediate steps
of the severing process.