* 1412714
* Collaborative Research: Controlling the Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers through Fundamental Studies of Mechanisms, Methods, and the Direct Correlation to Polymer Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 282,200.00

In this collaborative project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Jason Locklin of University
of Georgia and Dr. Wei You of University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill aim to
establish new chemical approaches that allow for precise control of sequence,
molecular weight, and dispersity in the polymerization of conjugated monomers.
These advances are needed to allow for improved structure/property
relationships, which are critical for the development of organic polymers for
various technologically significant applications including photovoltaics and
flexible electronics. This collaborative project promotes multidisciplinary
education and research experience at the graduate and undergraduate levels. It
is anticipated that graduate students spend time in each other's laboratories
acquiring expertise unavailable in the individual research groups, and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in science and engineering
participate in this project through active recruitment. Consequently,
participants not only learn new science and develop key technologies, but also
build networks of collaborators and contacts and learn important skills for
working in interdisciplinary environments. Furthermore, this collaborative
project features public outreach to K-12 schools with regular classroom visits
to deliver talks on polymers and nanotechnology along with hands-on activities
via kit-based science modules.

This collaborative team aims (1) to develop broadly applicable methods to the
synthesis of conjugated polymers via controlled chain-growth polymerization in
solution, facilitated by a fundamental understanding of the catalytic mechanism
using small molecule competition reactions and the kinetic isotope effect, and
(2) to evaluate materials in device configurations to determine
structure/property relationships of polymers synthesized with high precision
versus those prepared with conventional methods. At the conclusion of these
studies, this collaborative team anticipates having established a rational and
effective method for preparing chain-growth catalysts for selected new monomers
and gained a better understanding between structure/property relationships and
their correlation to device performance in organic electronic devices. This
multi-institutional collaboration integrates the necessary expertise and
resources in synthesis and characterization of novel organic molecules and
polymers, thin film characterization, and in polymer solar cell device
fabrication and characterization. A better understanding of the catalytic cycle
with metal-mediated cross coupling reactions and more precise control of an
interfacial layer in device geometries will have significant impact on other
related fields of organic electronics, such as transistors, light emitting
diodes, and fuel cells.