* 1412084
* Uncovering the biophysical mechanism of Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts molecular function
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Emily Smith, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Proteins in the cell membrane play a role in integrating the cell with its
surrounding environment. For example, the receptor for advanced glycation
endproducts (called RAGE) has many functions including a role in immunity. An
important aspect of membrane protein function is the ability to move throughout
the entire cell membrane to interact with other biological components, and
characterizing this movement is critical to understanding how these proteins
function. This project provides missing information to advance the understanding
of how other biological components affect RAGE movement in the cell membrane.
The award also enables the training of graduate, undergraduate and high school
students. Partners in these endeavors include two programs: one pre-college
program aimed to increase the number of ethnically diverse Iowa students who
pursue science degrees and the other aimed to helps Iowans understand
biotechnology developments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Emily A. Smith from
Iowa State University to characterize the effects of chemically-defined ligand
binding events, cytoplasmic interactions, and other membrane components on RAGE
diffusion and clustering using fluorescence microscopy combined with live cell
measurements. The primary microscopy techniques to be used include single
particle tracking, fluorescence resonance energy transfer and fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching. Details of the molecular mechanism of a pattern-
recognition receptor including the effects of ligand affinity, valency, and
chemical composition on RAGE clustering and diffusion will be elucidated for the
first time. This project provides missing information to advance the
understanding of an important receptor associated with innate immunity and
numerous pathophysiological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;