* 1412719
* Bridging the Gap between Theory and Next-generation Observations of the First Galaxies and Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Cindy Gulis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 506,533.00

This research will develop improved simulation tools for computations that will
help us understand the formation of the first galaxies and quasars. A number of
upcoming observatories will provide data addressing a crucial epoch in cosmic
history: the Epoch of Reionization (EOR), when the first galaxies and quasars
lit up the dark ages and reionized the neutral hydrogen gas. Broader impacts of
the work include training of undergraduate and graduate students. Dr. Li will
create a new program, Research Experience in Astronomy and Computation for High-
school teachers (REACH), for a week-long Penn State In-Service Workshop in
Astronomy. REACH will provide high-school educators interdisciplinary education
and training in astronomy and computer science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Li will
undertake a comprehensive approach to bridging theory and observations of the
EOR by combining multi-scale cosmological hydrodynamic simulations with multi-
wavelength radiative transfer calculations. Three main goals are pursued in this
project: First, she will perform simulations on both galactic and cosmological
scales to follow the formation and evolution of early galaxies and quasars.
Second, she will perform post-processing radiative transfer calculations to
derive multi-wavelength properties of galaxies and map the reionization history.
Third, she will confront models with observations to understand the physical
processes, and make predictions for future surveys.