* 1412367
* Preparation of functional polypeptides via methionine alkylation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 309,400.00

Polypeptides are chemically synthesized mimics of natural proteins, and offer
many advantages as mimics of biological materials for medical uses. Since they
are synthetic, these materials are free from biological impurities that may have
undesirable properties, and also are prepared free from pathogens that may be
carried in biologically derived materials. Chemical modification of polypeptides
is a method to enhance the properties of these materials for eventual use in
applications such as drug delivery vehicles, regenerative medicine scaffolds, or
as medical diagnostic devices. This research project is focused on improving
upon the current state of the art for chemical polypeptide modification to make
these processes more economical and broader in scope. Success of this project is
expected to provide general methods that may be used downstream in a number of
medically important applications. In this project, Prof. Timothy Deming at the
University of California Los Angeles plans to include underrepresented groups,
teach and train graduate and undergraduate students, and disseminate research
findings in publications and presentations. Under the support of the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Prof. Deming conducts research to (i) develop practical, selective
methods to chemically modify polypeptides, and (ii) develop this chemistry for
controlled attachment and release of molecules from polypeptides. More
specifically, his research group plans to explore and develop the reactions of
methionine residues in polypeptides to prepare aklylated methionine sulfonium
derivatives. The key challenge of this project is to determine how alkylating
reagent structure affects the chemistry and stability of the resulting
methionine sulfonium groups. The knowledge gained from these studies can allow
fine tuning of polypeptide functional group reactivity that may be valuable for
downstream specific uses, e.g. in the controlled release of drugs, and is
expected to lay groundwork for development of a new class of functional
biopolymers.