* 1412978
* Fluorinated Amino Acids for Nanobiosensing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Neal Zondlo, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 326,400.00

Biological imaging has broad applications in basic research and in medicine,
with new technologies capable of broad human and economic impact. The
development of methods that can probe specific processes in complex solutions,
in cells, or in organisms can substantially increase our understanding of
complexity in biology and can be ultimately used to develop new approaches to
identify changes that are associated with disease. In this work, new approaches
to detect the functions of proteins and the structure of proteins are developed,
via the incorporation of multiple fluorine atoms into proteins. Fluorine is
exceptionally useful for imaging because it is not normally present in
biological environments and because it can be specifically detected by magnetic
resonance approaches such as MRI. Thus, addition of fluorine to molecules that
are in complex solutions, such as inside cells, allows the specific
identification of that fluorinated molecule in a sea of other non-fluorinated
molecules that are not seen by fluorine magnetic resonance, as well as changes
to those molecules that occur during biological processes. This proposal
involves the development of highly fluorinated amino acids, to allow sensitive
detection, and their incorporation in proteins and application to identify
specific biological processes, including the actions of enzymes and other
proteins, that are important in changes in cells that define development and
disease. This approach should be broadly applicable to the identification of
changes and functions of proteins by magnetic resonance. The technologies
developed herein will be distributed to other researchers for maximum impact and
may be commercialized, contributing to economic development. Undergraduate
researchers will contribute significantly to all aspects of this project,
training students who go on to careers in diverse areas and applications of
science, including research, teaching, medicine, policy, business, and law.
Undergraduate and graduate students trained in this project will have broad
cross-disciplinary education, with preparation for diverse applications in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Neal Zondlo of the University
of Delaware to develop approaches to examine specific enzymatic activities and
protein structure using F-19 NMR with fluorinated amino acids. Probing
biological processes in real time in situ is a substantial challenge whose
solution has broad potential applications in imaging and in understanding basic
biology. The development of new and general approaches to imaging that allow the
identification of specific intracellular or extracellular events will allow new
explorations and interventions in basic and applied biological research. General
methods to the application of fluorinated amino acids for the interrogation of
biological processes in situ with high sensitivity will be developed. F-19
imaging has enormous potential because of its specificity (high signal to noise
due to the absence of fluorine in vivo; application to detect specific molecular
events), its high magnetic sensitivity comparable to proton, and its application
using commercial proton NMR and MRI instruments. The potential of F-19 magnetic
imaging is currently substantially limited by a need to achieve increased
sensitivity for diverse applications and for the development of specific probes
of defined biological processes. An ideal approach to enhance specificity and
sensitivity of F-19 magnetic resonance spectroscopy would involve the
incorporation of an intense fluorine signal in native ligands in a manner that
is minimally disruptive of structure. Methods to incorporate perfluoro-tert-
butyl groups into peptides as novel amino acids will be developed. Perfluoro-
tert-butyl groups have 9 equivalent fluorines, and thus have a 9-fold increase
in signal-to-noise over single fluorines. At least as importantly, perfluoro-
tert-butyl groups are sharp singlets by NMR, further increasing signal-to-noise
and operational simplicity, meaning that most existing proton-based
instrumentation can readily be adjusted to detect peptides containing perfluoro-
tert-butyl groups. This approach will be used to detect kinase activity in real
time by F-19 NMR, with potential applications to imaging diverse biological
processes. In addition, approaches to probe cis-trans isomerism by NMR in
complex solutions will be developed, using 4,4-difluoroproline, an amino acid,
which is a sensitive F-19 NMR probe of the isomerization state of proline amide
bonds. The approaches developed may be broadly applicable to probing processes
in solution, in cells, and potentially in vivo. While this work is initially
focused on applications in kinases and cell signaling, it is also applicable to
other enzymatic modifications of proteins, including proteases and cell surface
ligands, as well as to protein-protein interactions. This work has the potential
to open new and sensitive approaches to imaging.