* 1412439
* Novel amphiphilic polymers to elucidate the effect of architecture on micellization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Curtis Jarand, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

Hybrid polymers that exhibit regions of contrasting solubility (e.g. water-
soluble versus oil-soluble) are termed "amphiphilic polymers". Amphiphilic
polymers are potentially useful in a range of applications including detergents,
emulsifying agents, etc. Some of them have already been utilized commercially in
the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries. The majority of previous research on
amphiphilic polymers has focused on polymeric components that are simple linear
strands. Drs. Scott Grayson, Alina Alb, and Henry Ashbaugh at Tulane University
explore the synthesis of various "non-linear" architectures and study their
properties using both computer modeling and physical analysis to identify unique
and useful materials. As an integral component, undergraduate and graduate
students are trained in state-of-the-art laboratory techniques to provide them
with a technical foundation for careers in the polymer industry. In addition,
this project supports ongoing outreach efforts in New Orleans public school
chemistry classes to demonstrate to the high school students the connections
between textbook chemistry and its real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses specifically on two
classes of polymer architecture: non-linear amphiphilic homopolymers (AHPs) and
"dendrimer-like" star polymers. This research effort simultaneously investigates
the synthesis of new monomers that better address the need for uncharged
amphiphiles, while exploring novel cyclic, star, and caged architectures. The
second class of polymers, dendrimer-like star polymers, enables the
incorporation of branching not only at the core (like traditional star polymers)
but also at the interface between the polar and non-polar blocks. This project
develops modular synthetic approaches to star-dendritic-linear and graft-
dendritic-linear polymers, which allow the length of the linear blocks and
dendron generation to be independently tuned. The synthesis of these unique
architectures is complemented by detailed theoretical modeling (Replica Exchange
dynamics) and state of the art physical characterization (e.g., light scattering
couple with automatic continuous mixing). The relationship between the
structural parameters, the resultant self-assembly behavior, and polymer
properties are explored in detail.