* 1412544
* BECS Collaborative Research:  Modeling the Dynamics of Traffic User Equilibria Using Differential Variational Inequalities
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/16/2013,08/31/2014
* Jong-Shi Pang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 40,864.00

The goal of this project is to employ a novel mathematical paradigm, known as a
differential variational inequality (DVI), to study two fundamental problems in
transportation analysis, namely, the continue-time dynamic user equilibrium with
flow propagation and delays, and the problem of traffic disequilibrium in the
face of network disruption. Our aim is to develop a nonlinear dynamical system
theory that combines classical ordinary differential equation (ODE) methods with
contemporary mathematical programming advances to study the equilibrium of
short-time (e.g. within-day dynamics) and the equilibration process of longer-
time (e.g. transient dynamics) traffic flows, answering questions such as: how
to compute dynamic user equilibria, how traffic evolves from a disequilibrium
state, due to network disruptions, toward an equilibrium, and how close the
current traffic state is to an equilibrium. Results from this study will lead to
a new paradigm integrating traffic network analysis methods with recent advances
in mathematical science, and bridge the gaps between current practice of traffic
analysis and the needs to consider short-term and long-term traffic dynamics in
a holistic manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be the first step to
develop a mathematical framework for traffic dynamic analysis that, in a long
term, has the potential to revolutionize the traditional way of conducting
transportation analyses such as network signal optimization, dynamic congestion
pricing, emergency management after disruptions, among others. Since equilibrium
analysis and system dynamics are widely used in other science and engineering
fields, the concepts and methodologies developed in this research can also
provide new perspectives for equilibrium based analysis in these fields. The
research team plans to integrate research findings to undergraduate and graduate
courses, and involve undergraduate and graduate students with multidisciplinary
backgrounds in this research. The team also plans to reach out to policy makers
and practitioners at various transportation management agencies for whom
findings from the proposed research will enable them to better manage
transportation systems.