* 1412797
* GENI  Engineering Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Russell Clark, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2015
* USD 48,011.00

This project supports hosting the three day 19th edition of the GENI Engineering
conference (GEC), including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be held
Mar 17 - 19, 2014 at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, GA. Both
the conference and the demonstration session will be held at the University or
in university owned conference facilities in order to minimize costs. Event
planning and logistical support for GEC 19 will be coordinated by a team from
GaTech?s Institute for People and Technology which has extensive experience in
conference planning and support at the local, national, and international
levels.

The Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) is a virtual instrument
that is rapidly emerging in prototype form across the United States. GENI aims
to transform experimental research in networking and distributed systems, as
well as emerging research into very large socio-technical systems, by providing
a suite of infrastructure for 'at scale' experiments in future internets.

There are three GECs per year, in which the entire GENI community meets to
review current status, and to decide on subsequent steps in GENI's evolution.
The GECs include community-based working groups leading GENI's design and
planning, and demonstrating progress with live experiments. About 250 to 300
leading researchers and Ph.D. students from diverse US institutions will gather
in Atlanta to showcase their ideas and results. In the demo session over 35 live
demos will be provided with a wired connection to the GENI infrastructure. The
demo evening will be held in the first floor event space of the Technology
Square Research Building located immediately across the street from the
conference hotel and will be provided with high-speed connectivity to Internet2,
the NLR, and the SoX regional network. Each GEC demo project will be issued with
temporary campus-wide wireless credentials that will grant access to the campus
wireless infrastructure and commodity Internet for the duration of the demo
evening.

The GEC meeting and demo sessions provide graduate students with both an
opportunity to demonstrate and explain their work to the GENI community prior to
formal publication. It is a key part of helping new graduate students understand
what is being done with GENI and who amongst their peers at other institutions
might be valuable resources. It also supports outreach to new community members,
including the emerging US Ignite community. GENI is already being used as an
instrument for research, this project supports the continued development and
community development of that instrument.