* 1412643
* Persistence and Permanence in Biological Interaction Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Gheorghe Craciun, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 272,000.00

The phenomenon of persistence is the focus of much modern biological and
biomedical research. Persistence is found at all scales, from the molecular and
cellular, to tissues, organisms, populations, and ecosystems. At the cellular
level, persistence in gene and protein networks plays a key role in the
establishment of homeostasis, which is the ability of the cell to regulate key
variables, so that internal conditions remain relatively constant. At the
intracellular level, the nodes of these interaction networks could be signaling
molecules, genes, and gene products; at the ecosystem level, the nodes could be
the various species and energy resources. Many diseases involve a disturbance of
homeostasis in specific types of cells, which corresponds to a loss of
persistence in the associated interaction networks. A more complete
characterization of persistent systems may improve the understanding of these
diseases. This project will create software that implements mathematical methods
for understanding persistence, and will allow biologists and biomedical
scientists to analyze persistence properties of diverse biological networks of
interest.

Persistence and permanence refer to the capacity of a system to maintain all of
its variables within some fixed limits in a robust way, and this capacity is one
of the most important features of biological interaction networks. In order to
understand the role played by specific biological interactions (e.g., a
signaling pathway in a cell), one often faces great difficulties in trying to
interpret the effect of positive and negative feedbacks, nonlinear interactions,
and other complex signaling between the nodes of the network. These difficulties
are due to the inherent complexity of the dynamics of nonlinear systems. There
are significant mathematical challenges to be overcome, whose study will lead to
rich new areas of biological insight as well as mathematical theory. This
project will analyze persistence as a fundamental theoretical concept that
traverses levels of biological complexity. Mathematical and computational tools
will be developed to understand persistence in general biological interaction
networks. As a concrete step in that direction, this project will focus on
biochemical networks, with the aim to provide mathematical tools for drawing
precise connections between reaction network structure and its persistence
properties. These tools will be applicable to complex networks, and will be able
to distinguish between very similar networks having rather different capacities
for persistence.