* 1412648
* Collaborative Research: Age-Dating M31's Halo and Satellites - Testing the Lambda CDM Paradigm
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Puragra Guha Thakurta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2018
* USD 217,627.00

Stellar halos, the roughly spherical clould of stars orbiting a spiral galaxy,
provide unique insight into the formation and evolution of galaxies, and they
may hold the key to understanding dark matter. From our position inside the
Milky Way, we are unable to fully probe our own halo, because much of it is
blocked from our view. M31 (the "Andromeda Galaxy") is near enough that we can
measure properties of individual stars in its halo. This program will utilize
existing data and obtain new observations of M31 in order to map the
distribution star ages throughout its halo. This will permit them to determine
the relative importance of several different mechanisms that can add stars to a
galaxy halo. Ultimately, this will lead to a better understanding of the history
of our own Milky Way galaxy. This program will create opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate student research at two institutions. The University
of Virginia group works with amateur astronomers on galaxy evolution research
projects and outreach programs to K-12 students in rural Virginia. The
University of California - Santa Cruz team teaches underrepresented high school
students through the COSMOS, MAGIC, and the Science Internship Programs. Both of
the PIs teach large undergraduate courses, actively mentor students, give
regular public lectures and speak in K-12 classrooms.

The PIs will create the first age-distribution profile of the M31 stellar halo.
This work leverages an enormous investment of telescope time over the past 10
years (the SPLASH project) and aims to add two significant new parameters:
metallicity and age distributions. Three new observational methods will be
applied, including a near infrared imaging survey across the M31 halo out to a
distance of 180 kpc, optical time series of anomalous Cepheids in M31 satellite
galaxies, and Keck/DEIMOS spectroscopy of M31 field and dSph stars. This work
leverages an enormous investment of telescope time over the past 10 years (the
SPLASH project) and aims to add two significant new parameters: metallicity and
age distributions.