* 1412232
* Prospecting for Resources: A Systems Integration of Local and Systemic Nutrient Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Gloria Coruzzi, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,523,991.00

Multicellular organisms have distinct organs that need to communicate as an
integrated system in order for the organism to thrive. In animals, for example,
compounds produced in the kidney regulate heart function. In plants, root
foraging for nutrients in the soil requires energy provided by shoots, where
photosynthesis occurs. This inter-organ communication enables plant roots to
rapidly respond to and forage for nutrients in a changing environment as an
integrated system. This project represents the first inter-organ, systems-view
of plant adaptation to a changing environment. Using a special split-root
experimental design in the model Arabidopsis, this work will derive hypotheses
for the molecules and signals controlling a plant's systemic response to
nitrogen uptake and assimilation. The studies will identify novel inter-organ
signals involved in root-shoot communication including mRNAs, small RNAs and
hormones. The new biological understanding gained from this project has the
potential to inform genetic modification of crops for improved nutrient-capture
in soil in a real world environment, thereby reducing the environmental and
energy cost of nitrogen fertilizer used in agriculture. This project will also
develop novel mathematical models and an integrated theoretical framework that
can be used to dissect systems-wide inter-organ signaling across plant biology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major goal of systems biology is to predictively model
how an organism will respond to perturbations as an integrated system. For
multicellular, multi-organ systems, coordination of intra- and inter-organ
signaling is required to mount an integrated response to environmental
perturbations. This grant will test how the interplay of inter-organ systemic
signaling and local signaling enable a plant to actively forage for the growth-
limiting nutrient nitrogen (N) in a complex environment. The novelty of the
approach is the "split-root" system, which can report on both systemic (inter-
organ) and local (intra-organ) signaling which is not possible in standard set-
ups. In the split-root system, roots of a single plant are split and each root-
half is exposed to a different N-environment. This set-up has previously been
used to discover two distinct types of systemic N-signals: i) a "N-demand"
signal from the root-half exposed to an "N-deplete environment that specifically
stimulates lateral root (LR) growth in the distal root exposed to an N-replete
environment, ii) an N-supply" signal from the root-half in the N-replete
environment that specifically represses LR growth in the distal root exposed to
an N-deplete environment. Microarray studies from this set-up uncovered evidence
for a root-shoot-root relay system communicating N-supply and N-demand systems-
wide. The goal of this proposal is to identify these systemic N-supply and
N-demand signals and molecular components involved in this relay in four related
aims. First, to generate causal models for inter-organ signaling, RNA-seq will
be used to monitor mRNA and small RNAs as a function of space (organ) and time
after exposure to a heterogeneous N-environment (Aim 1). Next, inter-organ
traveling RNAs will be captured in phloem - the plant "information highway" (Aim
2). In Aim 3, these datasets will be integrated and modeled to identify causal
target gene pairs that implicate specific signals (hormones, sRNAs and
mRNA/proteins) in systemic inter-organ N-signaling. Candidate signals and genes
will be experimentally validated in Aim 4, where their role in root N-foraging
and N-uptake will be examined. The combined aims will test three non-exclusive
hypotheses: 1. Shoot Response: specific shoot genes/processes affected by
systemic N-signaling are required to mediate root responses to a heterogeneous
N-environment. 2. Trafficking Signal(s): specific long-distance signals
(hormones, mRNAs, or sRNAs) are involved in systemic, inter-organ N-signaling.
3. Root Response: a specific combination of long-distance signals and local
N-response genes in roots triggers root N-foraging in a heterogeneous
N-environment. For the scientific community, this project will develop novel
mathematical models and an integrated theoretical framework for systems-wide
inter-organ signaling. Moreover, the new biology understanding gained from this
project promises to inform genetic modification of crops for improved nutrient-
capture in soils in a real world environment. The ultimate goal is to engineer
plants with improved nitrogen use efficiency, hence reducing the environmental
and energy cost of nitrogen fertilizer used in agriculture.