* 1412547
* Collaborative Research: Redox Regulation of Protein Kinase Functions in Guard Cell Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Alice Harmon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2017
* USD 324,885.00

Stomata are pores on the leaf surface through which plants release oxygen and
water vapor and take up carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The size of the
stomatal aperture (and hence the exchange of carbon dioxide and water vapor with
the atmosphere) is controlled by specialized cells. These cells (called guard
cells) change their shape in response to environmental conditions and are
responsive to a range of signaling systems within the plant. The goal of this
research is to understand how reactive oxygen species and changes in the
reducing and oxidizing biochemistry in guard cells regulate an enzyme system
(protein kinases) that controls stomatal movements in response to environmental
cues. The function of stomata impacts the response of plants to environmental
stress (including temperature and drought) and this research should lead to the
rational breeding of improved (stress resistant) crop plants. The project will
enable cross-disciplinary training of college and high school students
(including women and members of underrepresented groups), in emerging fields of
high-throughput science at the interface of biology and chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use multiple approaches including
molecular biology, biochemistry, genetics and analytical chemistry to tackle a
critical problem in plant biology, i.e., the functions of reactive oxygen
species and redox changes in regulating kinase activities and stomatal
movements. The central hypothesis is that redox-dependent modification of
cysteine residues in key protein kinases provides a versatile means of
regulating kinase function in stomatal signaling. This hypothesis will be tested
by pursuing two specific objectives: 1) To determine the cysteine modifications
of Brassica napus sucrose non-fermenting related kinases. The experiments will
enable comprehensive analysis of cysteine modifications in response to abscisic
acid (a drought stress hormone) and a bacterial flagellin peptide that is
involved in stomatal entrance of plant pathogens. 2) To determine cysteine
modifications functional in stomatal movement and how they affect kinase
phosphorylation. The experiments will identify the cysteine modifications
essential for stomatal movement and analyze cysteine redox changes that regulate
kinase activity. This project will reveal novel regulatory mechanisms underlying
stomatal movements and will contribute to the emerging concept of redox
modulation as a versatile mechanism by which cells regulate important signaling
components and processes.