* 1412700
* Supporting Highlighting and Advancing Recent Developments in Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (SHARED EPR)
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2021
* Stephen Lyon, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2021
* USD 320,701.00

This project establishes a Research Coordination Network named "Supporting,
Highlighting and Advancing Recent Developments in Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance" (SHARED EPR) that aims to promote the development and dissemination
of innovative instrumentation and techniques in the area of EPR spectroscopy.
EPR is of central importance to scientific research in the disciplines of
Chemistry, Physics, Biology, and Materials Science. It is a technique which is
used to investigate structure and dynamics in a wide variety of samples, ranging
from biological molecules to polymers to semiconductors. The information
obtained with EPR is then used to understand how these molecules or materials
function, and how improved ones can be made. However, the broad applicability of
EPR across many scientific disciplines can inhibit effective interaction between
groups that use the technique. It is crucial to the overall growth of the field
of EPR that advances achieved in one discipline be communicated to researchers
in the other disciplines. The SHARED EPR network is designed to ensure these
advances are translated from the lab in which they are developed to the labs in
which they are needed, no matter what discipline is involved. &lt;br/&gt;The
Primary Goals of the network are to: facilitate the advancement of EPR
methodology, instrumentation and techniques; foster cross-fertilization and
establish new collaborative research opportunities within the U.S. EPR
community; and establish international collaborations. The Network will achieve
these goals by spearheading the following network activities and training
opportunities. An annual Grand Challenge Workshop will be organized in
conjunction with a national scientific meeting that brings together a diverse
range of EPR researchers to identify and address major issues facing the field
of EPR spectroscopy. A web portal will be developed to provide a centralized
location for information regarding EPR research and resources and serve as a
gateway to the EPR community for non-specialists. The Network will sponsor EPR
Technology Transfer Experiences in which students and postdocs spend time and
doing experiments in other labs to learn new EPR techniques which they will
bring back and implement in their home labs. Pre-college minority students will
be supported to participate in a research-based science experience at the
Steppingstone Magnetic Resonance Training Center in the Detroit area.
International collaborations will be fostered through the interaction of the
SHARED EPR Network with the German Priority Program SPP 1601 consortium titled
"New Frontiers in Sensitivity for EPR Spectroscopy: From Biological Cells to
Nano Materials." This project is co-funded by the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, the Division of Chemistry, and the Division of Materials
Research.