* 1412336
* DNA elimination mechanisms in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Douglas Chalker, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

The genomes of many organisms contain DNA with no known function. In some
organisms, this so-called junk DNA is eliminated during development by a complex
rearrangement of the genome. However, it is not clear how the cell can tell what
is junk and what is not. This research will study how the ciliate, Tetrahymena
thermophila, establishes what parts of the genome should be thrown away as junk
and what should be retained as functionally important. Because junk DNA is found
in the genomes of many organisms, this work could have broad scientific
significance on understanding how cells deal with extraneous, non-essential DNA.
To accomplish the research, a tool for visualizing genome-related datasets will
be created and made accessible for use by the broader scientific community,
thereby improving the current scientific infrastructure. The project will
enhance the future scientific workforce by engaging trainees from the
undergraduate to post-doctoral level in hypothesis-driven research. The research
efforts will be coordinated with curricular development activities of the
principle investigator, and thus will facilitate best teaching practice by
bringing authentic research into the university biology classroom. Students
engaged in the classroom research, in turn, will gain first-hand experience in
the practice of scientific discovery and add to a growing body of scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate mechanisms that
eukaryotic cells use to establish boundaries between functionally distinct
regions of the genome by exploiting the model experimental organism, Tetrahymena
thermophila, which eliminates much of its non-coding DNA from the somatic copy
of its genome. Using a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches, the
work will uncover mechanisms that Tetrahymena cells use to define the boundaries
of the DNA segments that are eliminated during its development. The fact that
Tetrahymena eliminates these sequences allows one to unambiguously identify
those that get packaged as junk by comparing the content of the reorganized
somatic genome and the intact germline genome. The project will use available
Tetrahymena genome sequences to generate a genome browser that will map the
retained and eliminated regions, using the intact genome as a reference.
Previous research revealed that a regulatory protein called Lia3 is critical for
the accurate removal of a subset of the eliminated sequences. The genome browser
will be used to compare the DNA of normal cells to DNA from cells lacking LIA3
to identify all the sequences for which elimination boundaries are inaccurately
defined when this protein is absent. Preliminary experiments have revealed that
the sequences controlled by Lia3 contain guanine (G)-rich sequences positioned
about 50 base pairs from each boundary. Lia3 binds these sequences when they
form G-quadruplex DNA, a four-stranded DNA structure. This represents a novel
DNA binding activity, and the project will thoroughly characterize both the
ability of Lia3 to bind this non-standard DNA structure and elucidate how this
structure can serve to organize the genome. In addition, the Tetrahymena genome
encodes three other proteins that are similar to Lia3 in sequence and gene
expression, and the project will test the hypothesis that each of these proteins
identifies the boundaries of a distinct subset of eliminated DNA. Together,
these approaches will characterize a previously unknown mechanism that
eukaryotic cells use to define boundaries between genes and non-coding DNA and
provide clear evidence that G-quadruplex structures have important regulatory
roles.