* 1412107
* Collaborative Research: Modelling the Turbulent Galaxy Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Nickolay Gnedin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2018
* USD 434,681.00

Anywhere that there is a fluid in motion, whether liquid or gas, there will be
turbulence. These disturbances to the flow can be very significant, but their
possibly profound effect on the formation of galaxies out of the cosmic gas
remains an area of mystery in our fundamental understanding of how the Universe
evolves. This work seeks to correct this lack, using high powered computers to
carry out novel numerical simulations with very high resolution. For the first
time, pretty well all of the physics involved in forming stars within galaxies
will be included. The calculations will be intimately connected with telescope
data, both checking the computer results and helping to understand the
observations. The new ideas will also be useful for other studies of turbulent
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmic gas flows have high velocities, span
enormous scales, and are highly turbulent, but the possibly profound effects of
turbulence on galaxy formation are largely unexplored. This project is a
systematic exploration of turbulence and its effects on accretion flows, star
formation, and the structure of galaxies, in self-consistent cosmological
simulations using adaptive mesh refinement (AMR). Part of the work will
implement and test a novel model for sub-grid scale turbulence and use it to
estimate local turbulent stresses. This model will be used to add new
physically-motivated prescriptions for star formation into the galaxy formation
simulations, incorporating a rich set of physical processes thought to be
critical for comparison with observations, including modeling of molecular
hydrogen, chemical enrichment and evolution, dust formation and destruction,
radiative transfer of ionizing and far-ultraviolet radiation, star formation,
and stellar feedback with radiation pressure and cosmic rays. Observational
comparisons will test and inform the theoretical models, while the simulation
results will help to understand the data. Scientific results will include
quantifying the effects of turbulence on the cold accretion gas flows onto
galaxies, assessing the relative contribution of dynamical drivers of
turbulence, and quantifying the effects of turbulence on the density structure
of the gas. The emphasis on observational comparisons will make this study
particularly valuable for interpreting the results from current and future
facilities. Both the methods and the results will be of value for other
simulations and for semi-analytic models. The simulations also lend themselves
well to high-fidelity, scientifically-accurate visualizations well suited to the
high resolution environment of full-dome planetarium projectors, but of value to
all planetaria.