* 1412417
* Constraining the Magneto-Rotational Instability in Accretion Disks with Simulations of Dwarf Novae and X-ray Binary Outbursts
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Omer Blaes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2019
* USD 235,400.00

Material falling onto dwarf stars, neutron stars, and black holes, a process
called accretion, powers some of the most energetic and fascinating astronomical
sources. Because rotation is common in the Universe, most accretion systems form
disks swirling around the central gravitating object, where material must
transfer away its rotational inertia, or angular momentum, before continuing
inwards. The matter flowing inwards also spends time in the disk converting
energy into the outgoing radiation by which these objects can be observed. This
research will apply new methods to understanding the process of angular momentum
transport in disks around white dwarf stars, and may finally settle whether the
currently dominant model is in fact correct.

Magneto-rotational instability (MRI) turbulence has become the dominant research
framework for understanding angular momentum transport and the release of
accretion power in accretion disks across all of astrophysics, from proto-
planetary disks to active galactic nuclei. Although the ultimate goal is to
model observed sources, little attention has been paid so far to dwarf nova
outbursts in accretion disks orbiting white dwarfs, which offer the most
interesting observational constraints on angular momentum transport. Using
vertically-stratified, radiation magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) shearing box
simulations of MRI turbulence, this research will build on recent results
showing intermittent thermal convection. Three new studies are planned: (1)
ensure that the thermal convection is numerically resolved, and understand how
it enhances turbulent transport, (2) incorporate non-ideal MHD in the largely
neutral state to see if MRI turbulent transport can be sustained in the
quiescent state; and (3) incorporate lessons learned about the vertical
structure and angular momentum transport into existing alpha-based models of the
hydrogen ionization disk instability. This direct confrontation between the MRI
model and observations will firm up the theoretical foundation of the hydrogen
ionization disk instability, and allow observations of dwarf novae and low mass
X-ray binaries to constrain more effectively the properties of MRI turbulence.

One graduate student will develop their thesis from this project, several
undergraduates are expected to be involved, and the research will inform public
talks, including a new one being developed specifically on the science contained
in this work.