* 1412773
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The role of quality control in microbial translation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Beth Lazazzera, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 473,211.00

The goal of this research is to understand what happens to cells when they make
mistakes in their genetic codes - why is it that sometimes mistakes help cells
grow better, while in other instances cells may die? The project will integrate
laboratory research and training programs for undergraduate and graduate
students, including members of historically underrepresented minorities. The
impact of these efforts will be measured by the presentation of research
findings at local and national scientific meetings, by future placements of
students, and by student authorship of peer reviewed publications. This project
will also provide laboratory training and education experiences for high school
and community college students. In addition, the project will contribute to
other broader activities including a training course in advanced bacterial
genetics, and mentoring workshops for junior investigators.

Translating the four-letter code of RNA into the twenty-two-letter alphabet of
proteins is a central feature of cellular life. The accuracy of this process,
translation of the genetic code, determines how faithfully the information in a
genome is transformed into proteins with correct amino acid sequences. The role
of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases in translation is to define the genetic code by
correctly pairing cognate tRNAs with their corresponding amino acids. Aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases select the correct tRNA with comparative ease due to the unique
sequences and structures found in these small RNAs. In comparison, the
simplicity of amino acid structures makes discrimination between them far more
difficult. Synthetases achieve the amino acid substrate specificity necessary to
keep errors in translation to an acceptable level in two ways: preferential
binding of the cognate amino acid, and selective editing of non-cognate and non-
protein amino acids. Editing significantly decreases the frequency of mistakes
during aminoacyl- tRNA synthesis in vitro, although many details of the reaction
mechanism and the impact of in vivo editing remain unclear. We have identified
different growth conditions where editing is required for viability, for example
in response to oxidative stress and starvation, and during cellular
differentiation. It is not fully clear why quality control (QC) through aaRS
editing is required under only a subset of growth conditions, but under some of
these conditions, the lack of editing leads to the accumulation of toxic, non-
protein amino acids in proteins. Under other conditions, the lack of editing may
decrease the amount of uncharged tRNA, a critical molecule that cells sense in
order to mount a necessary starvation response. The objectives of this project
are to use microbial genetic, physiological and biochemical approaches to
determine the mechanisms by which quality control impacts cellular function in
response to stress, and the impact of quality control on mistranslation with
non-cognate and non-protein amino acids.