* 1412085
* Collaborative Research:  Tear Film Dynamics: Modeling, Blinking, and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Richard Braun, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 396,553.00

According to data from 2008, nearly 5 million Americans age 50 or older suffer
from moderate to severe dry eye syndrome (DES). Symptoms include discomfort and
reduced visual function. The dynamics of the tear film is thought to be critical
in the development of DES; rapid evaporation and/or insufficient tears are
thought to cause chronic irritation leading to DES. Both of these mechanisms can
lead to elevated saltiness (osmolarity), which is believed to be a key variable
in understanding the irritation to the eye surface. The results from this
project will yield quantitative insight into tear film flows and osmolarity
dynamics that may impact how ocular scientists interpret their data. The team,
which is based at the University of Delaware and the Rochester Institute of
Technology, will work closely with leading optometrists to achieve this goal.
The investigators will train mathematical scientists with advanced knowledge of
and experience with physical and biomedical modeling, advanced computation, and
physiological application. These trainees include five undergraduate and two
graduate students, and one postdoctoral fellow. All trainees will participate
extensively in dissemination of results to the applied mathematical and
biomedical communities, via publication and travel to scientific meetings. New
information discovered as part of the activity will be incorporated into
graduate and undergraduate training through lectures, discussion in group
seminars at the participating universities, and future research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators based at the University of Delaware
and the Rochester Institute of Technology will collaborate to study the dynamics
of the tear film on the human eye in an effort to understand its function and to
help clarify causes and consequences of dry eye syndrome (DES). The results will
help explain and visualize the complex tear motion during blinking and to
quantify the variability of critical quantities such as tear saltiness
(osmolarity). To do so, new tear film models consisting of nonlinear coupled
high-order partial differential equations on moving, two-dimensional eye-shaped
domains will be formulated using a variety of methods from applied mathematics
and mechanics. The team will then develop two new computational techniques to
solve the models. Current tear film models will be advanced by incorporating
increasingly challenging effects of evaporation and lipid layer motion on
complex moving domains. The project will draw upon the thin liquid film
literature and from close consultation with experimental optometrists to make
informed decisions about mathematical modeling, comparison with in vivo
experimental data, and sensible interpretation of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Mathematical Biology Program in
the Division of Mathematical Sciences is co-funded by the Fluid Dynamics Program
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.