* 1412582
* RUI: Evolution of Signal Transduction Pathways in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Dennis Wykoff, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2018
* USD 548,273.00

The goal of this project is to understand how differences in metabolism have
arisen in the response of related organisms to changes in their environment.
Each of the fungal species to be studied experiences a slightly different
environment and each species is expected to have tailored its metabolism, over
evolutionary time, to be best suited for that environment. The thiamine signal
transduction pathway will be studied in the yeast species Candida glabrata and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and compared to the well-studied pathway in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This project will answer questions about how thiamine
(vitamin B1) synthesis is regulated in these organisms and how this system has
evolved to impact growth in different environments. All organisms require
thiamine and its uptake or synthesis is critical for growth. Understanding how
the thiamine signal transduction pathways have evolved in yeast species will
give a better understanding of the extent to which the gain and loss of genes
affects how an organism is able to respond to its environment. This project will
be carried out at Villanova University (a primarily undergraduate institution)
and will provide research training and experiences for Masters level students
and undergraduate students from Villanova and Immaculata University.
Undergraduates working on this project will, on average, spend over two years
working on their research, and will be encouraged to take responsibility for
their projects and to present their data at professional meetings

Thiamine is synthesized de novo in most microorganisms and is a dietary
requirement in all animals. This project examines in detail the thiamine signal
transduction pathways in C. glabrata (a mammalian commensal that is closely
related to the model yeast S. cerevisiae) and S. pombe. The goal of this work is
to understand the evolutionary changes that have permitted these organisms to
occupy different environments. In S. cerevisiae, transcription of the thiamine
biosynthetic genes requires the transcription factor Thi2 which is surprisingly
lacking in C. glabrata. Although C. glabrata can synthesize thiamine with
reduced efficiency it appears to scavenge thiamine efficiently from the
environment. This work will test the hypothesis that the gain of Thi2 in some
yeast species has allowed for more efficient thiamine synthesis and that C.
glabrata lost Thi2 because it grows in mammalian tissues which are likely a rich
source of thiamine. The project will: 1) examine the evolution of thiamine-
regulated promoters through rt-qPCR, reporter fusions, and cross complementation
experiments, 2) examine the changes in environmental niche that have allowed for
loss of some thiamine regulatory genes in C. glabrata, 3) examine the
neofunctionalization of the C. glabrata PMU gene array to generate a highly
specific thiamine pyrophosphatase, and 4) examine the consequences on fitness
using competitions between species or strains with given thiamine gene network
architectectures. This project will elucidate 1) the evolution of thiamine
signal transduction/synthesis pathways in fungi 2) the role of the Thi2
transcription factor in this pathway and 3) determine the impact of signal
transduction pathway re-wiring on environmental specialization.