* 1412365
* A Platform for the CHO Biomanufacturing Systems Biology Community
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kelvin Lee, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 959,983.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET will provide
tools and infrastructure needed to help in the biomanufacturing of protein-based
high value products that can be used in a variety of applications, including as
medicines. A majority of these proteins are manufactured using "mammalian cells"
and represents more than $60,000,000,000 per year in sales. There are numerous
problems and issues in the biomanufacturing of these proteins that have not been
adequately addressed because of incomplete knowledge of how the most common cell
platform technology (known as the Chinese hamster ovary or CHO cell) functions.
Recently, the genome of the CHO cell has been published and shared and an
international community of academic and industrial partners has emerged to
organize and build upon this new knowledge. The work that will be pursued during
this project will provide necessary tools and infrastructure to support the CHO
genome effort, lead to a better understanding of some of the causes for problems
in the biomanufacturing of proteins, and has the potential to substantially
reduce the manufacturing cost of some of the most expensive biologics. Besides
its importance for the research and manufacturing in the biotechnology industry,
the project will also involve training of the workforce for this rapidly
expanding sector of the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
The establishment of the CHO K1 (a cell line) genome, together with two
different versions of the Chinese hamster, offers the possibility of
establishing a new reference genome and a number of related resources for this
community. In Aim 1, the project will test different approaches to merge the two
existing Chinese hamster genomes using a variety of bioinformatic approaches.
This effort will create a new reference genome that benefits from the
chromosomal information contained in one of the genomes with the high coverage
depth in the other of the Chinese hamster genomes. In Aim 2, the project will
develop and share bioinformatic tools related to mRNA and peptide/protein
expression that should provide enhanced functionality to the current CHO genome
browser. Aim 2 will also provide a resource for establishing product quality
limits by offering a framework for calculating the range of possible glycoforms
available to any given CHO cell. In Aim 3, the project will, for the first time,
establish a framework to define genome and chromosomal (in)stability which forms
the basis for important problems in biomanufacturing.