* 1412063
* Mechanism of neocentromere motility and meiotic drive in maize
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 630,000.00

The predictive power of genetics rests on the concept that all genes have the
same chances of being passed on to offspring. This is Mendel's first Law of
Segregation. The goal of this project is to better understand the rules of
genetics by studying a rare exception that violates this fundamental tenant. By
using maize as the study species, we can visualize genetic segregation with
precision, as the chromosomes are large and easily visualized, and the
transmission of genes can be seen in the familiar form of colored kernels on an
ear of corn. Students trained on this project will participate in traditional
field genetics, chromosome analysis using advanced microscopy, and molecular
assays of the genes that control the process of meiosis that divides and
segregates chromosomes. Scientists at all levels, ranging from undergraduates at
a small liberal arts college to graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at a
major research university will participate in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most famous exceptions to Mendel's First Law
occurs in maize by a chromosome variant known as Abnormal chromosome 10 (Ab10).
This chromosome skews segregation in its favor through a mysterious mechanism
that involves the formation of "neocentromeres" that move independently during
meiosis. Segregation distortion mechanisms such as this are referred to as
meiotic drive. Recent data indicate that a novel kinesin gene (Kin618) located
on Ab10 controls neocentromeres and meiotic drive in maize. The goal of this
work is to fully characterize Kin618 and to initiate a larger study to identify
other factors involved. Extensive new sequence resources will be developed to
help us interpret the origin and evolution of this fascinating chromosome. These
studies will expand our knowledge of the maize genome and provide important new
insights into the mechanism of chromosome segregation in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant
Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.