* 1412060
* In situ Time-Resolved Spectroscopic Studies of Redox Reactions Involving Adsorbed Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Daniel Scherson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 01/31/2019
* USD 495,000.00

Professor Daniel A. Scherson of Case Western Reserve University is supported by
the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Division of Chemistry to
investigate the mechanism of reactions involving nitrogen and sulfur oxides both
in molecular and ionic forms in aqueous solutions, as well as other species of
relevance to energy conversion and electrosynthesis. Emphasis is centered on the
development and implementation of spectroscopic techniques for monitoring in
situ the time evolution of such species in the nanosecond domain and the factors
that control the reaction pathways. The results emerging from these studies will
open new prospects for addressing societal problems associated with
environmental control and remediation, such as those derived from the overuse of
fertilizers, and energy storage and conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the in situ static and dynamic characterization of
irreversibly adsorbed electrocatalysts for these reactions, as well as the
effect of the microtopography of selected bare and atom-modified single crystal
metal surfaces on the nature of adsorbed intermediates and other interfacial
properties. Insight into these issues will be gained from the coupling of
microelectrodes, charge injection, and an array of complementary microscope-
based spectroscopic techniques, including UV visible reflection spectroscopy,
resonance and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopies, and sum frequency and
second harmonic generation. The success of this work would provide a means for
extending in situ spectroelectrochemical techniques into the nanosecond range,
allowing the study of the dynamic aspects of electron transfer events of
relevance to a variety of other fields, including electrocatalysis,
heterogeneous catalysis, corrosion, sensors, and environmental science. Students
involved in this research will be trained in a broad range of fundamental and
applied disciplines.