* 1412768
* Modeling the Cosmic Melting Pots in the Outskirts of Galaxies and Galaxy Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Daisuke Nagai, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2018
* USD 493,971.00

Understanding the growth of galaxies and galaxy clusters is one of the most
significant outstanding problems in our knowledge of the universe. On the
largest scales, the universe has a filamentary structure, with gas and dark
matter interweaving in a series of threads. The gradual flow and build-up of gas
along this "cosmic web" ultimately leads to the formation of protogalaxies and
protoclusters. Despite this, the precise manner in which galaxies and their
clusters eventually form remains poorly understood. A breakthrough step, enabled
by this research, is to connect and synthesize our knowledge of the gas in the
outskirts of galaxies with that in galaxy clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will address a number of critical questions regarding the structure and
flow of gas by using a suite of high-resolution cosmological simulations. The PI
will principally use the Adaptive Refinement Tree (ART) code, but will also
compare the results of these simulations with detailed multi-wavelength
observations of clusters and the circumgalactic medium. The work will lead to
new insights into the baryon budgets in galaxies and clusters, the impact of
galactic feedback on extended halo gas, the environmental dependence of galaxy
evolution, and the quenching of star formation in galaxies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also develop a hands-on computational
astrophysics curriculum to expand minority involvement in computational science,
in collaboration with the Science, Technology, and Research Scholars (STARS)
program at Yale University. Furthermore, the data products of the simulations
will be made available via online publicly-accessible databases.