* 1412140
* Spontaneous formation of singularities through critical collapse
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Pavel Lushnikov, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

This project is devoted to the study of mathematical nature of phenomena of
collapse that arise in a variety of biological and physical systems. For
example, collapse may occur when a powerful laser beam enters a transparent
medium, such as usual glass. Interaction of the medium with the laser beam
results in self-focusing when the intense light creates an effective lens inside
the medium and amplifies itself during propagation until the singularity of the
light amplitude is reached. Mathematically a singularity means that the
corresponding mathematical solution approaches infinity. Qualitatively similar
collapse phenomena occur in hydrodynamics as well as in the bacterial growth
(for example, for E. Coli). In the latter case, communications between bacteria
(through a chemical substance called chemoattractant) cause spontaneous
aggregation of the bacterial colony to a very high (almost singular) bacterial
density. Solutions of the corresponding nonlinear systems of partial
differential equations that model phenomena with collapse experience spontaneous
formation of singularities in finite time (blow-up). Blow-up is often
accompanied by a dramatic contraction of the spatial extent of a solution, hence
the term "collapse." Near the singularity point there is a qualitative change in
underlying nonlinear phenomena; the initial mathematical models lose their
applicability and other mechanisms become more important, such as optical
breakdown and formation of plasma in optical media, or bacterial crowding and
formation of multicellular organisms from the bacterial
colony.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on phenomena of collapse
in the Nonlinear Schr√∂dinger equation (NLSE), Keller-Segel equation (KSE) and
Davey-Stewartson equation (DSE) which are archetypal equations to study finite
time singularities in the critical dimension two. These equations are among most
universal and widespread equations in nonlinear science with numerous
applications in nonlinear optics, hydrodynamics and biology. The need in
understanding collapse became especially pressing since the advent of lasers in
early 60s. More than 50 years of research produced well-established collapse
theories for NLSE and KSE. However, until recently it remained a puzzle why
these theoretical results were never confirmed by either direct simulations or
in experiments. The explanation is that the existing theories required
unrealistically large amplitudes for their applicability. This project will
develop a detailed theory of collapse scaling and collapse regularization in
NLSE and KSE for the realistic amplitudes. The principal investigator will also
develop a DSE collapse scaling theory, which has been lacking for many years.
The effort will be made to make the theory a practical tool for applications.
Both perturbative and nonperturbative approaches will be used, as well as
matched asymptotic techniques and extensive supercomputing. Diverse applications
of NLSE, KSE and DSE will promote cross-fertilization of ideas across the fields
of nonlinear optics, hydrodynamics, Bose-Einstein condensation and biology.