* 1412549
* CHILES VERDES: The Transient Radio Sky at Incomparable Depth
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Laura Chomiuk, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 262,103.00

Most astronomical phenomena change slowly, over millions or billions of years,
but the most violent events in the universe - like supernovae, star mergers, and
black hole outbursts - can vary on timescales of just days. This program will
explore rapid variations in the sky at radio wavelengths, searching for new
classes of violent events and informing such long-standing questions as the
origin of the elements and the production of near-light-speed jets. By
capitalizing on the dramatically improved sensitivity of the upgraded Very Large
Array in New Mexico and "piggy-backing" off an approved radio observation, which
will stare at one place in the sky for 42 days, the PI and her collaborators
will obtain the most sensitive survey ever for variable and transient radio
sources. PI Chomiuk is actively engaged in undergraduate education and public
outreach at Michigan State University. As director of the MSU Campus
Observatory, she leads monthly public observing nights and special hands-on
events for the broader Michigan community, highlighting dynamic celestial events
like bright supernovae and novae. As part of this program, she will expand the
Observatory's public programs. In addition, she will educate undergraduates in
career paths and broaden their participation in community educating. She will
work with undergraduates on authentic research experiences, founded on data from
the campus observatory and national radio telescope facilities.

The PI and her collaborators will conduct the most sensitive radio transient
survey to date. They will use data from the CHILES program, the radio equivalent
of the Hubble Deep Field. The JVLA will observe a single field away from the
galactic plane for 1002 hours in total between 2013 and 2016 in order to measure
neutral hydrogen in other galaxies. CHILES VERDES is an adjunct program to use
the time-resolved continuum (0.9-1.8 GHz) data to search for radio transients.
Some of the most violent events in the universe should produce radio transients:
supernovae, gamma-ray bursts, mergers of compact objects, tidal disruption
events, and more. With the sensitivity of the VLA, a 3-year timeline, a well
characterized field, and contemporaneous observations at other wavelengths, they
expect to increase the sample of radio transients by several orders of magnitude
over the small handful previously observed.