* 1412858
* RUI: Petobactin Mediated Iron-Acquisition in Bacillus cereus Group Microbes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Bianca Garner, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2018
* USD 354,300.00

Environmental conditions regulate the expression of genes in bacteria. These
complex regulatory processes afford microbes the ability to survive under
various conditions. These cues can range from temperature to pH and nutritional
availability. In members of the Bacillus cereus group, iron availability has
been demonstrated to regulate genes associated with numerous pathways, including
iron acquisition. Iron uptake in Bacillus cereus group microbes have emerged as
areas of interest in the identification virulence factors. This group includes
the human pathogen Bacillus cereus, the insect pathogen Bacillus thuringiensis,
and the zoonotic pathogen Bacillus anthracis. Ferric iron and heme iron sources
have been identified as critical for the growth and virulence of many of these
microbes. An important iron uptake mechanism for the B. cereus group microbes is
the siderophore petrobactin. A unique compound, this siderophore has only been
isolated within the Bacillus cereus group microbes and the marine Marinobacter
species. The level of this small, ferric chelator can be altered by both growth
temperature and iron availability. While most siderophore are regulated by the
ferric uptake regulator, there are no clearly defined regulatory mechanisms
involved in petrobactin production, as it lacks the ferric regulator sequence
within the petrobactin operon. The focus of the study will address the signaling
mechanisms that govern iron uptake in response to iron and temperature. This
research will involve undergraduates from Tougaloo College, a historically black
college in Mississippi. The proposed project will work in concert with the
Tougaloo College Natural Sciences Division's plan to increase the African-
American STEM pipeline by strengthening the undergraduate research experience
and enhancing the curriculum.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. Iron availability in microbes has been demonstrated to
regulate gene expression. In the Bacillus cereus group microbes, several iron
acquisition systems have been detected, including siderophore mediated transport
and heme uptake systems. Bacillus cereus group microbes produce two catechol
containing siderophores, bacillibactin and petrobactin. While bacillibactin is
regulated by iron availability via the ferric iron uptake regulation, no such
regulatory mechanism is identified within the petrobactin operon. The proposed
study will seek to elucidate the mechanisms governing petrobactin production in
response to environmental signals, including iron and temperature. Aim one will
focus on identifying petrobactin regulatory genes. Transposon mutagenesis will
be employed to identify Bacillus cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis mutants not
capable of regulating petrobactin production. The temperature sensitive plasmid
pIC333, which carries the mini-Tn10 transposon element, will be used to
transform B. cereus and B. thuringiensis. Antibiotic resistant mutants will be
cultured for 12 hours in transferrin containing medium and then cultured
overnight in the presence of streptonigrin. Microbes capable of utilizing
transferrin iron, which is predicted to be mediated by petrobactin, will be
killed by the streptonigrin. Viable cells will be isolated on complex,
antibiotic containing medium. The chrome azurol S assay, the Arnow assay and
thin layer chromatography will be used to characterize siderophore and catechol
production in isolated mutants. Genome sequencing and complementation will be
used to identify and confirm sequence involvement in petrobactin production. Aim
two will focus on characterizing B. cereus group member phenotypes under iron
and temperature growth conditions. We have observed that petrobactin
biosynthesis genes are differentially regulated when cells were cultured in
different iron sources and under different temperatures. Environmental and ATCC
B. cereus group microbes will be cultured in iron replete and deplete conditions
for 24 hours. Aliquots will be removed at specific time points to measure
petrobactin production during the various growth phases. At each of the time
points, cell motility and spore concentration will also be measured.
Transcriptional profiling will be used to identify unique signatures associated
with iron and growth temperature in B. cereus and B. thuringiensis. This study
will provide insight into the complex regulatory mechanisms of B. cereus group
microbes in response to environmental cues.