* 1412411
* Genetic and Molecular Signaling Associated with Cell-cell Fusion in Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2019
* N. Louise Glass, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 05/31/2019
* USD 749,204.00

Cell-cell fusion is an essential process in most multicellular organisms. In
filamentous fungi, formation of cellular networks via fusion of cells is
essential for movement of nutrients, which has an immediate applicability to
industrial fungus control. In order to interact with one another and respond to
environmental cues, these fungi communicate via chemical languages using
extracellular signals and cellular responses. This project will study the
molecular mechanisms of specific signaling proteins that localize to sites of
interaction between cells in order to provide a model to understand signaling
between genetically identical cells. The project offers an interdisciplinary
training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral
associates (including members of underrepresented groups) who will conduct live
cell microscopy, as well as genetics, biochemistry, and molecular biology
experiments. They will present their work at national and international
conferences, and they will have opportunities to author publications on their
research. In addition, biological images and movies developed as a result of the
proposed research will be distributed to other Universities and mycological
organizations nation-wide as teaching material at undergraduate level and for
the public at large. The elucidation of chemical communication in fungi is
important for understanding their role in nature and serves as a molecular
paradigm for cell-cell communication. Understanding at molecular scale the
homotypic fusion of filamentous fungi has the potential to uncover a new
paradigm, that is, a novel mode of establishing specific communication and
fusion between related cells. In Neurospora crassa, the attraction of cells to
each other, and subsequent fusion, requires a precise regulation of protein
localization and activation which is dependent upon reception of chemical
signals. Analyses of wild specimens of N. crassa indicate that different
chemical languages (i.e. dialects) determine whether or not fusion will occur
between genetically different specimens. This project will study the molecular
mechanisms of specific signaling proteins that localize to sites of interaction
between cells in order to provide a model to understand signaling between
genetically identical cells. Using genomic comparisons between wild specimens,
the genetic basis of the chemical dialects will be determined.