* 1412958
* AF: Large: Theory of Computation - Pushing the State-of-the-Art
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Avi Wigderson, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,000,003.00

This project is aimed at understanding a variety of fundamental questions in the
theory of computation. It will be carried out via the postdoctoral mentoring
program at the Institute for Advanced Study, and as such the specific topics of
focus will evolve with the postdocs present each year. Current foci include,
among others, the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- The power of formulas.
&lt;br/&gt;Formulas is the most basic mathematical and computational descriptive
mechanisms. Understanding their minimal length for natural problems captures at
once limitation on the space requirements, as well as the potential parallelism
inherent in the problem. The award will focus on the most challenging direction,
which has so far resisted attack - proving limitation of formulas. More
generally, the researchers will pursue proving limitations of other natural
computational models, especially arithmetic computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
The power of relaxations&lt;br/&gt;The "meta-algorithms": Linear and semi-
definite relaxations of integer programs, are among the most fruitful and
powerful techniques for solving (or finding approximate solutions) to
optimization problems. The award will focus on understanding the limits of these
techniques. This work ties in naturally to understanding the limitations of
natural proof systems and of natural strategies for search
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Peeking inside the "black-box"&lt;br/&gt;One
of the most useful paradigms in programming and learning is the encapsulation of
objects as black-boxes, to which only input-output access is allowed. With this
utility come limitations which can hopefully overcome if we are allowed some
access into the internal workings of the black box. Modeling such access, in
scientific experiments, machine learning and computational complexity is a
challenge the researchers plan to
pursue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational complexity, a foundational
core of computer science, has proved itself a remarkably deep and fruitful
fountain of problems, ideas and techniques over the past decades. The research
agenda is expected to be a driver of innovation in Theoretical Computer Science
and related disciplines. Some of the areas of study have potential implications
outside theory, especially machine learning, coding theory, scientific discovery
and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the educational side, the mentoring program
furthers the quality of IAS postdocs to serve as outstanding teachers, graduate
advisors and academic leaders and innovators in one of the most exciting
branches of science today. Whether IAS alumni pursue a career in academia or
industry their impact on technology and on the training of new generations
undergraduate and graduate education is immense.