* 1412497
* Spatially precise optogenetics at depth: cracking neural circuits with structured illumination and ultrafast imaging in the intact brain. DEC 8-10, 2013; Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Hillel Adesnik, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Optogenetics is rapidly altering how scientists reveal the basic operation of
the brain circuits that are central to sensation, action, and cognition. The
vast majority of optogenetic studies to date have primarily capitalized on the
genetic side of optogenetics taking advantage of the specificity of gene
expression to&lt;br/&gt;control and image unique cell types and connections in
the brain. However, precise spatial&lt;br/&gt;control of the illuminating light
affords an additional dimension of specificity that has been underutilized,
partly owing to the challenges posed by the scattering properties of brain
tissue. Recent and future work in multi-photon imaging and structured
illumination, combined with alternative approaches such as micron scale,
implantable illumination devices promise to open up whole new avenues of
research to understand the elementary basis of neural computation, sensory
coding, and neural defects in brain diseases such as autism, schizophrenia, and
epilepsy. There will a focus at this meeting:on advances in structured
illumination, ultrafast imaging and local implantable illumination devices, to
control neural activity at brain depths beyond the limits of multi-photon
microscopy. Invitees will present their recent advances, and also discuss the
major outstanding challenges in this field and how to surmount
these&lt;br/&gt;challenges to develop the necessary technologies that will
unlock fundamental aspects of brain function and disease.