* 1412826
* A Joint Mathematical and Experimental Study on Cholera Transmission Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Fred Dobbs, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

Cholera is a severe intestinal infectious disease that remains a serious public
health threat in developing countries, especially in Africa and in the Indian
subcontinent. This project aims to establish a new mathematical and experimental
framework to model, analyze, validate, and simulate cholera transmission
dynamics. Incorporating bacterial growth, seasonal variation, and spatial
heterogeneity, the framework overcomes the limitations in current cholera
epidemic models. Toward this goal, new mathematical models based on differential
equations will be introduced, innovative laboratory experiments will be
conducted, optimal control study will be carried out, and large-scale high-
performance numerical computation will be performed. The project represents an
interdisciplinary collaboration between applied mathematics and microbial
ecology, integrating mathematical analysis, laboratory experiments, and
numerical simulation. The research will improve our understanding of the
fundamental dynamics of cholera, which involve multiple transmission routes and
complex interaction among human and ecological hosts, bacteria and viruses, and
exhibit complex spatial and temporal variations under global climatic and
environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide cholera outbreaks and
their increasing severity, frequency and duration in recent years underscore the
gap between the complex mechanism of cholera transmission and our current
quantitative understanding of the disease and strategies for its control. The
success of this project will not only build a solid knowledge base for
understanding cholera dynamics, but also provide important guidelines for public
health administration. Meanwhile, education and training activities of this
project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in the theory, methods
and application of mathematical epidemiology and disease ecology. Outreach
activities will focus on demonstrating exponential growth and teaching
exponentiation in both educational and community settings. Project results will
be widely disseminated to academic and public health communities.