* 1412928
* RUI: Expanding the Atomic Database for Nebular and Stellar Neutron-Capture Element Abundance Determinations
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Nicholas Sterling, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2018
* USD 320,399.00

The slow-neutron-capture-process or s-process, which occurs in stars near the
ends of their evolutionary lifetimes, is a major contributor to the chemical
evolution of our Universe, producing roughly half of all isotopes of elements
heavier than iron. The abundances and distribution of these neutron-capture
elements in nebulae and stars within our galaxy are not well determined mainly
due to a lack of atomic data. This project will combine theoretical, laboratory,
and observational astrophysics to study the s-process in two such heavy
elements; bromine (Br) and rubidium (Rb), in order to determine the process and
rate by which these elements are synthesized within evolved stars.

The project will investigate the details of asymptotic giant branch (AGB)
nucleosynthesis through the study of Br and Rb, which have been recently been
detected in planetary nebulae (PNe), HII regions and the interstellar medium of
other galaxies. The project will compute photoionization cross-sections for the
neutral state and first six ions of both Br and Rb. The calculated cross
sections will then be verified through experiments on the Advanced Light Source
(ALS) at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The new atomic data will be
incorporated into the Cloudy photoionization code where it will be used to
derived corrections for the abundances of unobserved ions of Br and Rb in
astrophysical nebulae. The Cloudy abundances, in turn, will be applied to high-
resolution PNe spectra that were previously observed by the PI.

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project offers numerous and
wide-ranging opportunities to train new scientists with a strong emphasis on
recruiting students from underrepresented groups into STEM fields. This will be
the first RUI award at the PI?s institution and should help to build the
infrastructure necessary to facilitate further faculty-student research
collaboration. The project will communicate its results to the public through
public open houses held at the observatory on the campus of the PI's home
institution and through public demonstration nights organized through the PI?s
department. The PI gives lectures at local K-12 schools and will incorporated
the results of the research into those presentations.