* 1412508
* Collaborative Research: Early Stages of Protein Folding Explored by Experimental and Computational Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Vincent Voelz, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2018
* USD 413,483.00

Non-technical explanation Although major progress has been made in recent years
in understanding how small proteins fold, deciphering the mechanisms of folding
of larger proteins remains a daunting challenge. This project is aimed at moving
beyond small proteins to larger ones with more complex folding behavior by
joining cutting edge experimental approaches with powerful computational
strategies for exploring early stages of folding of apomyoglobin, a medium size
protein. A rich set of experimental data on the structural and dynamic
properties of intermediate states populated on the microsecond time scale will
provide benchmarks for validating and refining simulation techniques. The
findings will provide a critical test of our understanding of protein folding
and the power of molecular simulation to accurately model the folding reaction,
yielding structural and mechanistic insight with unprecedented spatial and
temporal resolution.

This project offers training opportunities for future scientists in a wide range
of experimental, computational and theoretical approaches. Students will benefit
from the close collaboration between experimental and theoretical groups. Dr.
Roder is a member of the NSF-sponsored Protein Folding Consortium whose main
mission is to foster scientific exchange and collaboration. Dr. Voelz is a
participating researcher in the Folding@home distributed computing project, a
unique platform for scientific outreach that promotes public awareness for the
importance of basic research in protein folding.

An in-depth understanding of the mechanisms of protein folding has implications
beyond the immediate field. For example, non-native protein states are critical
for understanding protein aggregation, which has major practical implications in
biotechnology and medicine. The rapid kinetics techniques to be developed will
not only benefit protein folding research, but also studies of ligand binding
and enzymatic reaction mechanisms. Critical testing and refinement of
computational models will benefit other areas of computational biology, such as
structure prediction, modeling of protein interactions and functional
conformational changes.



Technical description The objectives of this project entitled "Collaborative
Research: Early Stages of Protein Folding Explored by Experimental and
Computational Approaches" are: (i) to elucidate the folding mechanism of a
prototypic alpha-helical protein by detailed experimental and computational
analysis of the kinetic network of states encountered during folding of
apomyoglobin (apoMb); (ii) to understand key features of the amino acid sequence
important for initiating folding, defining chain topology and directing the
search for the native structure. The group of Heinrich Roder at the Fox Chase
Cancer Center will combine ultrafast mixing methods with fluorescence and NMR-
detected H/D exchange labeling to elucidate the kinetic folding dynamics of
apoMb with single-residue resolution. The results will provide a basis for
validating computational models to be developed by the group of Vincent Voelz at
Temple University. Modeling of apoMb folding dynamics by molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation, combined with Markov State Model approaches, will yield atomic-
resolution structural insight and testable predictions of experimental
observables. Recent kinetic studies have shown that folding of apoMb under
acidic conditions (pH 4.2) is a multi-stage process completed within 250
microseconds of initiation. This time scale is computationally accessible and
makes large-scale MD simulations a realistic proposition, using the Folding@home
distributed computer network. Effects of mutations on experimental observables
and the simulated network of states will inform on the sequence determinants for
folding initiation and pathway selection.

By combining advanced experimental techniques, including kinetic analysis with
microsecond resolution, mutagenesis and NMR-based hydrogen-deuterium exchange
methods, with state ofthe-art computational methods, it will be possible to
describe early stages of folding of the 153 residues apoMb with a level of
detail that has previously been achieved only for much smaller proteins.
Experimental observables, including rate constants, mutational perturbations,
fluorescence properties and NH protection patterns, will serve as benchmarks for
testing and refining computational models, which in turn will provide structural
and mechanistic insight with atomic resolution and make predictions to be tested
in a next round of experiments. The results will extend our understanding of the
principles of protein folding beyond small two-state folders to a larger helical
protein with complex multi-state folding behavior and address long-standing
questions concerning the sequence determinants for folding initiation and
propagation, and the structural features and kinetic roles of protein folding
intermediates.