* 1412472
* The Molecular Basis of Cadherin-Mediated Cell Adhesion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,036,509.00

In this project the PI will study the molecular mechanisms that underlie cell-
cell adhesion. The project is multi-scale and interdisciplinary in nature and
the strategy that is being developed can serve as a model for other such efforts
that integrate computational and experimental methods in cutting edge areas of
modern biology. A particularly important element of this research is the
training of scientists with expertise in both computational and experimental
work including joint mentoring from senior researchers with very different
backgrounds. The training of women and minority scientists is an integral
component of this research program. A number of women postdocs working on
previous NSF funded projects have gone on to successful independent research
careers and this tradition will be maintained. In addition, each summer the lab
hosts minority undergraduate students and accepts high school students as
interns. Both undergraduate and graduate minority students trained in the lab
have become highly successful research scientists. The outcomes of this project
will have substantial impacts on the workforce development and on the
development of predictive tools in nanobiotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms that underlie cadherin-mediated cell-cell
adhesion. Cadherins are cell surface molecules that also have a trans-membrane
region and a cytoplasmic domain that interacts with the actin cytoskeleton.
Classical cadherins consist of five extracellular cadherin (EC) domains
connected by linker regions. Upon initial encounter of two cells, cadherins on
opposing membrane surfaces bind to one another and initiate a series of events,
beginning with the formation of large ordered assemblies, that ultimately lead
to cell-cell adhesion. The project involves integrated experimental and
computational studies on the structure, dynamical properties and function of
classical cadherins. Analysis of existing three-dimensional structures, the
design of site directed mutants, binding affinity measurements and Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectroscopy will be used to elucidate the factors
that enable cadherins to bind to one another in a highly specific fashion,
despite being similar to one another in sequence and structure. EPR will also be
used to study changes in cadherin flexibility resulting from cell-cell contact
and the formation of trans (different cell) adhesive bonds. Coarse-grained
molecular simulations will be used to understand how these changes in
flexibility lead to the formation of cis (same cell) interactions that drive the
lateral clustering of cadherins on cell surfaces. The project will lead to a
deeper understanding of this important class of molecules and will also reveal
general principles regarding the mechanisms employed by other families of
adhesion molecules to mediate cell-cell recognition. This project is jointly
supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Computational
Physics Program in the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.