* 1412624
* Mechanisms of Polypeptide Translocation Catalyzed by Class 1 HSP100/Clp Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Aaron Lucius, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

Two fundamental questions about any motor are: 1) how far does the machine
travel per turnover of the engine and 2) how much fuel is required? Answering
these two questions is essential for understanding how a motor operates in a car
or how a motor operates in the cell of a living organism. However, answering
such questions for a molecular motor in the cell, which cannot be directly
observed by eye, requires substantially different techniques and experimental
strategies. Molecular motors that exist in the cell are essential for a vast
array of metabolic processes. For example, survival of extreme heat or exposure
to environmental stresses depends upon molecular motors that either repair or
remove damaged cellular components. If such damaged components were left
unattended they would have catastrophic effects on the cell. At the core of this
work the researchers seek to answer the two posed fundamental questions of how
two representative motors tasked with such repair activities move along their
track and how much energy they require to do so. The knowledge gained will be
important for gaining a deeper understanding of how these motors and a vast
array of similar motors operate and potentially the impact they have on the
cell. Moreover, the results will allow others to better propose and test
mechanisms for a variety of motor proteins that use similar operating principles
and lie at the heart of a vast array of biological functions. Vital to the
research infrastructure of our nation is training the next generation of
scientists with the ability to apply the thermodynamic and transient state
kinetic approaches proposed here. This goal will be achieved by involving
graduate, undergraduate, and high school researchers in the work; a strategy
that has been successfully invoked with previous NSF support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all organisms reactions such as protein remodeling, ATP
dependent proteolysis, and protein disaggregation are essential for proteome
maintenance. However, the molecular level events in these reactions remain
obscure. This research will advance knowledge by providing a detailed molecular
mechanism for ClpA, ClpAP, and ClpB catalyzed polypeptide translocation, which
represent model enzymes that catalyze protein remodeling, ATP dependent
proteolysis, and protein disaggregation, respectively. In addition, the results
will advance knowledge across fields because a variety of homologous AAA+
enzymes are thought to use similar mechanisms to catalyze such disparate
reactions as clamp loading in DNA replication, microtubule severing, membrane
fusion, and morphogenesis and trafficking of endosomes. This project will
promote teaching, training and learning and perform outreach by incorporating
high school students and undergraduate researchers through the university's
ChemBridge and Chemistry Scholars programs, respectively. A further benefit of
the proposed activity to society is that this work will yield individuals highly
trained in the application of an array of biophysical and molecular biology
techniques.