* 1412670
* Directed Assembly of One-Dimensional Nanopeapod Structures through the Capture of Preformed Nanoparticles in Scrolled Nanosheets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 414,465.00

John B. Wiley at the University of New Orleans is supported by an award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate an unusual motif in chemical structures on the scale of
nanometers (billionths of a meter). The ability to organize small scale objects
(nanoobjects) into ordered arrays is important to the development of new
technologies. In this project, new peapod-like structures are assembled from
small spheres and very thin sheets. The materials are then studied in terms of
methods of assembly, variations in composition, and physical properties. Such
materials are of interest in that they could lead to important technological
advances in a variety of areas including magnetics, electronics, photocatalysis,
and drug delivery. Undergraduate and graduate students are involved in all
aspects of the research component of this program, providing them with valuable
training in the synthesis and characterization of new nanostructures as well as
the presentation and publication of scientific data. There are also
undergraduate students from France who come to work in the research group's
laboratory, promoting chemistry at the international level. Finally, to help
promote science in the New Orleans area, local high school students are involved
in this research program each summer.

The ability to form nanopeapod structures by the capture of nanoparticles in
scrolled nanosheets offers a new approach to the assembly of 1-D nanostructures.
This project focuses on those aspects of nanoparticle assembly and nanosheet
scrolling specifically important to the formation of extended peapod
nanostructures. The program involves a combination of synthesis/assembly,
characterization, and mechanistic studies. The goals of this effort are to 1)
better understand and control the assembly of nanopeapod structures, 2) utilize
peapod assembly in directing the formation of intricate composites, 3) extend
these efforts to other host materials known to form scrolls, and 4) examine the
prospect of reversibility in these assembly processes. Understanding of the
assembly process is being pursued through, for example, investigations of its
size and shape selectivity. Other advances are being developed through property
tuning (magnetic, optical and/or electronic) in mixed nanoparticle assemblies.
While the earliest investigations of the group were based on hexaniobate
nanosheets, new scroll components are being sought, including isostructural
tantalates, layered perovskites, transition metal dichalcogenides and graphene.
Reversibility in scrolling of these structures is being examined as part of a
'capture-release' concept in nanoassembly.