* 1412108
* Towards a Holistic Model for Outer Membrane Protein Sorting in the Periplasm
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Karen Fleming, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,355,028.00

This project will employ a combination of mathematical modeling and
experimentation to develop an integrated, holistic view of the essential process
of sorting proteins into membranes in bacteria. This research will lead to novel
insights into how bacteria, which live in soil, water, and on the surfaces of
animal cells, grow and mature. The PI will engage in outreach to K-12 students,
and provide training to graduate and undergraduate students who will participate
in the research project and have the opportunity to present their work at
national scientific meetings.

The long-term goal of this project is to develop a quantitative description of
the flux of membrane proteins through the periplasm and into the outer membranes
of E. coli. The project will develop a global mathematical model that uses
ordinary differential equations to describe outer membrane protein chaperone
interactions and membrane protein maturation in gram-negative bacteria. The
model will be tested and optimized by experimental data on the interaction
kinetics and thermodynamics of all pairwise interactions. In this manner, the
holistic mathematical description will stay fully grounded by rigorous
experimental data. A major goal of the project is to determine whether or not
parallel pathways exist for the sorting of outer membrane proteins into outer
membranes.

This award is jointly supported by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster
and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics.