* 1412033
* Short-Range Protein Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Dongping Zhong, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 466,000.00

Electron transfer is ubiquitous in biology and essential to a variety of
biological activities such as converting chemical energy, catalyzing enzymatic
reactions, and triggering biological signaling. Electron transfer in
flavoenzymes is directly involved in intracellular antioxidant metabolism and is
essential to life. To understand protein electron-transfer reactions at the
molecular level, significant efforts have been made both experimentally and
theoretically to understand how electrons tunnel from one side to the other side
in proteins. At the long-range distance (larger than 10 Angstrom), studies have
shown that an electron tunnels in proteins on a timescale of nanoseconds or
longer in a similar way as in dielectric media. At the short-range distance,
because the protein movements are very fast, electron tunneling will be highly
affected by their fluctuations. Using an ultrafast instrument similar to a
camera to record every moment of electron motions in billionth of millionth of a
second, the dynamics of electron transfer can be mapped out. With modern
molecular biology, the manipulation of electron motions can also be achieved.
This interdisciplinary project, integrating physics, chemistry and biology, will
lead to new discoveries and new concepts in the chemistry of biological
processes and train a new generation of young interdisciplinary scientists. With
this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Dongping Zhong from The Ohio State University to systematically
investigate electron-transfer dynamics at short distances. Using ultrafast
spectroscopy and molecular mutation methods, the dynamics of electron-transfer
reactions at different short distances will be characterized through a series of
designed mutants that will vary the transfer separation. The local protein
fluctuations will be examined to quantitatively analyze the coupling of electron
transfer with local protein motions. Such coupled nonequilibrium dynamics is
central to protein dynamics and is essential to life processes. By developing
several analytical models, how short-range electron transfer dynamics are
modulated by local protein fluctuations will be quantitatively evaluated. These
studies will be the first to systematically study short-range electron transfer
dynamics in proteins and make significant contributions to understanding how
electron tunnels at a short range, a central topic to chemistry in biological
processes.

This project is also co-funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program in the Chemistry Division.