* 1412693
* Collaborative Research: New Frontiers in Reverberation Mapping
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Aaron Barth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 442,491.00

In the fifty years since the discovery of quasars, a picture of these enigmatic
objects has emerged wherein quasars are supermassive black holes residing at the
centers of large galaxies. The black hole may have a mass of millions to
billions times that of the sun. As this picture implies, the quasar phenomenon
is one and the same as that of the objects referred to as "active galactic
nuclei." All are characterized by enormous luminosity such that the quasar
frequently outshines the light from all of the billions of stars in its host
galaxy. The existence of black holes has captivated people of all levels of
scientific sophistication. The study of active galactic nuclei as well as the
nucleus of our own galaxy has produced strong evidence that, indeed,
supermassive black holes do exist and that they are the engines at the heart of
the quasar phenomenon. This project aims to continue the estimate of the mass of
the supermassive black holes in a sample of objects and extend it to objects of
higher luminosity than those previously studied via a combination of an intense
observational program as well as development of new analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will establish the
state of the art in "reverberation mapping" of active galaxies and quasars.
Reverberation mapping is a technique where one looks at the reaction of the
emission line spectrum of the active object to see how it responds to a change
in the intensity of the continuum source that ionizes and excites the
surrounding line-emitting gas. It is a technique that has been employed over the
last few decades to measure the size and structure of the so-called broad line
region in active galactic nuclei, and, in the past five years, the technique has
been applied to high-cadence observations to provide the best constraints on the
mass of the accreting black hole at the heart of the active object. This project
will further advance the technique via a three-phase effort: (1) analysis of
data from a high-cadence optical/ultraviolet monitoring campaign for NGC 5548
that will represent the single most intensive reverberation mapping program ever
attempted; (2) execution of a one year duration reverberation mapping campaign
at Lick Observatory to probe broad-line region structure at luminosities an
order of magnitude higher than the luminosities probed by other recent dedicated
monitoring programs; and (3) new development of state-of-the-art software for
modeling reverberation mapping data. The combination of these projects will make
it possible to dissect the structural and dynamical properties of the broad-line
region in greater detail than ever before, enabling critical new tests of the
local calibration for the quasar black hole mass scale.