* 1412692
* Unveiling how the XPC nucleotide excision repair complex senses DNA damage
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jung-Hyun Min, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 608,931.00

DNA in cells is continuously being damaged by diverse sources including UV from
sun, industrial pollutant, cigarette smoke, and burnt food. These DNA lesions,
if left unrepaired, can block important cellular functions and create errors in
the genetic code, which may lead to cell death or diseases. This project will
tackle two key questions in the field of DNA repair: How do repair enzymes
detect a small number of DNA lesions in a huge "genomic ocean" of normal DNA?
Why are some lesions repaired very efficiently, whereas others are not repaired
at all? Using innovative, multi-disciplinary approaches, the research will
transform the current static view of the lesion detection process into a 3-D
molecular trajectory "movie" in unprecedented detail, thus providing important
insights that might eventually lead to development of better ways to prevent the
occurrence of DNA damaged-induced cellular defects. Equally important benefits
will come from Integration of the research into creative education and outreach
programs to promote cross-disciplinary training in Chemistry and Physics for
graduate and undergraduate students and to build educational modules,
incorporating crosscutting concepts of the new Next Generation Science
Standards, to be used by K-12 teachers and their students in the Chicago Public
Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XPC complex recognizes diverse,
environmentally induced DNA lesions from the genomic DNA, and thus is a key to
the initiation of the eukaryotic nucleotide excision repair pathway. The
recognition efficiency of the lesions can vary widely depending on the lesion,
and certain lesions can evade detection by XPC and thus become resistant to
nucleotide excision repair. Previous studies from this research group have
suggested a novel "kinetic gating" mechanism in which XPC's ability to
discriminate between lesions and normal sites may lie in the kinetics of forming
an "open" conformation with the damaged (or normal) nucleotides flipped out. The
goal of this project is to rigorously investigate this model by a unique
combination of complementary technologies including X-ray crystallography, time-
resolved temperature-jump fluorescence spectroscopy and chemical crosslinking.
Specific aims are (1) to characterize and compare the dynamics of XPC-induced
DNA opening in damaged and normal DNA, (2) to determine the dynamics and
structures of lesion recognition using mutant XPC that lack key DNA-binding
structural elements, and (3) to elucidate and compare the structure and kinetics
of XPC's binding to repair-resistant and -proficient lesions. The results will
provide new insights into the dynamics of lesion recognition. Moreover, the
unique approaches developed in this study will also be relevant to other gene
regulatory and maintenance systems, and may help uncover a new paradigm of
protein functions controlled by transient interactions, which have escaped
previous detection by other methods.