* 1412373
* Interactions of Biomolecules and Bacteria with Titanium at the Mineral Microbe Frontier
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Ann Valentine, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Ann Valentine of Temple University is studying how
biological molecules and whole microorganisms bind to and dissolve titanium
oxide surfaces. Titanium is one of the most abundant elements on earth, but its
role in biology is, at best, obscure. Titanium oxides are the most prevalent
form of titanium in the environment, but they are normally very inert. Iron-
scavenging biomolecules unlock an activity that is otherwise disfavored: the
release of large quantities of titanium ions into solution. This research is
revealing the role of titanium in biology and, conversely, how biology impacts
the environmental chemistry of titanium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the interactions of iron-scavenging siderophores and bacteria with
titanium dioxide surfaces, and on the chemical consequences of those
interactions. The "siderophore"-mediated mobilization of titanium ions from
titanium dioxide is being characterized quantitatively. The oxide surface and
materials properties before, after, and during dissolution is being probed by
using Attenuated Total Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR)
spectroscopy as well as microscopy and related techniques. Microbe/oxide and
biomolecule/oxide interactions are being studied by using the bacterium
Rhodococcus ruber GIN-1, which adheres avidly to titanium dioxide and
incorporates titanium into its biomass. Titanium dioxide surface binding
proteins are being identified and characterized, and their abundance and
properties correlated to whole-organism phenomena. Titanium uptake is being
quantified and intracellular titanium binding molecules isolated. Rhodocuccus
ruber GIN-1 siderophores are being isolated and characterized. Research
activities are integrated with a program to improve teaching and learning in
introductory undergraduate chemistry at Temple University. Environmental
bioinorganic chemistry is featured in chemistry outreach efforts. The broader
impacts of this work include potential technological benefits from new
strategies for anchoring organic molecules to titanium dioxide surfaces, and
from the identification of the first native titanium-biomolecule complex and
potentially a titanium enzyme.