* 1412289
* Collision Cross Section Measurements Using Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* David Dearden, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,189.00

Professor David V. Dearden of Brigham Young University is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry and
the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering Program to develop a
technique to detect and characterize the shape of large molecules, commonly
found in living systems and molecular-size devices. Such information is
currently only available using highly specialized and expensive instruments. The
new approach will require only minimal, inexpensive modifications of
commercially-available instruments, thus making such measurements accessible to
a wide array of scientists. The availability of this technique on affordable
mass spectrometers is allowing the characterization of supramolecular assemblies
and the study of peptide folding and protein conformational changes in fields
such as supramolecular chemistry and biomolecular science. The results are
expected to facilitate biomedical research and the design and manufacture of
molecular-size devices, such as molecular switches and memory storage
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method Dearden is developing is known by
the acronym CRAFTI, cross sectional areas by Fourier Transform ion cyclotron
resonance. It is used to characterize the shapes of supramolecular systems and
large biomolecules through measurement of their collision cross sections in the
gas phase. These measurements are accomplished by monitoring the signal due to
the collisions of the ions with the molecules of a neutral background gas in a
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (FTICR/MS). User-
friendly software for CRAFTI data analysis is also being developed as part of
this project, facilitating the transfer of the CRAFTI technology to the broader
user community of FTICR and, potentially, to Orbitrap mass spectrometers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of this research, graduate students are
being trained in state-of-the-art mass spectrometric and analytical techniques.
Dearden is recruiting talented undergraduate students and involving them in the
research in preparation for future graduate studies. Results from this work are
included in annual presentations to the general public as part of National
Chemistry Week.