* 1412622
* RUI: Computational Modeling of Hydroxyl Radical and Carboxylic Acid Formation in the Atmosphere
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Keith Kuwata, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation. Professors Keith T.
Kuwata of Macalester College and Professor Stacey A. Stoffregen of the
University of Wisconsin-River Falls and their undergraduate research students
are developing more accurate and detailed theoretical models of chemical
reactions in the atmosphere. The most significant broader impact of the project
is the training that Macalester and River Falls undergraduates receive to
conduct significant research in atmospheric chemistry, which in turn equips them
to pursue advanced study in STEM fields. This research also contributes to the
intellectual vitality of the Midwest Undergraduate Computational Chemistry
Consortium (MU3C), to which both Professor Kuwata and Professor Stoffregen
belong. Their students will make presentations on their research projects at the
in-person MU3C conference every summer and the on-line MU3C conference every
winter. MU3C membership gives the PIs and their students opportunities to
interact with fellow computational chemistry faculty and students at nine other
primarily undergraduate institutions at conferences twice a
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on clarifying the
impacts that intermediates in hydrocarbon oxidation reactions have on free
radical and carboxylic acid concentrations. One intermediate of interest is the
vinyl hydroperoxide (VHP) formed in atmospheric alkene ozonolysis. Current
experimental and theoretical studies suggest that the tendency of the VHP to
undergo homolysis to form OH varies with both the size and structure of the
original alkene and with atmospheric conditions. Understanding these variations
requires more creativity about possible VHP chemical reactions and the
application of quantum chemical methodology that can accurately model molecules
with substantial static electron correlation. Such models provide new
mechanistic insights about atmospheric processes by making predictions about
transient species that cannot be directly characterized experimentally. At the
same time, these models are also used to predict experimentally known quantities
such as the concentrations of stable atmospheric species. Comparisons between
theory and experiment both validate theoretical predictions and drive the
development and application of new theoretical methods.