* 1412911
* Coacervates for Extraction and Enrichment of Membrane Proteins from Biological Matrices in Proteomics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Morteza Khaledi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Professors Morteza G. Khaledi and David C. Muddiman of North Carolina State
University are supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program
in the Division of Chemistry to investigate the use of newly discovered
supramolecular liquids called Perfluoro Alcohol Induced Coacervates (PFAIC) for
enhanced selective extraction and enrichment of membrane proteins from
biological matrices. Membrane proteins are the most important cell surface
membrane constituents. They act as highly-selective cellular receptors and
gatekeepers, regulating the traffic of critical nutrients and energy in and out
of the cells. Solubilization, extraction, and enrichment of membrane proteins
from biological samples into aqueous solutions suitable for further analysis - a
critical step for the characterization of the individual proteins and for
understanding their cellular function - is an area of considerable challenge in
contemporary bioanalytical chemistry and molecular biology. The project promises
to tackle this challenge and provide new avenues for the identification of
membrane proteins and hence advance our understanding of cellular function and
life processes. In the course of conducting the project, graduate and
undergraduate students will gain valuable skills in bioanalytical separation
technologies, proteomics and mass spectrometry. Plans are also established,
through a partnership with the Kenan Fellows Program of the Kenan Institute at
North Carolina State University, to involve high school teachers in summer
research and in the development of high school curriculum materials in the
general areas related to this research.

The overarching objective of the proposed research is to explore the use of
Perfluoro Alcohol Induced Coacervates (PFAIC) for enhanced selective extraction
and enrichment of membrane proteins from biological matrices. The proposed
research is organized into four specific aims: (1) to achieve an understanding
of the principles of extraction of proteins in PFAIC systems through systematic
studies of partitioning patterns, extraction efficiency and enrichment factors
of proteins with different structural and physico-chemical properties and PFAIC
systems with different chemical composition; (2) to investigate general
strategies for enrichment of membrane proteins into PFAIC phases; (3) to
investigate the effectiveness of PFAIC for pre-fractionation, extraction and
enrichment of membrane proteins in shot-gun bottom-up proteomics analysis of
yeast as a model biological sample; and (4) to explore the possibility of
inducing coacervation of lipid bilayers in cell membranes and concomitant
solubilization of the membrane bound proteins.