* 1412005
* Energetic Variational Approaches in Complex Fluids and Electrophysiology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Chun Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 10/31/2017
* USD 335,000.00

Complex fluids are ubiquitous in our daily life and important in physical and
biological applications. One such example is ionic solutions in animals or
humans. Biology and physiology has shown that understanding ionic solutions is
essential in almost all biological activities. The mechanical and electrical
interactions of molecular-scale microstructures with macroscopic flow in complex
fluids can give rise to new phenomena not encountered in simple fluids or gases.
New mathematical theories and techniques are needed to resolve the ever present
fundamental issues such as the ensemble of micro-elements, the intermolecular
and distortional elastic interactions, the coupling of hydrodynamic transport
and the applied electric or magnetic fields. This project investigates the use
of a very general energetic variational framework to derive and study the
dynamics of complex fluids, and its applications to general viscoelastic fluids,
the hydrodynamics of electrolytes and electro-rheological fluids, and the
transport of ionic solutions in ion channels. The proposed research also
provides the opportunity for students to have multidisciplinary experiences in
mathematics, bioengineering, and neurophysiology.

This project aims at making several distinct mathematical advances and to
integrate studies of these physical and biological complex fluids from different
fields. The common feature of the systems that the PI proposes to study is the
underlying energetic variational structure among all these materials and
systems. The PI will focus on understanding the coupling and competing effects
from different spatial or temporal scales, among them the microstructures and
the macroscopic properties of the solutions, the kinetic transport and the
induced elastic stresses in viscoelastic materials, the relative drags and
interactions between different species in mixtures. Energetic variational
methods have shown promise for the study of such multiscale multiphysics
problems, for instance the transport of ionic solutions through biological
environments. They deal naturally with systems with many components that flow
between fixed and moving domains or boundaries, and with different interactions.
We will apply such variational methods to study the transport of biological
plasma, ionic solutions of sodium, potassium, and chloride ions, and their
interaction with different environments and structures.