* 1412155
* Emission-lines from AGN&Starbursts: new steps to understanding their message
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 486,286.00

Much of modern astrophysics involves the interaction of electromagnetic
radiation (light) with diffuse clouds of gas around stars, in galaxies and in
the spaces between them. The radiation interacts with the atoms in the gas,
heats the gas and sometimes ionizes and excites the atoms. The gas then emits
light which, in turn, interacts with the gas. The detailed physical processes
involved in these interactions are enormously complex and vary with the gas'
temperature, density and chemical abundance. Understanding these processes and
their interplay with the radiation allows astrophysicists to deduce the physical
conditions in the gas clouds and the characteristics of the source of the
radiation. Dr. Ferland is one of the world's experts in the study of the
interplay of light and ionized gas and for thirty years he has been developing
an open-source, publicly-available computer simulation tool called "Cloudy."
Cloudy is used by hundreds of astronomers and astrophysicists in studies of
diverse regions from star-forming regions to the light-emitting regions
surrounding and excited by the supermassive black holes at the centers of active
galaxies (Active Galactic Nuclei or AGN) and quasars. Cloudy has been used in
the training and research of several generations of students and young
researchers. This award will support a major upgrade of the Cloudy code that
will improve its performance and range of applicability. The upgrade will
potentially allow it to be used in simulations of gas in dense plasmas such as
star-forming regions and will allow better calculation of the emission of light
from gas near the heart of quasars.

This is a time of unprecedented discovery in understanding the central regions
of Active Galactic Nuclei and Starburst galaxies across the electromagnetic
spectrum. Reverberation mapping of the Broad Lined Region, using optical H I
recombination lines at low redshift, and collisionally excited lines at high
redshift, have led to catalogs of supermassive black hole masses. These in turn
make possible investigations of key questions such as the evolution of black
hole mass, the role of AGN feedback, and the interplay between the evolution of
the black hole and surrounding galaxy. The Atacama Large Millimeter/Sub-
millimeter Array (ALMA) makes it possible to routinely study radio recombination
lines from both AGN and Starburst galaxies, probing sources of ionizing
radiation in dust-shrouded regions. ALMA can further probe molecular emission
from both star-forming regions and the AGN molecular torus. This project will
develop the theoretical tools needed to understand these emission-line
observations and incorporate them into Cloudy, which has been designed to solve
these plasma, chemistry, radiation transport, and dynamics problems
simultaneously and self consistently, building from the foundation of individual
atomic and molecular processes. The advances to be undertaken are motivated by
recent discussions with the dense plasma / magnetic fusion communities. Methods
and data they have developed will dramatically improve the numerical simulations
at surprisingly low cost. These significantly improved simulations will be
applied to models of the BLR, star-forming regions,and to associated molecular
regions.