* 1412805
* Collaborative Research: Sea Ice Deformation Observation with an AON
* GEO,OPP
* 12/31/2013,12/31/2015
* Jennifer Hutchings, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 12/31/2015
* USD 95,546.00

The PIs coherently argue that current coverage of GPS enabled buoys is
insufficient to monitor the Arctic-wide sea ice deformation. ARGOS positioning
is currently used on most buoys and is unable to resolve ice drift response to
inertial wave, tidal forcing and short-term weather events. Velocity and strain-
rate errors consequent to the use of ARGOS positioning result in
misrepresentation of ice deformation?s impact on the ice thickness distribution.
They argue that there is a very simple fix to this problem - deploying GPS
equipped buoys. The PIs present a way forward to convert the International
Arctic Buoy Program (IABP) buoy network to GPS positioning, and are provided
modest start-up funds to implement a demonstration of this. They anticipate that
the improved IABP network will provide pan-Arctic monitoring of regional ice
deformation variability on sub-daily to seasonal time scales. Sea ice
deformation products will be developed for public dissemination, enabling
regional estimates of ice thickness distribution to be improved and open water
fraction monitored, essentially assisting in the monitoring of ocean-atmosphere
fluxes in the Arctic. They propose buoy deployments to complement Automated
Drifting Stations (ADSs). At these stations localized measurements of multi-year
ice mass balance, ocean fluxes, ocean profiles and meteorology are made.
Understanding surface fluxes and ice mass balance in the ADS vicinity requires
an understanding of the evolution of the local ice thickness distribution.
Arguing that it currently is unknown what area of local ice pack affects the
energy budget measured at the ADS, they plan to deploy local GPS deformation
arrays around ADSs with a view to determining the spatial scale necessary to
monitor in order to provide a full picture of how both ice dynamics and
thermodynamics impact the energy budget at the ocean-ice- atmosphere interface
in the vicinity of the ADS.