* 1412568
* Ambidextrous Catalysis for Control of Polymer Tacticity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* James Canary, New York University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 460,000.00

With this award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, Professor James Canary of New York University is developing renewable
and biodegradable plastics that could find use in the medical field, such as in
implants and the development of new means to deliver medicines or drugs to more
precise locations in the body. One of the most important of the biodegradable
plastics in use today is polylactic acid, or PLA. This plastic is used in many
applications to make containers, wrappings and other common materials, but it
also plays a key role in the manufacture of medical implants and drug delivery
systems. One of the features of PLA that makes it particularly useful is the
relative orientation of the groups that are strung along the backbone of the
molecule. When these relative orientations are varied, the stiffness of the
resulting plastic can be changed, as can its biodegradability. The goal of this
project is to develop specialized catalysts that can precisely control the
orientation of groups in the PLA structure, thus controlling its properties.
This work is having a broader impact on the development of new materials with a
variety of uses in the medical field. It is having a further broad impact on the
environment, both through the production of new biodegradable plastics and
through the fact that the starting material used to make PLA is typically
obtained from recycled material. The work is also having an impact on the
training of the next generation of scientists through the participation of
students at all levels, even high school, in the research. The group is further
expanding the impact of their research by helping to prepare educational modules
on their work for a local museum, the New York Hall of Science.

This project focuses on the development of catalysts with the capability to be
switched electrochemically and, consequently, invert enantio- or
diastereoselectivity in organic reactions. This special property, essentially
unknown in other systems, is being tested in the polymerization reaction of
d,l-lactide (normally obtained from recycled materials) to form polylactide
(PLA), a renewable and biodegradable polymer. The relative orientation of the
methyl groups along the polymer background, property known as tacticity, can be
varied if appropriate catalysts are used. The group is exploring a set of copper
complexes that exhibit dramatic reconfiguration of the organic ligand upon
oxidation or reduction of a central copper atom. One interesting system,
synthesized from L-methionine, results in the inversion of the helicity of the
complex upon chemical or electrochemical oxidation or reduction. The overall
shapes of the diastereomeric copper (I) and copper (II) complexes are nearly
mirror image right- and left-handed propeller structures. In recent work,
catalytic diphenylurea groups were attached to the periphery of the invertible
redox switch, creating a new catalyst for asymmetric reactions. The right-handed
catalyst (the Cu(II) oxidation state) gave mainly product of (S)-absolute
configuration, while the left-handed Cu(I) catalyst produced mainly (R) product.
Control experiments indicate that the helicity of the catalyst governs the
stereochemical outcome of the reaction. The unique feature of this ambidextrous
catalyst approach is the opportunity to switch enantioselectivity in real time
while a reaction is underway. This dynamic feature of the catalyst is being
applied to the synthesis of PLA, thus allowing unprecedented control over the
stereochemistry of the product and the resulting properties of this important
polymer.