* 1412674
* RUI: Applied dynamics and topology of aggregation systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Chad Topaz, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 07/31/2017
* USD 219,488.00

In many natural systems, particles, agents, or organisms aggregate and display
collective behavior. Aggregation systems include nanoparticle self-assembly,
actin-filament networks in cells, and more. This project investigates
aggregation systems with an eye towards insect swarms, bird flocks, fish
schools, and other biological groups in which social interactions play a key
role. The specific objectives are (1) to discover whether computationally
challenging models can be accurately approximated with simpler, more tractable
ones; (2) to use this understanding to model environmentally and economically
destructive locust swarms; and (3) to classify complicated behavior in large
data sets related to aggregations. The locust research impacts agriculture. In
particular, it will yield insight on swarm suppression strategies. For instance,
it may suggest crop-planting layouts that would avert the gregarious locust
outbreaks that devastate farmers. Other key elements of this project, which is
based at an undergraduate institution, include: extensive undergraduate student
involvement and research training; a network of domestic and foreign colleges
and universities; a pipeline from research to the classroom; enhancement of
student research lab infrastructure; inclusion in research and advising
activities of a female recent Ph.D. seeking a tenure-track position; a focus on
the participation of underrepresented groups; and an educational public art
exhibition on aggregations produced collaboratively with an undergraduate female
artist and biology major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his
colleagues study aggregation systems from continuum and discrete perspectives. A
common aggregation modeling framework is conservation-type nonlocal PDE, which
are analytically and computationally challenging. Degenerate Cahn-Hilliard
approximations of a class of canonical models will be investigated with linear
analysis, numerical simulation, phase plane analysis of equilibria, and a
variational analysis of minimizers in order to evaluate the success of the local
model in approximating the nonlocal one. Based on this understanding, the
investigator will develop a model of phase polyphenic locusts interacting with
the environment and use it to develop strategies that suppress destructive
locust swarms. Stability analysis and numerical simulation will reveal
environmental conditions likely to suppress a hysteretic bifurcation to a
dangerous locust swarm. Finally, the investigator will characterize aggregation
dynamics using topological data analysis. Data sets arising from numerical
simulations and biological experiments will be analyzed with topological
barcodes describing their persistent homology. This work will identify dynamical
transitions in aggregation processes.