* 1412980
* Collaborative Research:The Supernova Rate and Delay Time Distribution in the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* Laura Chomiuk, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 268,609.00

Supernovae are violent stellar explosions that can briefly outshine the
cumulative light from all the stars in a galaxy. Supernovae are important
because they return heavy elements to the empty space in the galaxy, thus
seeding the next generation of stars and planets. The rate at which supernovae
occur is crucial to our understanding of the evolution of galaxies and the
Universe as a whole. This proposal will investigate two important quantities
related to supernovae by observing the objects that are left behind after a
supernova explosions and modeling the brightness of these supernova remnants.

The goal of this proposal is to investigate the supernova (SN) rate and the
delay time distribution (DTD) of supernovae (SNe). The DTD is a quantity that
describes how the SN rate varies with the age of a stellar population. The
project will impact our understanding of two key questions regarding SNe,
namely: What are the progenitors of Type Ia SNe?, and What is the range of
masses for progenitors of core collapse SNe? The PIs propose an innovative
approach to determining the SN rate and DTD that involves: (1) compiling a deep
sample of SN remnants from four galaxies in the Local Group, (2) measuring the
density and distribution of the interstellar medium in these galaxies, and (3)
using calibrated models for the luminosity of the SN remnants to determine the
SN rate and DTD. The study of the properties (i.e. size and luminosity) of
supernova remnant populations will be broadly relevant to questions of galaxy
evolution and cosmic ray origins.

The project will communicate its results to the general public through lectures
and hands-on astronomy activities for audiences of all ages. Both PI's are
heavily involved in the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students, and the proposed work will further strengthen the students' exposure
to astronomical research into supernovae.