* 1412877
* Modeling Circadian Clock Mechanisms from Synapse to Gene
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Casey Diekman, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 241,396.00

The brain's circadian clock controls daily rhythms in hormone production and
sleep/wake behavior. Disruptions of these rhythms, due to jet lag or night-shift
work for example, have health implications for millions of Americans. The
primary goal of this project is to gain a mathematical understanding of the role
that the clock's electrical activity plays in circadian timekeeping, in
particular the way the clock responds to the external light/dark cycle. This
project will contribute to the BRAIN Initiative by discovering principles about
the flow of information between the cell membrane and genes. These newly
discovered principles will aid in the development of mathematical models of
brain processes such as long-term memory formation and the control of neuronal
survival and death. This project will also impact areas of mathematical biology
beyond circadian rhythms through its development of computer simulation methods
that are capable of handling widely disparate time scales. Through this project,
the investigator will mentor graduate and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research at the interface of mathematics and neuroscience, and
will participate in educational outreach to under-served urban communities in
collaboration with the Urban Scholar Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to create a mathematical framework for understanding how
dynamic changes in gene expression affect the electrical properties of neurons
and ultimately animal behavior. Circadian rhythms offer one of the clearest
examples of the interplay between these different levels of organization, with
rhythmic gene expression leading to daily rhythms in neural activity,
physiology, and behavior. The main output signal of the master circadian clock
in mammals has long been believed to be a simple day/night difference in the
firing rate of neurons within the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Recent findings
challenge this theory, and demonstrate that a substantial portion of SCN neurons
exhibit a more complex and counterintuitive set of electrical state transitions
throughout the day/night cycle. Through data-driven mathematical modeling,
simulation, and dynamical systems analysis of the key cell types within the
clock nucleus, this project will develop an understanding of the daily
transitions in the SCN's electrical state and the functional roles they play in
the mammalian circadian clock. In addition, this project will determine whether
the activity patterns of two distinct classes of SCN neurons originate at the
cellular or the circuit level by deriving conductance-based mathematical models
of membrane excitability for both cell types and their synapses. The transitions
in SCN activity patterns that occur throughout the day/night cycle will be
explained by developing a multi-scale model of circadian timekeeping that links
detailed models of the molecular clocks inside SCN neurons to these models of
membrane excitability.