* 1412867
* EAPSI: Centralized planning of electricity generation in the New Zealand electricity market
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Amy Pielow, Pielow                  Amy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Efficiently generating electricity is a complex task, made more complex as
renewable resources are added, new companies enter the market, and there is more
focus on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. New models better equipped to handle
these emerging complexities need to be developed. This project will develop such
a model, which will include scheduling of both thermal and hydro resources under
different market conditions, for the New Zealand electricity market. This work
will be completed in collaboration with Dr. Andy Philpott, at the University of
Auckland. A better understanding of the interplay between these resources can
lead to more reliable systems, lower costs, and greater utilization of
sustainable technologies. Although the New Zealand electricity market is unique
in its operation and available resources, the mathematical techniques are
universal. Models that will be developed are applicable to not only other
similar systems, but to regional electricity markets in general.

In particular, this research will focus on the short-term scheduling of thermal
and hydro resources in centralized and decentralized contexts. These models will
include accurate representations of the cascading river-chain systems, which
will be co-optimized with thermal generation for a day-ahead planning horizon.
In such a model, both stochasticity of prices and renewable resource
availability must be considered, which motivates the use of decomposition
algorithms to exploit problem structure. The newly developed model will be
compared to the self-dispatch system currently in place. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.