* 1412442
* Comparative molecular evolution of animal and plant RNA-interference: Building a general model of how RNAi facilitates complexity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Bryan Kolaczkowski, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 508,614.00

This research will help understand how small changes in the ways molecules work
can produce big changes in how living things are organized and interact with
their environment. This work is expected to generate broad positive impacts on
society. First, this project should improve public understanding of evolutionary
theory by detailing how changes in molecules can produce complexity. Second, the
training of postdoctoral and graduate students at the interface of
computational, evolutionary and molecular biology is expected to help produce a
next generation of scientists able to use multiple disciplines to solve real
problems. Third, the expansion of distance-learning programs in computational
biology is expected to help increase participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM disciplines. Finally, understanding how molecules produce complexity is
likely to drive future innovations in fields such as biotechnology, synthetic
biology and nanotechnology.

Understanding how complex life arises through changes in molecular systems is a
central goal of evolutionary biology. RNA interference (RNAi) is a molecular
system recognized as important in the evolution of complex animals and plants.
However, little is known about how molecular changes in the protein and RNA
machinery comprising the RNAi system facilitated these rapid leaps in animal and
plant complexity. The objective of this project is to determine how molecular
changes in RNAi machinery altered the working of RNAi system in animals and
plants. This project's methodology utilizes evolutionary analysis of animal and
plant gene sequences encoding the protein components of RNAi system to identify
important evolutionary changes, experimental analysis of modern day and
ancestral molecules to determine the effects of evolutionary changes on how RNAi
works, and structural analysis to characterize the mechanisms by which
evolutionary changes alter RNAi function. By comparing the evolution of similar
RNAi systems in animals and plants, this project is expected to determine the
general principles governing how RNAi evolved to contribute to organism
complexity.