* 1412789
* Numerical Methods and Analysis for Induced-Charge Electrokinetic Flow with Deformable Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Yuan-Nan Young, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 01/31/2019
* USD 433,749.00

This project is an investigation of fundamental problems from fluid dynamics
that arise in biology and microtechnology. Its focus is on the development of
new mathematical models and efficient numerical methods to study the
manipulation by electric fields of the shape and position of cells, vesicles,
and drops in electrolytic fluids. These so-called 'electrokinetic techniques'
are among the most common methods for manipulating particles and fluids in
micro-scale devices and biological applications. For example, electric fields
are applied to induce shape changes in cells and vesicles, and this is used to
infer membrane properties. Electric fields are also used to form transient pores
in membranes, which is an important technique to load cells with molecules for
drug delivery or gene therapy. Impacts of the proposed research include the
development of new mathematical models and numerical methods that will be of
benefit to scientists and engineers studying electrokinetic phenomena in biology
and engineering. An additional impact of this project will be the education and
involvement of graduate students. The interdisciplinary training they receive
will be valuable preparation for a range of careers in mathematics and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the interfacial flow of an ionic fluid that
is driven by an electric field, a screening cloud of ions develops at the
interface and forms an electrochemical double layer or 'Debye layer'. The
electric field both acts on the ion cloud it induces and drives both it and the
surrounding fluid into motion. This is known as 'induced-charge electrokinetic
flow', and it is an important phenomenon in applications. We address a
significant difficulty in the numerical computation of such flows in the
practically important limit of thin double layers, by developing a fast and
accurate hybrid or multiscale numerical method that incorporates an asymptotic
analysis of the layer's dynamics into a novel boundary integral formulation of
the interfacial free boundary problem. A central theme of the current project is
the development of a hybrid method for electrokinetic flow about a membrane. The
algorithm will incorporate an analysis of the high-wavenumber or small-scale
component of the elastic and electrostatic stresses on a membrane into a
nonstiff method that is capable of handling the multiple time and space scales
inherent in the problem. The method will be used to study canonical problems in
the electrodeformation of drops, vesicles, and cells, and to examine vesicle
manufacture by electroformation and coalescence by electrofusion. The numerical
investigations will be complemented by analytical studies that will be used to
justify existing reduced or 'lumped parameter' models for electrohydrodynamic
flow, and to derive new models. The investigators also propose to develop a
hybrid method for problems with ionic surfactant, which combines features of
both electrokinetic flow and soluble surfactant.