* 1412633
* The Astrophysical Multimessenger Observatory Network
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 384,373.00

Astrophysical phenomena, and particularly the most energetic, emit a range of
particles from photons to neutrinos and cosmic rays. They may also produce
gravitational radiation. These "messengers" carry details of the energetics and
physical conditions in these sources. The Astrophysical Multimessenger
Observatory Network (AMON) aims to discover new particle astrophysics phenomena
by merging the world's leading multimessenger observatories into a single data
system for the first time. The facilities to be linked by AMON observe high-
energy neutrinos (the IceCube and ANTARES Neutrino Observatories), the strongly-
interacting nuclei observed as cosmic rays (the Pierre Auger Cosmic Ray
Observatory), and in future phases, the oscillations in the fabric of space-time
manifested as gravitational waves (the Advanced LIGO and VIRGO gravitational-
wave detectors). These are complemented by current and next-generation gamma-ray
facilities, including the Swift and Fermi satellites and the HAWC gamma-ray
observatory. Over the three year award period, the PIs will construct a
prototype AMON network with the scientific goal of discovering the first
jointly-emitting gamma-ray and high-energy neutrino sources. In conjunction with
the AMON project, the PIs will also initiate and run "AstroTxt," an applied
educational experience that will involve central Pennsylvania middle and high
school students directly in real-time AMON operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMON will assemble the first terabyte-scale multimessenger
database and develop tools for data exchange and real-time correlation analysis,
establishing a superior level of interoperability. This new and transparent
sharing of data promises significant scientific advances: Data from individual
facilities that in isolation cannot be interpreted as the detection of an
astrophysical source, may achieve a higher level of significance in a joint
coincident analysis of data from multiple participating observatories. Each
candidate astrophysical signal will be packaged as an electronic AMON Alert and
distributed to a network of follow-up facilities for counterpart searches and
characterization. Identification of an x-ray, optical, or radio counterpart will
serve to confirm the astrophysical nature of an event and enable a broad range
of detailed studies, including distance or redshift measurement, using
traditional astronomical techniques.