* 1412395
* Collaborative Research: The Genomic Basis of Multicellularity and Developmental Complexity in the Volvocine Algae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Richard Michod, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2017
* USD 279,000.00

The visible organisms around us are composed of many microscopic cells. In
contrast, it was only with the invention of the microscope that it was realized
that organisms exist that are composed of a single cell. Thus, a fundamental
question in biology has been to understand how microscopic unicellular organisms
evolved the ability to cooperate as a group to form large and complex organisms
composed of multiple cells (multicellular). In the most familiar organisms such
as animals and plants, the transition from single cells to multicellular
organisms occurred about a billion years ago in organisms that no longer exist,
which has made it very challenging to identify the genes involved in this
evolutionary process. However, in a group of organisms that live in ponds called
the Volvocine algae, the transition from single cells to multicellular organisms
occurred more recently resulting in the preservation of the genetic signature of
multicellular evolution within their present day relatives. While Volvocine
algae were once simply known as "pond scum", they are now known to be
representative of simple forms of other organisms such as plants and animals,
thus making them a valuable tool for understanding how multicellular plants and
animals evolved. The Volvocine algae are now recognized as an important model
for multicellular evolution, often appearing in science textbooks and are
featured at the Smithsonian Museum as one of the primary examples of how
multicellularity evolved. To determine which genes are important for
multicellularity in the Volvocine algae, their genomes will be sequenced and
compared to identify those genes that are evolving in multicellular algae
compared to close relatives that are unicellular. Once identified, these genes
will be independently tested to confirm that they are indeed important for the
transition to multicellularity. Because the Volvocine algae are similar to other
organisms, including plants and animals, the data generated in this project will
be broadly important toward understanding how multicellular organisms evolved in
all domains of life. During the course of this project there will be
opportunities for local high school, undergraduate and other trainees to
participate in this effort, including outreach to a high school where less than
20% of students have college-educated parents. The genome data generated from
this project will become publicly available on the Phytozome website
(http://www.phytozome.net), and this project will also contribute additional
data about the Volvocine algae to an international education effort, the
Volvocales Information Project
(http://www2.unb.ca/vip/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of
multicellularity is a major evolutionary transition that resulted in a
fundamental change in cellular organization and function. However, the genetic
basis of multicellularity is not well understood. Multicellular evolution
involves three major evolutionary steps: first colonial multicellular organisms
evolve when individual cells come together in a cooperative group; then cell
fate determination evolves such that there are two distinct germ and somatic
cell lines, finally organismal size expands and cells evolve specialized
function. The goal of this project is to determine the underlying, and succinct
genetic changes that are required for the evolution of colonial cooperative
groups, the evolution of germ-soma, and the evolution or organismal size by
using a comparative genomics approach. The project will utilize the Volvocine
algae as a model system that has undergone the most recent example of
multicellular evolution. The Volvocales are an excellent model system for
multicellularity because member species show stepwise gains and losses of
multicellular characters. The central hypothesis of this project is that
existing genetic pathways in unicellular Chlamydomonas have been evolutionarily
co-opted as complexity increased in the Volvocales. To test this hypothesis, the
PI will (a) sequence and compare the contents of the genomes of Volvocales
representative of the three major steps to multicellularity to identify
candidate genes and pathways that have been co-opted into new functions
correlating with multicellularity and organismal complexity, (b) use comparative
differential expression analysis between species to identify genes whose
expression pattern is altered and correlated with multicellularity in the
Volvocales, and (c) functionally test candidate genes to see when in the
Volvocales their function was co-opted by determining if they positively cause
multicellularity by expressing them in unicellular Chlamydomonas and looking for
morphological changes. This project will not only identify genes associated with
the evolution from uni- to multicellularity, but also challenge the prevailing
hypothesis in the field, which suggests that large-scale genomic duplication and
neo-functionalization events underlie multicellularity. The project is a
collaboration between two PIs, whose complimentary expertise is essential to
achieve its stated goals. Another goal of the project is to promote
participation of high school and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups and who are first generation college students. Both laboratories are
located near rural areas that struggle with modernizing their high school
science programs. High school participants in this project will be trained in
two steps. First, the PIs will provide outreach to their high school
collaborators to build in class units for teaching molecular genotyping of
phylogenetic classification or organisms. Next, students will participate in
weekend visits to KSU and U of Az where they use their in-class derived skills
to PCR genotype algal strains that will be used for the population studies in
the project. Students who have a strong interest in science will given the
opportunity to be interns in the PI's laboratory during the summer. Student
interns will travel to locations in the USA and assist with isolating new
Volvocales strains for the population studies and then use their training to
molecularly genotype the strains they have isolated. Importantly, the students
will also determine the taxa present in the ponds, and sample the water for
quality measurements, to build toward a future project.