* 1412571
* Collaborative research:  Multiscale modeling of the physiological interactions between sleep and circadian systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Cecilia Diniz Behn, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 158,000.00

Understanding the interactions between sleep/wake behavior and the circadian
(~24 hour) rhythm, coordinated in the brain by the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN), is fundamentally important for coping with challenges associated with
shift work, jet lag, and, more generally, life in our 24-hour society. When
these systems are not optimally aligned, there are negative implications for
physical and mental health, job performance, and key tasks such as driving.
Investigating these interactions is difficult since they take place on a range
of spatial and temporal scales that are not easily addressed simultaneously with
current experimental techniques. Temporal scales vary from the millisecond
timing of neuron firing to the 24 hour period of the circadian rhythm to the
days and weeks over which misalignment of sleep and circadian rhythms occurs.
Spatial scales range from the intracellular protein transcription and
translation dynamics that generate 24 hour rhythmicity in SCN neural activity to
synaptic interactions between neural populations involved in the regulation of
sleep states to the ultimately observable sleep/wake behavior of the animal.
Recent advances in identifying the anatomy and physiology of circadian and
sleep/wake regulatory systems provide the necessary details for constructing
physiologically-based mathematical models of these systems. The three aims of
this project undertake the development, analysis, and integration of
mathematical models to bridge the disparate temporal and spatial scales of the
problem. The project will address the following key questions: (1) the role of
different sleep states, particularly rapid eye movement sleep, in the
synchronization of sleep behavior with the circadian rhythm; (2) how SCN
electrophysiology translates neuronal signals into molecular signals that act to
shift the circadian clock; and (3) the nature of the indirect synaptic
projections between the SCN and neural populations regulating sleep and wake
states that govern the 24 hour rhythm in experimentally recorded rat sleep/wake
patterning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of different sleep states on
synchronization of sleep and circadian rhythms will be investigated by employing
a neuronal population model of the sleep/wake regulatory network coupled to the
SCN. To quantify the mathematical basis for synchronization and the
characteristics of rapid eye movement sleep cycling that promote
desynchronization, phase map based analytical techniques developed in coupled
oscillator theory will be applied to the model. To understand how neuronal and
molecular signals are integrated in SCN neurons, a Hodgkin-Huxley-type model for
neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus will be linked to a Goodwin-oscillator-
based model for the intracellular molecular clock. Model analysis will identify
the mechanisms by which the actions of neuronal synaptic projections on a
millisecond time scale, mediated through electrophysiology and resultant
intracellular calcium dynamics, perturb the calcium-dependent 24 hour
oscillations of the molecular clock. The feedforward and feedback synaptic
projections between the SCN and the sleep/wake regulatory network will be
investigated by fitting simulated sleep/wake patterning from neuronal population
models of sleep/wake and circadian networks to 24 hour experimental rat sleep
recordings. Results will provide constraints on and predictions for network
structure and coupling mechanisms. Mathematically, the projects will advance
techniques for multiscale modeling, provide insights into coupled oscillator
systems involving both limit cycle and hysteresis loop oscillators, investigate
deterministic and stochastic contributions to model dynamics, and demonstrate
novel methodologies for using experimental data to constrain network models. Two
graduate students and at least four undergraduate students will be trained in
interdisciplinary research in mathematical neuroscience and dynamical systems
through their participation in the projects. For educational outreach, a
sleep/wake modeling teaching module will be developed for high school algebra
classes to expose students to modeling in a personal, highly relevant context
that relates to issues such as shift work, jet lag, and the well-documented
sleep phase delay in teenagers.