* 1412981
* Quasars Probing Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Jason Prochaska, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2018
* USD 391,372.00

In the fifty years since the discovery of quasars, a picture of these enigmatic
objects has emerged wherein quasars are supermassive black holes residing at the
centers of large galaxies. The black hole may have a mass of millions to
billions times that of the sun. As this picture implies, the quasar phenomenon
is one and the same as that of the objects referred to as "active galactic
nuclei." All are characterized by enormous luminosity such that the quasar
frequently outshines the light from all of the billions of stars in its host
galaxy. Their extreme luminosity makes it possible to observe quasars located at
billions of light-years from earth. Due to the finite speed of light, this means
that astronomers can literally observe quasars at an earlier epoch in the
universe, the age of the formation of galaxies. This project will specifically
study pairs of quasars. Quasar pairs are relatively rare and are not physically
associated with one another. Instead, they are a superposition of two quasars at
different distances that appear close together on the sky. As the light from the
more distant quasar passes by the nearer one, any gas in the halo of the galaxy
hosting the latter quasar, the so-called "circumgalactic medium," imprints a
signature on the spectrum of the more distant quasar, allowing the study of the
characteristics of that gas and giving clues as to the mechanism of the
formation of the host galaxy. This team of researchers has assembled a sample of
such pairs and will use them to study the circumgalactic gas as well as the gas
between galaxies. The project will also support internship programs at a
minority-serving college and public outreach.

This project is an extension of the well-established Quasars Probing Quasars
project into several new scientific directions and support astronomical outreach
into the Hispanic community of Salinas Valley. Specific scientific emphasis will
be concentrated on the circumgalactic medium of massive galaxies, AGN physics,
and the intergalactic medium at redshift of about 2. The project will utilize
data from essentially every large-aperture, optical/near-IR telescope and will
leverage state-of-the-art cosmological simulations to interpret results and test
theories of galaxy formation, quasar feedback, cosmic re-ionization, and
supermassive black hole evolution. The core of the project will be the use of
pairs of quasars to probe the intergalactic and circumgalactic media at high
redshift as well as to provide evidence for the resolution of fundamental
questions in quasar physics. Typical quasar pairs are not physically associated
with one another but the light from the background quasar is imprinted by
material associated from the nearer, lower redshift member of the pair. This
allows determination of the size of structure in any absorbing gas along with
its density, mass, etc. Three distinct but coupled programs will be supported:
(1) to test theories of galaxy formation by elucidating the properties of the
circumgalactic medium around galaxies hosting quasars and sub-millimeter
galaxies; (2) to estimate timescales for the active galaxy phenomenon using the
transverse proximity effect; and (3) make the first measurements of the small
scale structure of the intergalactic medium at redshifts around 2. This is an
ambitious program for which the PI and his collaborators have the necessary
physical resources (telescope time, etc.) and intellectual prowess.