* 1412459
* A Synthetic-Biology Approach to Study Scaling Properties of Self-Organized Patterns
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Lingchong You, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 08/31/2020
* USD 677,117.00

Using engineered gene circuits as a model system, the proposed work aims to
examine the scaling properties of self-organized patterns. It focuses on a
unique property, scale invariance, or maintenance of constant relative size of
an organ with respect to the whole body during animal development or between
individuals. The project represents a transformative application of synthetic
biology to address unresolved, fundamental questions in biology. The proposed
computational and experimental framework provides a well-defined context for
exploring design principles that underlie generation of self-organized pattern
formation as well as the emergent scaling properties. In addition to offering
new biological insights, the proposed engineered systems can serve as the
foundation for future engineering endeavors, such as fabrication of novel
biomaterials. Furthermore, experimental techniques and computational
infrastructure arising from the proposed work will be applicable for analyzing
both natural and synthetic biological networks. Both computational and
experimental systems and tools will be made available to the broad research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equally important, the research in this project
will provide opportunities for pre-college students, undergraduates, and
graduate students with backgrounds in biology, engineering, mathematics, and
physical sciences to become exposed to interdisciplinary research in
bioengineering and synthetic biology. Modeling examples and experiments derived
from the proposed research, along with other examples drawn from the literature,
will be used to train these students. In addition, the course and curriculum
development will facilitate dissemination of knowledge in Systems and Synthetic
Biology both at and beyond Duke University. Finally, to support both short-term
and long-term education goals, the proposed efforts include development of a
textbook on systems and synthetic biology that targets upper-level undergraduate
students and starting graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The project aims to use a combination of mathematical modeling and
experimental analysis of synthetic gene circuits to explore the fundamental
mechanisms underlying scaling properties of self-organized patterns. Scale
invariance refers to maintenance of constant relative size of an organ with
respect to the whole body during animal development or between individuals. A
number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain scale invariance in
biological pattern formation. Regardless of their specific molecular
interactions, however, the vast majority of these mechanisms require morphogen
gradients as the spatial cue, which are either predefined or generated as part
of the patterning process. In preliminary work, using Escherichia coli
programmed by a synthetic gene circuit, the investigator has demonstrated the
generation of perfect scale invariance of ring size versus colony size in
robust, self-organized ring patterns of gene expression in the absence of an
apparent morphogen gradient. This observation raises a fundamental, unresolved
question: How does scale invariance occur in self-organized patterns in the
absence of a spatial morphogen gradient? To address this question, the
investigator proposes to develop and optimize an experimental platform to
examine scaling properties of self-organized pattern formation in engineered
bacteria. This platform couples inkjet printing technology and synthetic gene
circuitry to explore the role of morphogen as a temporal cue in the pattern
formation process, guided by mechanistically based mathematical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded jointly by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass
Engineering Program in CBET.