* 1412402
* New methods for controlling molecular motion on surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* E. Charles Sykes, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 446,750.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, Charles Sykes of Tufts University is investigating ways to direct and
control the motion of molecules on surfaces. This motion occurs in two ways:
molecules can travel across the surface in straight or curved lines or they can
spin in place like a top. Currently, it is not well-understood how energy
flowing through molecules causes them to move. This is preventing the
advancement of new technologies. New methods for separating or purifying
molecules require that these two types of movement be controlled, yet this can
be very difficult to do. Unique new applications, including tiny molecular-sized
pumps, sensors, optoelectronics, and assemblies, could become possible if a way
can be found to control these motions. In this research, a sophisticated imaging
system known as a scanning tunneling microscope is being used to visualize the
motion of individual molecules on surfaces. Electrical pulses can be applied to
the molecules in order to gain a better understanding of how energy flow leads
to molecular motion. The ultimate goal of the work is the discovery of valuable
design principles for the construction of molecular machines and molecular-sized
devices. The work is having a broader impact through presentations the
researchers are making at local high schools. Newly developed science
demonstrations, "meet a scientist" days, and the inclusion of high school
students in the research are bringing the work to a broad audience. The wider
public is also engaged in this research through the production of YouTube videos
featuring this cutting-edge research.

The research is aimed at developing new methods for the controlled rotation of
molecules and their unidirectional translation across surfaces by addressing
several key questions. First, the relationship between a molecule's intrinsic
chirality, its adsorption configuration, and its potential energy landscape on
the surface must be understood. Next, molecular functionality that enables cargo
to be bound and released is investigated. Finally, the electrically excited
hopping of molecules with ratchet-like energy landscapes is being studied to
better control unidirectional motion, providing more general approaches to the
directional transport of molecules on surfaces that do not require the molecules
to be a specific shape/functionality. While the electronic or vibrational states
of the molecules in these experiments is to be excited with electrons from a
scanning tunneling microscope tip, this method for globally inducing directed
motion of all the molecules on a surface is possible by coupling to the same
modes either with a macroscopic electron or light source. Discovery of novel
microscopic mechanisms for directed molecular motion on surfaces will provide
important proof of principle demonstrations that are generalizable in other
systems and fields. This type of enabling technology is crucial for the rational
design of new approaches for mass transport, separations and
enantiopurifications.