* 1412501
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Assessing the Demographic and Genetic Impact of Major Social Transitions in Historical Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Deborah Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,287.00

A major scientific question in the understanding of human population genetic
diversity is how modern diversity has been shaped by sociocultural transitions
and other major events in human history. These factors and their consequences
are not well-understood, despite the potential for significant reshaping of the
genetic makeup of human populations. This dissertation research by doctoral
student Jaime Mata-Miguez (under the supervision of Dr. Deborah Bolnick,
University of Texas at Austin) examines the demographic and genetic impact of
cultural expansion and colonialism on human population genetics, investigating
how factors such as community reorganization, altered migration patterns, and/or
increasing mortality rates resulting from warfare and other forms of changed or
destroyed traditional lifeways can produce profound genetic effects in impacted
human populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To comprehensively address this research
question, the project must focus on a human study population for which there are
data on both these historical impacts and the genetic makeup of the ancient and
present-day members of that population. By comparing DNA from ancient human
remains and the present-day inhabitants of Xaltocan, Mexico, the genetic changes
resulting from the multiple societal impacts associated with expansion of the
Aztec empire and Spanish colonialism in Mesoamerica can be assessed. This is a
unique test case for examining the impacts previously discussed; archaeological
research at Xaltocan has unearthed both pre-Aztec and Aztec human remains with
well-preserved DNA, so Xaltocan offers a unique opportunity to study genetic
changes across the period of Aztec expansionism, while genetic comparisons
between these pre-Hispanic samples and the modern residents also make it
possible to clarify the genetic changes that occurred at Xaltocan after the
onset of Spanish colonialism. As the first project to analyze genome-wide
markers in both ancient and modern samples from a single location, the research
will dramatically increase statistical power to infer past population history
and to clarify how major societal disruptions impact our genetics, in addition
to forces such as genetic drift and gene flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project also contributes to an array of broader scientific and social impacts.
By comparing ancient and modern DNA from Xaltocan, this investigation elucidates
the genetic consequences of sociocultural change and shows how major historical
events have shaped human genetic diversity in recent times. Genetic data and
results are being disseminated through public databases, peer-reviewed
publications, scientific presentations, articles in the popular press, and
educational presentations to the Xaltocan community, enhancing scientific
understanding and appreciation while contributing to the added value of these
data for additional relevant research. Community collaboration and participation
is a critical part of this project, fostering public engagement with science and
promoting scientific literacy in indigenous communities. Finally, this study
provides research, training, and mentorship opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Texas at Austin, including increased
participation of members of under-represented groups in science.