* 1412647
* Dust and Gas in Debris Disks Reveal the Origins of Planetary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Meredith Hughes, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2018
* USD 538,623.00

This award will fund studies to obtain and analyze observations of gas and dust
that are found in flattened disks around some stars. These disks are called
debris disks and represent the end stage of circumstellar disk evolution, with
stellar ages corresponding to the epoch when giant planets in our solar system
were newly formed. The investigators will use the ALMA (Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array), SMA (Submillimeter Array) and CARMA (Combined
Array for Research in Millimter-wave Astronomy) telescopes and obtain spectra of
three bright, nearby, edge-on debris disks that contain higher amounts of gas
than is predicted by most models of planet formation. Their data will be used to
test whether this gas is more likely to be primordial or produced from
evaporating comets. The data will also be used measure the dynamical state of
the debris disks, which will provide information about collisional velocities in
the disk, which will be useful for constraining disk models and for detecting
the presence of Neptune-mass planets in the disks. The principal investigator
will buld a new protected infrastructure at Van Vleck Observatory, which is
designed to accommodate demand from the surrounding community to learn about
astronomical research. They will also incorporate public-level research talks by
students and faculty, and hands-on astronomy explorations with the larger goal
of increasing scientific literacy of the community members.

This project will provide critical tests of the leading planet-formation models
of our solar system and other planetary systems. Spatially resolved
interferometric spectra of multiple gas lines and continuum emission will be
obtained and analyzed from dust in three disk systems that have the dust
properties of optically thin debris disks, yet retain substantial reservoirs of
molecular gas detectable at millimeter wavelengths: 49 Ceti, HD 21997, and HD
14159. They will measure the total mass in each system, estimate its lifetime,
and measure the basic chemical composition of each disks through multi-
transition analysis of gas lines. In particular, they will observe multiple CO
and HCN rotational lines, along with continuum bands. The data will also be used
to test collisional evolution models, measure the velocity dispersion and the
mass of largest bodies stirring the planetesimal population in the disks.