* 1412759
* Chemical tools for capturing protein-protein interactions in live cells
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Anna Mapp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2017
* USD 462,000.00

Just as humans use machines such as computers or cars to carry out complex tasks
in day-to-day life, a cell uses many different kinds of machines to grow, to
maintain its health, and to replicate. Unlike a computer or car, though,
machines in the cell are often built only when needed for a particular task and
are then disassembled; they are dynamic rather than static. An example of this
is the machine that reads the information stored in DNA, the transcriptional
machinery. More than fifty different proteins come together to form the
transcriptional machinery at a specific gene and then the machinery is
disassembled as the reading process begins. In part because they are short-
lived, the interactions between proteins that comprise such machines are
difficult to capture and visualize. This project focuses on developing novel
tools such that dynamic machineries in the cell can be captured and studied in
their native environment for the first time, tools that will be made available
to the broader scientific community. The undergraduate students and graduate
students working on this project will receive cross-disciplinary training in
chemistry and biology and will share this knowledge in local Michigan K-8
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Anna Mapp of
the University of Michigan to develop novel strategies for the discovery and
characterization of transient, modest affinity protein-protein interactions in
the native environment of the cell. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) underlie
all cellular process, serving to localize chemistries to specific cellular
locations in a time-dependent fashion. The variety of PPIs in terms of affinity
and surface is astonishing, with strengths ranging from picomolar to millimolar
and surface areas from &lt;500 Å2 to &gt;3000 Å2. PPIs with high affinity and
small surface areas most resemble protein-ligand interactions and they are the
most amenable to characterization by standard genetic and biophysical
methodologies; not surprisingly, they are the most well-defined in terms of
function and mechanism. However, many cellular machineries rely upon modest
affinity PPIs to accomplish their function. Traditional genetic, biochemical and
biophysical strategies for characterizing such interactions are often
ineffective and PPIs that fall within the low affinity range are the most poorly
characterized in term of structure and mechanism in addition to having the
smallest number of small molecule probes available. The tools developed through
this project will enable time-dependent capture of such PPIs through the site-
specific incorporation of photoactivatable functional groups into one or more
protein binding partners. Additionally, a comparison of distinct
photocrosslinking functional groups across a continuum of protein-protein
interfaces will be used to build a framework for experimental design targeting
any PPI of interest.