* 1412066
* Dynamics of Large Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Georgi Medvedev, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,277.00

A number of very important problems in science and technology lead to the
analysis of large networks of interacting dynamical systems. Our ability to
predict epileptic seizures, to effectively control a power grid, or to
coordinate a group of robots rely on our understanding of the principles
underlying collective behavior in coupled dynamical systems. Many natural and
man-made networks around us feature extraordinary richness and complexity of
interconnections. Mathematical modeling of such networks poses new challenges
for nonlinear science and requires new approaches incorporating combinatorial
and probabilistic methods into dynamical analysis of complex systems. Graph
Theory holds an extraordinary potential to inspire new powerful techniques for
extended dynamical systems and applications to technological, social, economic,
and biological networks. In this research, the Principal Investigator (PI)
combines state-of-the-art techniques of Graph Theory with analytical methods for
Dynamical Systems to develop an effective set of tools for studying coupled
dynamical systems and their applications in neuroscience. The results of this
research will be integrated into graduate courses in Dynamical Systems and
Mathematical Neuroscience.

In this project, the PI develops a unified approach for studying dynamical
networks as evolution equations on three types of spatial domains: Caley graphs,
quasirandom graphs, and graph limits. For problems in each class, analytical and
algebraic techniques, which mesh well with the underlying spatial structures,
are identified. These techniques are used to study stability of spatial patterns
in systems of coupled phase oscillators on Caley graphs, synchronization in
systems of coupled chaotic maps, and differential equations on different random
graphs including small-world and graphs that exhibit power law behavior, as well
as those that exhibit temporally structured stable patterns in a neural network
model of learning. The PI seeks systematic ways for describing the role of
network connectivity in shaping the dynamics in coupled systems. This work is
aimed toward development of a theory for interacting dynamical systems on
regular and random graphs.