* 1412973
* Collaborative Research: Novel Data Assimilation Techniques in Mathematical Cardiology-Development, Analysis and Validation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Alessandro Veneziani, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Heart disease remains the leading cause of death in industrialized countries,
including the US, where it causes 1/3 of all total deaths. Normally, the heart
contracts in response to electrical waves that propagate through cardiac muscle;
however, deadly arrhythmias can result when disturbances arise in these
electrical waves occur and lead to irregular heart contractions. Scientific
computing applied to cardiovascular problems is becoming a formidable tool (in
addition to in vitro and in vivo studies) not only to understand these
pathologies but also to design devices and optimize therapies. For computing
simulations to be reliable and accurate in clinical settings, it is crucial that
cardiac conductivities and other parameter values utilized in mathematical
models are estimated carefully. Unfortunately, there is no common agreement for
these parameters, and the uncertainty surrounding their values affects the
reliability of quantitative analysis. In this project, we use a combined
approach of mathematical methods, computing techniques and experiments to
estimate accurately these parameters necessary to perform numerical simulations
of cardiac tissue dynamics in normal and diseased tissue correctly. This
research has the potential to elucidate arrhythmia mechanisms and to develop
therapies by providing a quantified testbed for simulations. It is a truly
interdisciplinary project that connects biology, physiology, physics and
computation through a mathematical methodology and an integrative approach
between theory, simulations and experiments. Results will be made available the
public and other researchers via publications and online via
TheVirtualHeart.org.

The bidomain model for electrocardiology is the accepted mathematical formalism
for modeling the propagation of cardiac action potentials across tissue when
including intra- and extracellular components. Numerical simulations of
electrical propagation in heart tissue are extremely sensitive to the values
used for the conductivity, which is described by a 3D symmetric tensor for each
point in space. A precise quantification of the entries of this tensor in
practice is still an open and challenging problem from both the mathematical and
biological points of view. We formulate the problem of conductivity
quantification as a variational inverse problem. The conductivities are regarded
as the control variable for the minimization of the mismatch between the
activation time computed and the one retrieved from potential measurements. The
two challenges addressed by the present proposal are (i) development and
analysis of specific computational methods for the solution of the inverse
problem including appropriate model reduction techniques to solve the problem in
real cases and (ii) extensive validation of the methods in experimental settings
for different tissues within the heart, such as right and left ventricles and
atria, and for different mammalian tissues. The proposed research will develop
new mathematical methods and techniques for inverse problems and will advance
our understanding of wave propagation in cardiac tissue for normal and diseased
states. It will further allow the use of mathematical models and methods for
real applications, particularly when addressing clinical problems.