* 1412443
* Collaborative Research:Mechanistic Studies on Fe-type Nitrile Hydration Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Richard Holz, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2017
* USD 204,000.00

Nitriles are used extensively in the production of specialty chemicals like the
polyamide nylon. Nitrile hydratases (NHases) catalyze the hydration of nitriles
to amides at ambient temperatures in neutral water. The currently employed
industrial conditions for the hydration of nitriles to amides use either strong
acids or bases, and are often incompatible with the sensitive structures of the
compounds to be produced. NHases have therefore attracted substantial interest
as biocatalysts in preparative organic chemistry. Despite the industrial
importance of NHase enzymes, the details of how they work remain poorly
understood. The objective of this research proposal is to fill this knowledge
gap. The interdisciplinary nature of the effort will serve as a platform to
increase the participation of women and classically underrepresented graduate
and undergraduate students in scientific careers in biophysics, chemistry, and
biochemistry. As part of the proposed project, both PI's will participate in the
SMART program that mentors Milwaukee area public high school students in
research projects.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Richard C. Holz and Brian Bennett from Marquette
University to elucidate the catalytic mechanism of NHase enzymes. An
interdisciplinary approach will be used that will incorporate kinetics,
spectroscopy, biochemistry, computational chemistry, and both X-ray and neutron
crystallography. The proposed experimental approach is designed to address three
key questions: i) What is the transition-state structure of nitrile hydration?
ii) What are the protonation states of catalytically important species
throughout the reaction? and iii) What controls metallocenter assembly in a
purported eukaryotic NHase? The successful completion of this research will
greatly benefit society by facilitating the intelligent design and manufacture
of nitrile-based chiral pharmaceuticals and industrially important specialty
chemicals, with enhanced synthetic flexibility and lower environmental impact,
than at present.