* 1412379
* Role of nucleoside modifications in tRNA surveillance in prokaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Valerie de Crecy-Lagard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2018
* USD 690,000.00

All life requires the active participation of a class of RNA molecules known as
transfer RNA (tRNA) and many biological processes act to ensure the proper
functioning of this tRNA pool by removing damaged or defective tRNA molecules
before they can cause harm to the cell. This project is focused on discovering
new pathways for protecting bacterial cells from damaged tRNA, as might occur
occasionally due to mistakes made by the enzymes that are responsible for
producing tRNA, or due to growth in stressful conditions. Although some of these
pathways have been identified in eukaryotes, the fate of these damaged tRNAs is
not completely understood in Bacteria. In addition, the research will determine
the function of potentially novel tRNA metabolism enzymes that were identified
by integrative data mining and appear likely to play important but unknown roles
in tRNA metabolism. The project will train one graduate student and two post-
doctoral fellows to use cutting-edge multidisciplinary approaches to solve
fundamental biological problems, and will develop three classroom-ready online
modules using biological data-mining tools for high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to discover novel regulatory
processes involving tRNA turnover in prokaryotes and to understand the role of
tRNA modifications in these processes. This interdisciplinary project integrates
computational analyses with innovative technologies that encompass bacterial
genetics, RNA biochemistry, bioanalytical chemistry and genomics and the use of
novel systems-level analysis tools to survey the modification and cleavage
profiles of all tRNAs in the cell. The research will analyze the role of
modifications as determinants for tRNA integrity in Bacteria by conducting
screens for synthetic growth phenotypes, combining deletions in tRNA
modification genes under different stress conditions and measuring tRNA levels,
modification status and fragment population in strains lacking specific
modifications. In addition, preliminary comparative genomic analysis has linked
bacterial enzymes related to tRNA metabolism, but whose precise biological
function is unknown, to both tRNA modification and stress resistance, suggesting
they participate in novel mechanisms involving tRNA degradation and/or repair.
This hypothesis will be tested by analyzing tRNA pro-files in E. coli
derivatives lacking the corresponding genes and by identifying specific RNA
substrates for these orphan RNA metabolism enzymes.