* 1412058
* Linear and non-linear elasticity: Study of exact relations and instabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Yury Grabovsky, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 132,144.00

This project revolves around two central themes: stability and heterogeneity of
materials and structures, examining them from different perspectives. The
heterogeneity can be artificial, or man-made, as in composite materials, or it
can be created spontaneously by nature as in shape memory alloys or in some of
the buckling patterns of cylindrical shells. In the former case the dependence
of the macroscopic properties of materials on their microstructure is the
subject of this study, where the goal is to uncover all instances where exact
formulas can be established between the properties of constituent materials and
the composite, regardless of the microstructure. Undergraduate research is an
essential part of this project. In the latter case the creation of
microstructure is caused by instabilities that are explained by the principle of
minimum energy. Mathematically rigorous determination of whether it is possible
to lower the energy of a configuration is an important question, especially when
the configuration is already heterogeneous. Another important example of
instability is buckling of cylindrical shells. These structures are especially
interesting because theoretically predicted buckling compression can be up to
five times higher than the experimentally observed one due to high sensitivity
to initial imperfections. A newly developed theory of buckling, of which the
investigator is a coauthor, shows promise in giving a new explanation of extreme
sensitivity of the buckling load to imperfections.

The few exact relations that are known for fiber-reinforced elastic composites
are scattered across the literature. The goal of this project is the creation of
a complete list of all exact relations and links, providing a useful resource
for mechanical engineers involved in the study and design of composite
materials. Exact relations can be used as benchmarks for measuring the
discrepancies between actual and ideal composites' properties, since they do not
depend on the microstructure -- the least controllable variable in any
composite. Another goal of this project is understanding of elastic
instabilities in materials capable of undergoing martensitic phase transitions.
In the presence of phase boundaries the problem of understanding the interplay
between the global condition of positivity of second variation and local
quasiconvexity conditions in the bulk requires new insights. Proposed examples
of energy density functions with a large number of weak local minimizers can be
used to understand the logical hierarchy of necessary conditions for strong
local minima. Buckling of slender bodies represents a universal failure of weak
local stability under compression. Axially compressed cylindrical shells are of
special interest, since the classical heuristic asymptotic analysis of buckling
predicts not only the value of the critical load that is some five times higher
than experimentally observed, it also predicts incorrect scaling of the buckling
load as a function of shell's thickness. This project examines a newly
discovered mode-switching phenomenon, whereby small imperfections activate
"latent" buckling modes with different scaling laws.