* 1412007
* Conformational dynamics and regulatory interactions in a bacteriophage RNA polymerase complex
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Ranajeet Ghose, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,146,837.00

RNA directed RNA polymerases (RdRp) play a central role in the life cycle of RNA
viruses. The catalytic activity of these enzymes is regulated at two levels:
first, through conformational transitions occurring on the catalytic timescale
allowing the enzyme to attain a state capable of RNA polymerization; second,
through regulatory interactions with other proteins in the context of a multi-
protein RNA polymerase complex. The proposed research, through a combination of
biophysical/structural studies and biochemical/functional assays, will elucidate
the nature and importance of these two levels of regulation in a bacteriophage
RdRp. The multidisciplinary nature of the research will provide training for
students from various backgrounds at multiple stages of their professional
preparation. These efforts will be in line with the overarching mission of the
City College of New York to provide a multi-cultural, multi-ethnic research and
training environment that is inclusive of groups underrepresented in the
sciences including minorities and women. In order to strengthen the pipeline of
students from underrepresented and economically disadvantaged backgrounds
pursuing degrees in the STEM disciplines, the PI will refine and expand his
outreach activities to several New York area high schools including one situated
in one of the poorest congressional districts in the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Biochemical studies on viral RdRps have indicated
that specific conformational changes at the polymerase active site influence the
rate of nucleotide addition during the elongation stage of RNA polymerization.
The nature of these conformational changes remains unknown despite the
availability of crystal structures of several viral RdRps. The proposed research
will resolve this longstanding problem by combining solution NMR to probe
dynamics on the millisecond timescale with measurements of nucleotide addition
kinetics. These complimentary sources of data, NMR dynamics and fast kinetics,
interpreted within the framework of the available crystal structures and others
to be determined, will provide a clear structural and dynamic view of RdRp-
catalyzed nucleic acid polymerization in RNA viruses. Comparison of two
distantly related enzymes (from bacteriophage phi-12 and poliovirus) will allow
generalization to a broad class of viral RdRps. In addition to dynamics,
protein-protein interactions within polymerase complexes exert higher order
control over the activity of their constituent RdRps. Modifications in these
interactions lead to altered RdRp function, and in extreme cases to non-
infectious viruses. The proposed studies will define these regulatory
interactions in the context of phi-12 that contains a simple 4-protein
polymerase complex. The results obtained will be generalizable to more complex
RNA viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-funded by the Chemistry of
Life Processes program in the Division of Chemistry.