* 1412006
* Replacement-Free Growth of Au on Ag Nanocrystal Seeds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Dong Qin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 370,000.00

Dong Qin from the Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to grow metal nanocrystals on other ("seed") metal nanocrystals with
metal combinations that have not previously been possible. A nanocrystal is a
crystal whose size is limited to several billionths of a meter, and such small
crystals often have unusual properties. Noble-metal nanocrystals have received
steadily growing interest in recent years owing to their fascinating properties
and widespread use in applications ranging from catalysis to sensing, imaging,
and biomedicine. Today, growing them on seed particles has emerged as a
prevalent route to the syntheses of nanocrystals from a number of noble metals,
such as silver (Ag), gold (Au), palladium (Pd), and platinum (Pt), as well as
some of their bimetallic combinations. Despite the remarkable successes, the
seed usually has to be the less reactive molecule or it gets eaten away
("galvanic replacement") during the growth process of the second metal. The
project is aimed at finding a way to avoid galvanic replacement even when the
seed particle is made of the more reactive metal. The new classes of bimetallic
nanocrystals being made can be used in a broad range of applications since they
may enhance spectroscopy of nearby molecules and catalysis of chemical
reactions. The proposed research encompasses disciplines across materials
science, chemistry, colloidal science, solid-state physics, optics, and surface
chemistry. The project builds an interdisciplinary education program in
nanoscale science and engineering for graduate and undergraduate students, with
a major focus on the following components: i) learning that exposes students to
a multifaceted, integrated approach to understanding the fundamentals of
nanomaterials and their unique properties due to nanoscale sizes; ii) training
that offers students hands-on experience in the laboratory and the school user
facilities in exploring research tools and discoveries and frontiers of
nanotechnology; and iii) engaging that connects the students with community and
society to impart and promote a conceptual understanding of nanoscale science
and technology in high school students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is to develop a scientific basis for achieving seeded growth with two
metals that have been plagued by galvanic replacement reactions. Specifically,
the team aims to achieve replacement-free growth of Au on Ag nanocubes using a
faster, parallel reduction to kinetically compete with and thus inhibit a
galvanic reactions. The proposed research includes the following major thrusts:
i) synthesis of Ag nanocubes with edge lengths at 30, 60, and 90 nm as uniform
samples, together with different degrees of corner truncation; ii) determination
of the kinetic parameters (rate law and activation energy) for the reduction of
HAuCl4 by a strong reducing agent, such as ascorbic acid, NH2OH, and NaBH4; iii)
measurement of the kinetic parameters for the galvanic reaction between HAuCl4
and Ag nanocubes of different sizes and with different degrees of corner
truncation; iv) understanding the role of surface diffusion in controlling the
final structure (core-frame vs. core-shell) of the bimetallic nanocrystals; and
v) evaluation of the optical properties and chemical stability of the bimetallic
nanocrystals. Collectively, a solid understanding of the system involving Ag and
Au serves as the foundation for achieving replacement-free growth of a less
reactive metal on the seeds made of a more reactive metal. These new classes of
Ag-Au nanostructures can find widespread use in optical applications with
greatly improved performance in terms of chemical stability and activity,
together with their potentials for emerging applications such as sensing,
imaging, biomedicine, and photonics, as well as in the conversion of solar light
into energy through the field enhancement effect. The principle for the galvanic
replacement-free growth of Au on Ag can also be extended to other pairs of noble
metals, including Ag-Pd, Ag-Pt, Ag-Rh, and Ag-Ir. The resultant bimetallic
nanocrystals with a core-frame or core-shell structure may find immediate use in
catalysis and environmental protection.