* 1412262
* Studying Proteasome Assembly Using a Combination of Modeling and Experiment
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Eric Deeds, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 659,158.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB, the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET, and EPSCoR,
is aimed at understanding the fundamental process of macromolecular assembly
within cells. Many cellular functions are carried out by large protein complexes
known as "molecular machines". The cell does not synthesize these machines as
single, active units, but rather as a set of protein parts that must be
assembled into a particular structure in order for the machine to function.
Despite decades of research, it is still unclear exactly how assembly processes
ensure the efficient and reliable production of these machines within cells. A
major barrier to understanding assembly has been a comparative lack of
theoretical investigation into the assembly process. This grant focuses on
overcoming this problem by combining novel computational simulation techniques
with experimental tests to study the assembly of the proteasome. This massive
molecular machine is primarily responsible for disposing of damaged or unwanted
proteins by cutting them into smaller pieces that can be eventually reused by
the cell, and accurate assembly is crucial for its function. Findings from this
research will not only provide insight into the assembly of the proteasome
itself, but also shed light on the general principles of efficient
macromolecular assembly. These general principles will likely be applicable to a
wide array of cellular machines, and could eventually be applied to the design
of synthetic materials that can self-assemble reliably in a wide range of
environments. This grant will also support ongoing outreach activities at the
University of Kansas. In particular, the proposed research will be integrated
into a recently-developed program in which high school students are exposed to
the importance of modeling and quantitative biology. This work will also be used
as a platform to recruit undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds both to KU and the labs in which this research will
be performed. These efforts will focus on leveraging existing undergraduate
research programs at KU aimed at minority students and will strengthen
recruiting efforts at national conferences such as ABRCMS and SACNAS.

Technical Description: The proteasome consists of a proteolytically active Core
Particle (CP), containing 14 alpha and 14 beta proteins arranged in an
alpha7beta7beta7alpha7 pattern, and a Regulatory Particle (RP) that binds the
alpha rings and controls which substrates are degraded. The enzyme is only
active if the subunits adopt this specific three-dimensional structure, making
efficient assembly crucial for proteasome function. Extensive experimental study
has led to the proposal of a number of hypothetical proteasome assembly
mechanisms, governing everything from the self-assembly of prokaryotic CPs in
vitro to the chaperone-assisted assembly of eukaryotic RPs in vivo. To date,
however, there has been no attempt to make a formal or mathematical model of
this process. It is thus difficult to fully evaluate current assembly
mechanisms, since their predictions have never been formally established or
quantitatively tested.

A major focus of research in the Deeds lab involves using a combination of
computational models and experimental tests to overcome this problem. The
proposed research will leverage novel simulation tools that allow for efficient
simulation of proteasome assembly. Predictions from these simulations will be
tested and validated against in vitro and in vivo experimental data obtained by
collaborators. The unprecedented combination of modeling and experiment has the
potential to fundamentally transform our understanding of how certain
mechanisms, such as assembly chaperones, act to increase the reliability and
efficiency of assembly. While this proposal is focused on a particular model
system, our work will begin to elucidate a set of general principles of
macromolecular assembly, principles that could be applied to our understanding
of other large machines or to the design of novel nanomaterials that self-
assemble with high yields in vitro or in vivo.