* 1412153
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: FIRE: Physically-Predictive Cosmological Simulations of Galaxy Formation with Resolved Feedback
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Dusan Keres, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2018
* USD 275,111.00

The "Feedback in Realistic Environments" (FIRE) project introduces exciting new
ways to account for the effects of the earliest generation of stars, formed when
the Universe is young, on the formation of galaxies and clusters of galaxies,
the large-scale tracers of cosmology, the science of the origin and evolution of
the Universe. The FIRE computer models will include more of the important
physics than has ever been done before, and early tests suggest this work agrees
with observations more cleanly than previous studies, which had to include
various arbitrary assumptions in order to make progress. The technical details
within FIRE will also disentangle problems due to the uncertain physics of
galaxy formation from problems caused solely by the limitations of computer
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIRE will carry out novel computational studies
of galaxy formation using high-resolution cosmological simulations that resolve
the interstellar medium (ISM) with unprecedented realism. Star formation injects
large quantities of energy and momentum into the surrounding medium, and this
stellar feedback generates galactic winds that affect the galactic environment.
This project will run the first cosmological simulations that self-consistently
include important stellar feedback physics. Combining a resolved, multiphase ISM
with highly non-linear feedback interactions produces powerful galactic winds in
broad agreement with observations, without using any of the ad hoc prescriptions
which previous simulations have had to invoke. FIRE simulations will address the
regulation of galaxy growth by stellar feedback, the properties of galactic
inflows and outflows, the morphological transformation of galaxies, quenching of
star formation in massive galaxies, active galactic nucleus feedback, the escape
fraction of ionizing photons, and stellar feedback on dark matter halos. All of
these simulations will be connected directly with multi-wavelength observations.
In particular, simulated absorption line statistics compared with high-redshift
measurements will test predictions of gas flows in and out of galaxies.
Technical enhancements incorporated into FIRE will help to quantify the relative
importance of numerical and physical uncertainties in galaxy formation modeling.
The initial conditions of all FIRE simulations will be made available to the
community to motivate others to follow this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes training of four graduate students, who will also learn from
the collaborative interactions across three institutions. Visualizations from
FIRE form a basis for outreach targeted at high school students, including
workshops in computational thinking for teachers. Other efforts include seminars
aimed at teachers, local astronomy enthusiasts, and students from
underrepresented groups, working to explain the connection between local
phenomena on Earth and the cosmic processes studied by FIRE.