* 1412504
* Collaborative Research: An Archaeological Survey for Substructure in the Stellar Halos of the Nearest Massive Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2018
* David Sand, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 03/31/2018
* USD 381,528.00

Our Milky Way galaxy is surrounded by "dwarf" galaxies that orbit and
occasionally collide with our galaxy. We are part of a "local group" of large
galaxies, each with its own swarm of dwarf galaxies. One of the important
unanswered questions in astronomy is how these galaxies formed and how they
change in time. Our current understanding of structure in the universe suggests
that a large galaxy like the Milky Way should actually host a larger number of
dwarf satellites than we observe. To examine whether this is universal or merely
a property of our local group, this program will conduct a detailed census of
the regions surrounding two of our nearest galactic neighbors. They will survey
two types of galaxy - spiral, like the Milky Way, and a large elliptical galaxy
- and then measure the basic properties of these newly discovered systems. This
involves a collaborative effort between three institutions and will use some of
the largest and best ground-based telescopes. All three PIs are active in
education and public outreach. PI Sand's institution, Texas Tech University, has
a new astrophysics research group and undergraduate concentration. The science
in this proposal will help establish TTU's astrophysics program and reach out to
the larger Lubbock community. In particular, two undergraduate astrophysics
students will spend summers in California doing research for the program,
allowing them to interact with the larger astrophysics community. PI
Guhathakurta is very actively involved with several programs that provide
mentoring and research experiences for high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three PIs, along with a postdoctoral researcher and
students, will address the observed lack of faint dwarf galaxies associated with
the Milky Way and M31 (compared Lambda-CDM predictions for small-scale structure
formation). Using the Magellan and Keck telescopes, they will conduct a
panoramic imaging study to measure the stellar stream and dwarf galaxy content
in NGC 253, a Milky Way-like spiral in a filamentary environment, and NGC 5128,
a massive central elliptical galaxy. They will also use Keck+Diemos and newly-
developed coaddition techniques to obtain spectra of tidal streams and dwarf
galaxies. If successful, this would enable kinematic and metallicity studies for
the first time outside the local group.