* 1412951
* FIngering convection: enhanced mixing and the emergence of large-scale structures.
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Pascale Garaud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,561.00

This program combines analytical studies with computer modeling to better
understand large-scale fluid instabilities that lead to "fingering convection".
This process could play an important role in a range of natural systems, from
Earth's oceans to the atmospheres of red giant stars. This program will form the
basis of a PhD thesis and provide opportunities for UCSC undergraduates and
interns (visiting UCSC from the Ecole Normale Superieure in France) to gain
valuable research training. In conjunction with this effort, the PI and her
students will be involved with the next International Summer-Institute for
Modeling in Astrophysics, a 6-week long program to solve topical outstanding
problems in astrophysics. The program aims to train graduate students in a
particular field through intense research experience, and to catalyze long-
lasting collaborations between more senior researchers through shared mentorship
of a student.

The PI and her students will carry out analytical and computational modeling of
the process of "fingering convection" and attempt to produce flux laws to
predict how much heat and material is transferred by this process in various
scenarios likely to be found in stellar astrophysics. Fingering convection
results in radiative regions of stars from instabilities produced by a gradient
in composition even when the density gradient is otherwise stable. This can
happen, for example, by the accretion of metal rich material is accreted or near
the Hydrogen burning layer in red giants. While primarily an analytical and
computational study of instabilities and convection, this program could lead to
modules that can be incorporated into stellar evolution codes.