* 1412269
* Infrared Mapping of Magnetic Fields in Star-Forming Regions in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Dan Clemens, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2018
* USD 637,919.00

Many galaxies in the Universe have large spiral-shaped structures in flat disks.
Those structures consist of gas and stars, many of whose properties are governed
by processes involving magnetic fields. This project is a study of such
structures in our own Milky Way galaxy using observations at near-infrared
wavelengths. Catalogs containing thousands of times more detections than
available previously will be produced for general astronomical use and released
to the entire scientific community. Three graduate students will be trained in
using various aspects of these data to study topics ranging from star formation
in the Milky Way to comparing it to the properties of other nearby galaxies like
our own.

The Galactic magnetic B-field has barely been characterized and its influence on
the interstellar medium (ISM) is poorly known. Comprehensive analysis of the
recently completed Galactic Plane Infrared Polarization Survey (GPIPS) data set
will provide an important leap forward. This will include quantitative tests of
models of the Galactic B-field in the disk as well as identifying the locations
and natures of the regions in the disk now seen to exhibit strong departures
from the general disk-parallel B-field alignment. Connecting what is seen in the
GPIPS data for the Milky Way disk to large-scale B-fields in nearby edge-on
galaxies will provide vital context as well as test whether the B-fields traced
by synchrotron radio polarization, arising from hot plasma, connect smoothly to
the B-fields in the cool, star-forming ISM. Deeper observations of important
Galactic regions will answer B-field related questions with milli-parsec
resolution in quiescent and star-forming sites and provide key tests of the two
B-field model paradigms (strong vs weak fields). Studies resulting from using
the Mimir instrument and from GPIPS provide vital B-field context, from the
diffuse outer ISM layers of molecular clouds into the dense, core regions. New,
K-band Mimir polarimetry of infrared dark clouds and well-known massive cloud
core star formation regions will reach deep enough to provide context for the
high column density zones observed with millimeter and submillimeter
interferometric polarimetry.

GPIPS and Mimir data products have impact outside the study of B-fields in the
ISM. Community use of GPIPS data will yield new findings on stars, stellar
evolution, star clusters, and Galactic structure and assembly. Project support
of GPIPS data products and software ensure their utility and legacy. The program
of bringing undergraduate and graduate students to Arizona to operate Mimir on
the Perkins telescope for class-based projects will continue and will include
high school students participating in BU's RISE summer program. Though modest in
numbers (~100 students in 8 years), these trips to the telescope have had
profound personal and career impact on the students participating, be they from
graduate or undergraduate observational classes or from the introductory, non-
majors astronomy courses at BU. Public presentation opportunities at the Boston
Museum of Science, BU Astronomy Department?s weekly open nights, and elsewhere
will be actively pursued for this project. Finally, three graduate students will
complete PhDs and several undergraduates and High School students will gain
valuable research experience.