* 1412030
* Collaborative Research: Electron transfer and storage in assemblies based on nucleic acids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical: These awards by the Macromolecular/Supramolecular/Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry to Carnegie Mellon University (Lead),
University of Pittsburgh (Non-lead) and Duke University (Non-lead) aim to
develop new strategies to create self-assembling chemical structures that may,
in the long term, perform information processing and chemical transformations
associated with computation, sensing, and energy conversion. In addition, these
studies would enable the invention of new types of artificial machines that
would function on the same scale as biological machinery. At the present time,
many of the key transformations and functionalities of interest are either very
difficult to create or entirely inaccessible. The team will develop new
strategies to teach beginning graduate courses that leverage scientific
expertise across multiple institutions - thus enriching the excitement for- and
content of- introductory courses, while lowering the cost per institution. The
team is also strongly engaged in outreach to K-12 students and educators, are
actively involved in developing teaching and learning kits, and modules for K-12
students and teachers such as "DNAZone" and "Classroom Kit Lending
Library".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Artificial, supramolecular systems
that perform complex chemical transformations with high efficiency are an
important target of modern chemistry, with potential long-term applications in
bioelectronics and biomedicine. This collaborative research program uses DNA and
synthetic nucleic acids to program the self-assembly of structures in which
electroactive groups based on metal ions and nanoparticles are organized with
nanometer resolution. The aim of the research is to determine rules for the
construction of structures in which it is possible to separate charge on the
tens of nanometers length scale. The students working on the project would gain
expertise in synthesis, characterization, and theory and learn collaborative
skills. The investigators will develop and use an internet-assisted strategy for
teaching small-to-medium-size introductory courses for graduate students on
topics at boundaries among scientific disciplines at different institutions
involved in this collaborative research. The team will be engaged in creating
tools that K-12 educators can use to teach science concepts using examples from
modern research.