* 1412287
* Mapping the Chemical Evolution of Disk Galaxies with MaNGA
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Christy Tremonti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 88,727.00

The chemical composition of galaxies - the relative amounts each galaxy has of
hydrogen, helium, oxgen, nitrogen, iron, etc. - provides important clues to how
those galaxies have evolved. However, the known drivers of galaxy evolution -
acquiring gas that can form stars, the types of stars that form and where they
form in the galaxy, and dynamical processes, such as the reistribution of gas
within and outside galaxies through supernova explosions, etc. - are difficult
to separate when the sample of galaxies is small, and all the galaxies in the
sample are very similar. This proposal plans to develop the computer codes
needed look at a sample of several thousand galaxies with very different
properties in in order to provide insight into how their chemical compositions
are related to the drivers of galaxy evolution.

Explaining how astronomers are able to gather and use information about stars
and gas by looking at the different wavelengths of light (their electromagnetic
spectrum) is challenging. Yet these spectra lie at the root of most of our
measurements of the masses, motions, temperatures, and compositions of stars,
planets, nebulae, galaxies, and large scale structure in the Universe. Many
difficult concepts, such as the phases of the moon, can be effectively taught
with the aid of demonstrations. The PI will work with an undergraduate student
to design and build a portable spectrograph - a portable version of an
instrument that astronomers use to study the different wavelengths of light - to
be used in classrooms and for public outreach.

This proposal will develop and publish a sophisticated code to measure nebular
abundance gradients in MaNGA. This will enable the study of nebular abundance
gradients in disk galaxies, which offer a uniquely powerful probe of the
processes that drive galaxy evolution: gas accretion, star formation, and gas
outflows. The complex interplay of these processes is challenging to disentangle
even in our own Milky Way. However, insights into these processes can be gained
by examining galaxies in a wide variety of evolutionary states. The development
of this code is a key step in being able to analyze the information from the
MaNGA dataset.