* 1412509
* Assembling the Phragmoplast Microtubule Array
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Bo Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 630,490.00

Towards a molecular mechanism of how plant cells divide

Cells reproduce by duplicating their genomic content and then dividing the
genome into two identical daughter cells. The final step of division is
cytokinesis, where the two daughters are physically separated from each other;
its success is absolutely essential for normal growth and development, as well
as reproduction in all organisms. Eukaryotic organisms from different kingdoms
have developed cytokinesis mechanisms that share certain features but differ in
others. In advanced green algae and plants, cytokinesis is brought about by a
sophisticated apparatus called the phragmoplast, which contains a core framework
of structural microtubules. Phragmoplast microtubules serve as tracks that
transport vesicles used to assemble the cell plate, the structure that
physically separates the two daughter cells. Microtubules undergo rapid
remodeling while the developing cell plate expands outward toward the cell
cortex. The phragmoplast is considered to be an evolutionary landmark that
enabled the emergence of land plants on earth, but little is known about how
plant cells assemble this structure. In order to understand plant cytokinesis,
this project will dissect mechanisms that regulate microtubule reorganization in
the phragmoplast. This work will not only advance knowledge of plant cell
division but also shed light on how eukaryotic cells harness protein-based
machineries to accomplish sophisticated tasks. Knowledge obtained here will be
applicable to all plants, and aid understanding of how marine green algae
transitioned into land plants during evolution. Undergraduate and high school
students from the UC Davis campus area will join the discovery, and receive
hands-on training in modern cell biology. The PI & Co-PI emphasize training
undergraduate students whose curiosity and talent in research are shadowed by
their relatively low GPAs. The impacts of the proposed project will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups, and aim for their advanced training
upon graduation or prepare them to be technically competitive when seeking jobs
in academia and the biotechnology industry. The PI's group uses the mustard
plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system to dissect cytokinesis because of
its advanced genetics/genomics and well developed cell biology tools. As
preliminary work, the PI has prepared necessary reagents, insightful mutants,
and informative fluorescent marker lines to make the system ready for the
proposed experiments. Prior accomplishments have resulted in a model
hypothesizing that the phragmoplast is assembled in modular form, where a core
of interdigitating microtubules are surrounded by non-interdigitating ones. The
current project will test this modular model to learn how this apparatus is
assembled to execute cytokinesis and taken apart upon the completion of cell
division. Specifically, the project will examine proteins that act at
microtubule plus ends in the phragmoplast and integrate their functions in order
to generate the dynamic array. The proposed work has two objectives: 1) Towards
establishing a quantitative model of microtubule organization in the
phragmoplast. Efforts will be devoted to analyzing the kinetics of the
phragmoplast microtubule array by the state-of-the-art live-cell imaging
technologies. Research will use a photoswitchable microtubule marker to test
whether microtubule translocation takes place in the phragmoplast. Available
mutants will be employed to test specific functions of the microtubule-bundling
protein MAP65-3, the motor Kinesin-12, and the kinase MPK4 in the assembly and
disassembly of the array. Results from these studies will be integrated into a
quantitative model recapitulating microtubule dynamics and reorganization during
cytokinesis. 2) To uncover the novel function of MAP65-4 in the phragmoplast.
The project will examine MAP65-4 localization by immunofluorescence and live-
cell imaging in transgenic lines. Genetic experiments will be followed to test
for any redundant functions of MAP65-3 and MAP65-4 in the phragmoplast. The
outcome of these investigations will advance our knowledge on how the anti-
parallel microtubule array is established. Overall, this project will provide
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students