* 1412195
* RAPID:   Analyzing dDwax in the Dead Sea DSDDP Core as an Indicator of Aridity and a Stratigraphic Aid
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jessica Tierney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/2014
* USD 48,279.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support the use of the
&amp;#948;Dwax proxy as a stratigraphic guide and as an indicator of past
changes in aridity for sediments from the recently-drilled Dead Sea Deep
Drilling Project (DSDDP). The results will be used to refine the core
stratigraphy, which must be achieved before further analyses are conducted. The
project will produce a preliminary 200ka &amp;#948;Dwax record from the Dead Sea
DSDDP core that will provide critical stratigraphic control on the DSDDP core,
aiding the interpretation of major climatic events such as the desiccation of
the Dead Sea during the last interglacial period, and insights into changes in
past aridity in the Levant region, including the state of hydroclimate during
glacial periods, around which there is much debate. The stratigraphic utility of
&amp;#948;Dwax derives from its clear ability to track Marine Isotope Stages,
enabling relative comparisons between &amp;#948;Dwax and other proxies in the
core that can be interpreted in the context of global marine isotope
stratigraphy. The development of these &amp;#948;Dwax data will play a critical
role in the international progress of the DSDDP project as the dating results
will allow other proxies and core description work to be put into temporal
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This research
will investigate the apparent discordance between results from local cave
stalagmites, which indicate long droughts during the last glacial cycle (approx.
100,000 years) and the apparent intermittent high levels of the Dead Sea during
this time (known to scientists as the much larger Lake Lisan, which was ~250m
deeper, and extended all the way North to the Sea of Galilee/Lake Tiberias, and
South to 150km beyond the current shoreline).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will support an early career researcher, a technician, and an undergraduate
intern recruited through the Northeastern University cooperative education
program. The PI will also facilitate local outreach efforts by hosting motivated
high school students in her lab through the Falmouth Academy Internship program,
an ongoing collaboration between Falmouth Academy and WHOI. These students will
participate in aspects of the Dead Sea project and learn about the effects of
climate change on the Levant region. International collaboration with colleagues
from Germany, Israel and Japan will be facilitated.