* 1412929
* RUI: Rhomboids from Streptomyces: The Unknown Key Player?
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Monica Trujillo, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 219,111.00

Streptomyces are soil bacteria that produce natural products that serve many
functions for the bacteria and also possess a number of interesting and useful
properties that include anti-bacterial, anti-tumor and anti-parasitic
properties. Interactions between Streptomyces and the environment regulate the
synthesis of these natural products but much remains unknown about this process.
This project addresses the role of rhomboids, a family of protein-degrading
enzymes, in the communication of Streptomyces with the environment and is
anticipated to shed light on how bacteria "talk" to each other and sense a
changing environment. Student research opportunities from this project will be
incorporated into the courses that are taught. Students (including members of
underrepresented groups) will conduct genetic, molecular and microbiological
research and their work will be presented at State, regional and national
conferences; they will have opportunities to author publications on their
research. In addition a Science, Technology and Engineering Program (STEP)
program will engage high school students interested in research, and
Queensborough Community College undergraduates will help to mentor
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine the
role of rhomboids in Streptomyces coelicolor. Putative rhomboid genes identified
through bioinformatics analysis will be knocked-out and the developmental cycle
and the production of secondary metabolites will be compared in wild-type and
gene knock-out bacterial strains. Mutant rescue studies will be used to
characterize the function of rhomboid genes from diverse Streptomyces species
and to investigate their role in regulating cell signaling, thereby providing
insights into the molecular evolution of regulatory mechanisms in bacteria.