* 1412253
* Structural Characterization of Proteins and Assemblies by Solid State NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Ann McDermott, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,169,916.00

Purification is a normal requirement for determining the structure of biological
macromolecules. However, these structures may differ depending on whether the
macromolecule is in the cell interacting with its partner, or purified from
cellular components. Thus, the physiological relevance of many structures
remains unknown. This project will develop new experiments to characterize
biological molecules in purified form, in living cells and even in whole
organisms. The technique to be used, solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) provides information about both the structure and dynamics. An important
challenge for these experiments is that they often require large amounts of
material, and, therefore, the studies are often limited to simple macromolecules
studied in their purified forms, rather than in a native biological context.
Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is a powerful technique for enhancing NMR
sensitivity. This project will develop DNP experiments that capture signals from
amounts of material typically found in living cells. Knowledge of structures of
biological macromolecules benefits society because it enables detailed
understanding of basic biological processes. The proposed activities will also
benefit society through training of new scientists and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use dynamic nuclear
polarization to study full viral particles of the bacteriophage Pf1, which is
both an important biological agent and a template for nanotechnology. The
knowledge gained regarding the virus structure, molecular recognition,
solvation, and dynamics, will contribute to a broader understanding of self-
assembly. The project will also develop improvements in DNP technology. DNP
operates by transferring signal strength from the unpaired electrons of stable
free radicals to nuclei that are then detected in the NMR experiments. These
compounds, containing two closely spaced stable free radicals, are mixed with
the sample. To better deliver the radical compounds, the project will develop
ways to attach them to proteins in ways that facilitate specific enhancements.
Moreover, tagging the proteins will facilitate detailed studies to better
understand the mechanism of polarization transfer.