* 1412888
* GOALI: Informing Amorphous Formulations Design through Quantitative Nonlinear Optical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Garth Simpson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 488,000.00

Even trace crystallinity can profoundly affect the physical behavior of
materials ranging from pharmaceutical ingredients to confectionaries. However,
detection of low levels of crystallinity for small organic molecules like active
pharmaceutical ingredients is notoriously challenging with existing benchtop
instruments. In this project supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Garth Simpson, his research
group at Purdue University, and their industrial partner Merck & Co., Inc., will
develop a new approach for crystal detection and quantification, based on
nonlinear optical light-matter interaction. In sufficiently intense optical
fields such as those arising in the focus of a femtosecond pulsed laser,
normally weak interactions that scale nonlinearly with the intensity become
significant. These new effects provide contrast in microscopy that is highly
selective for crystals of small chiral molecules.

Quantitative second harmonic generation (SHG) microscopy instrumentation
incorporating real-time data processing will be developed and applied for
characterizing trace crystallinity at parts-per-million (ppm) levels,
representing a 10,000-fold reduction in the lower limits of detection relative
to existing common benchtop methods. Independent confirmation of trace crystal
detection and percent crystallinity determination will be performed using a one-
of-a-kind instrument integrating SHG microscopy and synchrotron X-ray
diffraction. Initial applications will target analysis of amorphous formulations
through collaborations between Purdue investigators and researchers at Merck.
Partnering with Merck will help span the"valley of death" - obstacles that
prevent drug discoveries transition to new drugs - to align fundamental
discoveries on the nonlinear optics of chiral systems with the realities of
private sector applications. If successful, the development of reliable benchtop
tools for trace crystal detection could directly impact the design and quality
control of drug formulations and potentially inform analyses of a significantly
broader scope of biological materials.