* 1412796
* Nonlinear Couplings for Flows in Fractured Porous Media: Analysis and Numerical Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Akif Ibragimov, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 290,001.00

Recent changes in fracturing technologies have had a strong impact on the
economic and political life, all over the world. In the United States, these
technologies have increased the hydrocarbon reserves year-after-year by more
than 15 percent. The oil and gas productions are substantially increased by
creating new fractures that go deeply underground in different directions.
Although this technology has been known for decades, many challenging problems
had prevented it from being implemented. There is still a lack of fundamental
knowledge about the long term impact of man-made fractures, not only on the
environment in general, but also on basic human needs. Society needs robust,
unbiased knowledge on the impacts of this technology, and our industry needs
rigorous tools for predicting and controlling the geometrical and mechanical
characteristics of the fractures underground. Algorithms and scientific tools
that will be developed under this proposal can be used in many other areas of
biochemical and biomedical research. The proposed research will be integrated
within several educational programs, which include graduate and undergraduate
courses. Junior and senior undergraduates, as well as graduate students, will
participate in various stages of the proposed research. Associated industrial
problems will stimulate engineering majors to learn fundamental mathematical
topics, and will attract mathematics majors toward applied mathematics problems.
Senior personnel will disseminate the results of this project, not only through
professional meetings and journal publications, but also through a network of
collaborations and partnerships with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal addresses fundamental issues related to modeling and computer
simulation of strongly coupled systems in fractured reservoirs. The main
challenges arise from the fact that the natural underground systems and
substances that are utilized to produce fractures are subjected to coupled
physical processes, such as stresses in solid rocks and flows of multiphase
fluids in the multiscale system. This system is essentially a three-dimensional
porous medium characterized by an extremely high ratio between the horizontal
and vertical length of the fractures, and respectively, their width. In this
investigation, main hydrodynamic features, observed in real life by reservoir
engineers, will be modeled by using different sets of nonlinear partial
differential equations in the porous regions and in the fractures. These systems
of equations have not been studied before. The flow in the fractures does not
follow the classical law (linear Darcy), and the inertial forces can no longer
be neglected. Moreover, the dissipative effects due to the interaction between
the fluid flows in the different regions must be taken into account. The
proposal is focused on the combination of novel ideas in multigrid and domain
decomposition algorithms, oriented to parallel architectures with the aim of
achieving the best computational performance. In order to improve the retrieval
of hydrocarbon resources, the proposal will also address the solution of
optimization problems.