* 1412164
* Denatured State Bias toward the Topology of Alpha-helical Folds
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Bruce Bowler, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 495,000.00

This project will investigate how a linear sequence of amino acids encodes the
three-dimensional structure of a protein. The folding code is of fundamental
importance and has clear practical value for the pharmaceutical and biotech
industries. Solving the folding code will ultimately allow reliable design of
proteins with a desired structure and function. A primary barrier to cracking
the folding code is that the code is highly redundant. Two amino acid sequences
with little resemblance can yield proteins with similar three-dimensional
shapes. This project will test the hypothesis that short segments of a protein?s
amino acid sequence act like punctuation marks that bias the protein chain to
change direction. Placing these punctuation marks in the right places is thus
sufficient to establish a protein?s shape. This project will also provide
training for one undergraduate student and two graduate students in a broad
array of biochemical and biophysical methods. As part of this project, Dr.
Bowler will work with the spectrUM Discovery Area, an interactive science center
located in downtown Missoula, Montana. The Discovery Area provides hands-on
activities to spark excitement about science in K-12 students. Combining
computer graphics and physical models of proteins produced with a 3D printer,
Dr. Bowler will develop educational modules for the Discovery Area to
demonstrate the link between protein structure and function. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research will be a set of small proteins containing
two to four alpha-helices in compact bundles. Each protein contains sequences
that permit the protein chain to turn. This project will test the hypothesis
that the turn sequences bias the shape of a protein even under solution
conditions that disrupt protein structure. The project will employ NMR and
fluorescence methods, a thermodynamic approach involving formation of histidine-
heme loops and computer simulations to test this hypothesis. The research will
also test whether protein shape can be evolved by inserting turn sequences into
a 42 residue polyalanine sequence known to form a single long &amp;#945;-helix.
Finally, the research will test whether protein structure can be devolved by
replacing turn sequences with polyalanine segments. Thus, this project will
provide important new insights into the role of turn sequences in the folding
code.