* 1412175
* Chemistry of Brown Dwarfs, Exoplanets, and Low-Mass Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Katharina Lodders, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 472,638.00

The PI and her team will take atmospheric chemistry techniques that they
previously used to model planets in our solar system, and apply them to the
study of low-mass stars, brown dwarfs (objects with masses between that of stars
and planets) and exoplanets (planets outside of our solar system). These objects
all have in common that they are low enough temperature (T < 2600 K) to undergo
molecular gas- and cloud-chemistry. One focus of this project will be on the
effects that chemical compositions different from the Sun have on the
atmospheric chemistry of these objects. They will also investigate the deuterium
chemistry to help define the planet-star boundary. The team will develop a web-
based platform for the thermodynamic data resulting from these studies, which is
relevant to scientists in astronomy, planetary science, geochemistry, chemical
engineering, materials science as well as industry. They will train and mentor a
graduate student and undergraduate students in research, including those
majoring in computer science through a cross-campus intitiative. Scientific
results will be integrated into new and revised textbooks.

The investigators will accomplish this by carrying out thermochemical and
kinetic computations to study gas and condensate speciation at different
metallicities and varying C/O ratios and to identify possible chemical
metallicity indicators. They will then apply results from the computations to
hot irradiated gas giant exoplanets, and M&L dwarfs and subdwarfs. They will
also work with collaborators to expand models of photometric and spectroscopic
signatures of clouds and metallicity effects. The deuterium (D) chemistry work
will be done by deriving the thermodynamic and rate data for D/H exchange
reactions, expanding the existing computational schemes; running the
computations and analyzing the results for the most abundant and/or
spectroscopically active D-bearing gases.