* 1412734
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: G Protein Regulation of the Actin Cytoskeleton in the Cleavage Stage Embryo
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Charles Shuster, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2019
* USD 622,761.00

Cell division is a fundamental process for virtually all living systems. The
generation of two identical daughter cells requires not only that each cell
receives an equal complement of genetic material (DNA) but also that the other
contents of the cell be divided equally. The process of physically separating
the two daughter cells is known as cytokinesis, and this process involves a
contractile ring that physically constricts the cell and splits it in two.
Cytokinesis utilizes many of the same mechanisms that are used to regulate cell
shape change during migration. Cell shape is dependent on a dynamic structure
(the cytoskeleton) that is comprised primarily of the protein actin, and whose
behavior is regulated by a number of small signaling molecules. Several
conflicting models have been proposed to explain how these small molecules
interact to control the cytoskeleton, but the explanatory power of these models
has not been clearly established. This project will investigate the regulation
of the cytoskeleton by these small signaling molecules and help to clarify the
mechanisms by which they function.This research will provide training and
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, with a
concerted effort to recruit underrepresented minorities including Native
American Indian and Hispanic students. Outreach into high schools will also be
performed with the intent to generate in students a long-term interest in
science.

In this project, a toolbox of molecular and pharmacological reagents will be
combined with biophysical measurements and high-resolution light and electron
microscopy to examine how the G proteins Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 coordinate
cytokinesis-related shape change in large embryonic cells. Aims 1 and 2 will use
a combination of live cell imaging and biophysical analyses to determine what
elements of Rac and Cdc42 signaling antagonize Rho-dependent cytokinesis. Aim 3
will take advantage of a unique preparation of the contractile ring to both
define its 3D structure and determine how the different elements of Rho
signaling contribute to its assembly and function. The results of these studies
will advance knowledge in the field of animal cell division research by
extending our understanding of the precise 3D architecture of actin and myosin
II in the contractile ring that drives cytokinesis.