* 1412485
* Radiative shocks in gamma-ray bursts
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrei Beloborodov, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2017
* USD 574,521.00

Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are an extreme variety of cosmic explosion and perhaps
the most powerful events yet discovered. After a lot of work, GRBs are now known
to be at large distances, significant fractions of the size of the universe.
They come from very high speed jets of material shot out by short-lived compact
sources, possibly during the formation of black holes. At least in some cases,
GRBs are associated with the collapse of very massive stars of the type called
Wolf-Rayet. This work should make transformative progress on a major goal of GRB
theory, which is to use available observations all the way from low energies
(long wavelengths, radio data) to the highest energies (short wavelength, gamma
rays), to reconstruct the explosion, determining the composition of the jets,
how they are made, how they emit gamma rays, and how they interact with their
surroundings. Junior researchers at the beginning of their careers will learn
about complex theories and computer simulations and contribute to the
understanding of fundamental physics and the properties of matter in extreme
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will revisit the mechanism of
shocks in GRBs, and analyze their radiative properties. It will use ab initio
numerical simulations to investigate a new type of sub-photospheric shock. By
following shock formation and propagation on a microscopic level, these
simulations will fully describe the dissipation mechanism and the radiation
produced. These results will then be tested against observations. The study
includes work on a mechanism for the observed GeV flashes in GRBs which has
already raised new questions about the physics of the external blast waves from
GRB explosions, and in particular suggests the possibility of a non-linear shock
which has a strong precursor and involves ultra-high-energy electron-positron
pairs. Both the simulation method and the shock mechanism are novel and could
potentially uncover unexpected features in the blast wave mechanism. The
research impacts fundamental physics by understanding new properties of matter
in extreme conditions. Educational impacts include the training of junior
researchers and incorporation of results into instructional courses.