* 1412261
* The Highest Energy Astroparticle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Angela Olinto, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 826,000.00

The origin of ultrahigh energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) is one of the most puzzling
questions in high energy particle astrophysics. Its solution may radically
change our knowledge of the most extreme astrophysical objects in the Universe,
of the magnetic fields which permeate it, or of particle physics. Several open
questions remain - What is the origin of the observed features in the energy
spectrum? What is the composition of the UHECRs? What are the sources of the
UHECRs? In addition, UHECRs explore particle interactions at energies beyond the
reach of current accelerators. Are particle interactions above 100 TeV center-
of-mass energy what we expect?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds
for the continued participation of the U. Chicago group with the Pierre Auger
Observatory (PAO) and related particle astrophysics. With its 3000 km-squared
area, it is the largest cosmic ray detector ever built. Particle showers
produced by UHECRs are detected at the ground by a sparse array of surface
detectors (SD), and in the atmosphere by fluorescence detector (FD) telescopes
sensitive to the light from nitrogen fluorescence excited by the shower
particles. Since its completion in 2008, the PAO has unequivocally established a
steep flux suppression at the end of the energy spectrum, found hints of
anisotropies in the UHECRs arrival directions and indications of a heavier UHECR
composition at the highest energies. This group will address these questions by
improving Auger measurements (spectrum, anisotropy, composition, proton-air
cross section) with better statistics and data analysis methods, and by
providing phenomenological interpretations of the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immersive research experiences, innovative detector
laboratories, and partnerships with planetariums will bring UHECR science to
formal and informal audiences. Research experiences developed in collaboration
with programs focused on underrepresented groups, e.g. Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge,
will enhance diversity at the graduate and undergraduate levels. UHECR science
will reach broad and diverse audiences through partnerships with the Auger
Visitors Center, the Malargue Planetarium, the Adler Planetarium and videos. The
Adler collaboration will include the high-impact Astronomy Conversations
program, where scientists interact directly with museum visitors, exploring
Spanish language programming, and developing a full dome UHECR show.