* 1412851
* Outflows and AGN in the Nuclei of Merging Galaxies, Viewed with Laser Guide Star Adaptive Optics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Claire Max, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,627.00

Quasars are the most luminous objects in the universe. The active galactic
nucleus (AGN) that is the quasar's powerhouse can outshine its entire host
galaxy. In the more than fifty years since their discovery, a picture has
emerged of a quasar as a supermassive black hole residing at or near the center
of a large galaxy. Interstellar gas in the galaxy, perhaps the residue of stars
disrupted by tidal forces as they orbit close to the black hole, falls into the
black hole and in doing so is heated to very high temperatures and emits copious
radiation over a wide range of wavelengths. Along with the gas inflow, it is
also clear that quasars drive gas out of the nuclear region. An outstanding
question in the evolution of galaxies is to what extent the outflow from a
quasar expels the interstellar medium, thereby quenching star formation in the
host galaxy. This effect could have a strong influence on the development of
galaxies at early times in the universe. This project will use newly-developed
imaging and spectroscopic techniques to study nearby active galaxies in fine
detail to gain insights as to how and from where the outflow is driven. It will
also study a sub-sample of active galaxies that may have double active nuclei at
their centers. In addition, it will contribute to an established workforce
development program on Maui and a teacher training program in
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple lines of evidence suggest that quasars
in the early universe drive massive galactic outflows that expel much of the
interstellar medium in their host galaxies. These outflows are needed to quench
star formation, limit black hole accretion, and give rise to observed
relationships between the central black hole?s mass and properties of the
galaxy's bulge. Without them, it is difficult to explain the old stellar
population and low gas content of local "red and dead" massive galaxies, as well
as their steeply declining number at high masses. For high-redshift galaxies it
is difficult to study outflow processes in detail, because the galaxies have
small apparent sizes and faint fluxes. This project will study the physical
processes of nuclear outflows for nearby quasars and luminous infrared galaxies
(0.01 &lt; z &lt; 0.15), using laser guide star adaptive optics coupled with
integral field spectrographs which can map emission and absorption lines on
scales of 10 - 100 pc in the host galaxy. The outflow characteristics thereby
deduced from observations in the near-infrared will be compared to those at
other wavelengths, including molecular observations by the Herschel satellite,
ALMA, CARMA, and the SMA, and visible observations with integral field
spectrographs such as Gemini's GMOS instrument. The project will also include
observations of active galactic nuclei from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey with
dual [O III] emission lines at 0.2 &lt; z &lt; 0.6 to identify outflows and
distinguish them from dual active nuclei.