* 1413708
* Three Dimensional Nanolithography via Combined Scanning Near-Field Optical Microscopy and Photopolymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 499,491.00

Gang-Yu Liu at the University of California-Davis is supported in an award from
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program that aims at
developing advanced chemistry methodologies for three-dimensional (3D) printing
with nanometer precision. 3D printers enable production of objects by custom-
design. Cutting-edge 3D fabrication technology has reached high spatial
accuracy, down to 0.3 micrometers. This project aims at further miniaturizing
the technology down to genuine nanometer scale, <100 nm, in all three dimensions
(1/800-1/100,000 of human hair). This will be achieved by a very small light
source using near-field scanning optical microscopy technology that directs a
chemical reaction, such as polymerization on a surface, layer-by-layer,
following the scanning trajectory of the probe, and as such producing 3D
nanostructures by design. The work extends current 3D capability into the
nanometer region. The materials produced by 3D nanoprinting provide new
opportunities in various fields including optical and electronic devices,
catalysis, and biosensor and biodevices where the local environment of active
ingredients dictate the subsequent processes and device performance. Liu and her
team plan to continue their outreach effort in working with high school students
via UC Davis programs such as the ACS Project SEED program and Young Scholars
Program, and with the general public via the Davis Science Center, Nanoexplore
program.

The project takes advantage of the Liu's molecular resolution nanofabrication
and imaging technology in 2D, high intensity apertureless near field scanning
optical microscopy (NSOM), and surface chemistry. Using NSOM to activate a
photosensitizer and produce radicals locally, photoinduced thiol-ene click
chemistry will be utilized layer-by-layer, following the designed geometry to
yield the designed 3D structures. Unlike currently used 3D printers that enable
microlithography, this research takes advantage of NSOM's spatial precision and
extends 3D fabrication to the nanometer region. The goal is to achieve the
highest spatial precision and resolution in 3D nanolithography. Student training
includes: (a) precision mechanic movement and feature tracking; (b) high
resolution imaging and structure characterization using scanning probe
microscopy technology including AFM and apertureless NSOM, (c) advanced skills
in computer programing and 3D printing; (d) surface chemistry at nanoenvironment
including absorption, pattern transfer, and desorption, and (e)
photopolymerization chemistry with high spatial resolution.