* 1413525
* Conformational Flexibility in Beclin 1, an Evolutionarily-conserved, Key Autophagy Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Sangita Sinha, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 890,800.00

Project title: Conformational flexibility in Beclin 1, an evolutionarily-
conserved, key autophagy protein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autophagy is a critical
cell survival pathway responsible for nutrient recycling due to degradation of
unwanted, damaged or harmful cellular components. Autophagy plays an important
role in several key organismal processes including embryonic development, tissue
differentiation, cell-growth, as well as surviving environmental stress and
internal stressors like damaged organelles, mutant proteins, free radicals and
intracellular pathogens. Beclin1, a protein essential for autophagy, has been
directly implicated in these processes. This research will focus on
understanding the atomic-resolution structure and flexibility of Beclin1 to
provide a better understanding of its critical role in autophagy and cellular
maintenance. This project will provide graduate and undergraduate students in
North Dakota an unprecedented opportunity to train in classical and cutting edge
methods of biophysical and biochemical research, and also have a substantial
impact outside the laboratory by educating high-school teachers about
biomacromolecular structure and function. Over the period of this project, 40
high-school science teachers will participate in a summer professional
development course to help them instruct their students in understanding the
structures of biomacromolecules such as proteins and DNA. Thus, the educational
activities outlined in this project are designed to educate and mentor students
at all levels: high school, undergraduate and graduate; and will have a broader
impact far beyond the grant funding period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beclin1 appears
to be a protein interaction hub for autophagy as it binds to over twenty diverse
cellular proteins. The research goal of this project is to better understand how
Beclin 1 interacts with so many different partners by establishing its structure
and conformational flexibility and identifying residues that are key for
function. Circular dichroism and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
will be used to assess secondary structure content, backbone flexibility and
dynamic conformational changes. High-resolution structures will be determined by
X-ray crystallography or NMR. Small-angle X-ray scattering will be used to
obtain low-resolution structural information such as size, oligomerization and
molecular envelopes. Combined information from these methods will be used to
derive a pseudo-atomic model of full-length Beclin1. The role of motifs and
conserved residues in binding will be examined using isothermal titration
calorimetry to quantify the thermodynamics of interaction and by cellular assays
to assess the impact of mutations on cellular autophagy levels and binding of
selected key autophagy proteins. Last, but not least, this research will provide
substantial information about poorly understood intrinsically disordered regions
and help establish methodology essential for investigating such regions.