* 1413576
* Glycosylation and calcium as a code for tandem EGF-like repeat structure and dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Megan Macnaughtan, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 375,000.00

Proteins carry out many different tasks that are necessary for life. The
specific task performed depends on the 3-dimensional structure of the protein
molecule. In nature, a protein's structure can be purposely altered through
interaction with ions, like calcium, or by chemical modifications, such as
adding a sugar group. Even though it is predicted that most proteins have sugars
attached to them, forming so-called glycoproteins, only a small proportion of
the 100,000+ protein structures studied by scientists are glycoproteins. To
understand how attached sugars alter the structure of a calcium-binding protein,
the effects of the attached sugars must be systematically investigated.
Understanding the synergistic effects of the sugar, calcium, and protein will
allow investigators to study the function of these unique protein shapes and to
predict the structure of similar glycoproteins. Graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be recruited for this project. They
will acquire specialized training in protein chemistry, nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, NSF-EPSCoR and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division are funding Dr. Megan Macnaughtan from Louisiana State University to
determine the synergistic effects of calcium binding and glycosylation on the
structure of the mouse Notch1 Abruptex region. The structure and function of
epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) repeats, like those in the Notch1 Abruptex
region, are regulated by highly conserved glycosylation and calcium-binding
sites. The effects of high-affinity calcium-binding sites on the structure of
tandem EGF repeats has been well-studied, but the synergistic and singular
effects of glycosylation have not been systematically investigated. EGF repeats
26-28 of the Notch1 Abruptex region will be studied to determine the calcium
dissociation constants and the structural changes upon sequential glycosylation
using fluorescence spectrophotometry and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. The high-resolution 3-dimensional structure of calcium-bound,
glycosylated EGF26-28 will be determined using NMR to identify important
interactions. By defining the interactions between calcium, the glycans, and the
protein, new insights into the structure of other glycosylated EGF repeats and
the regulation of EGF repeat function will be revealed, impacting the fields of
structural biology and cellular signaling.