* 1413547
* Discovering new writers and patterns underlying the CTD code
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Aseem Ansari, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,997.00

RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is the protein machine that transcribes the majority
of genes in the eukaryotic cell into RNA. Pol II core component consists of 12
proteins, and the tail end of the largest protein, called the C-terminal domain
(CTD), is the site of interaction with other proteins and cellular machines. In
this project, we will earn how these interactions are affected by chemical
changes of the CTD in the baker's yeast cells. Since CTD-related mechanisms are
highly conserved in evolution, the research will enable our understanding of
gene expression in other eukaryotes, including humans. The program will expand
the horizons of students and colleagues by working in teams that bring expertise
from multiple disciplines, train the next generation of globally engaged
scientists/technologists, and provide widely enabling tools to the scientific
community. To engage the next generation of students in STEM subjects, as well
as the larger community, we will in particular develop a computer game that
begins with the collection and assembly of basic biological processes that
underlie The Central Dogma of Molecular Biology and leads the players to
identify features required to form a "minimal living
genome."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "CTD code" hypothesis posits that the
engagement of relevant proteins with Pol II is coordinated by sequential post-
translational modifications of the CTD. An important feature of this unusual
domain is the occurrence of a repeating hepta-peptide that is modified on all
five of the hydroxyl-bearing amino side chains. This project focuses on
phosphorylation of threonine in position four of this hepta-peptide repeat; such
phosphorylation has been implicated in directing the post-transcriptional
modification of a specific set of Pol II-transcribed genes. The project will
integrate chemical, biological and computational approaches to identify cellular
kinases that phosphorylate threonine four of the Pol II CTD from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The next level of experimentation and analysis will focus on
obtaining mechanistic insights into how phosphorylation of this residue
contributes to global versus gene class-specific transcriptional control.