* 1413356
* Invisible States and Double Conformational Capture in RNA-RNA Recognition: The Docking Transition of the Hairpin Ribozyme
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Charles Hoogstraten, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2019
* USD 735,725.00

Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is most familiar as the messenger that carries genetic
information stored in DNA to the sites where it is translated into the proteins
that do the work of the cell. In recent years, however, scientists have realized
that RNA molecules that do not encode proteins play a wide variety of roles in
biology, and that many of these "noncoding RNAs" take up complex and intricate
three-dimensional shapes in order to fill their biological function. In this
project, the process by which the well-studied RNA enzyme known as the hairpin
ribozyme forms its folded shape will be examined in detail. The results will
uncover principles for the processes and driving forces of RNA folding that will
be of general applicability to other noncoding RNA molecules and will thus
enhance scientific understanding of a variety of fundamental cellular processes.
In addition, a standard set of baseline technical parameters (NMR frequencies
for atoms in RNA molecules that lack three-dimensional structure) will be
generated that will be of use to many workers in the field of RNA biophysics.
The lab in which this research will be performed has a strong history in the
graduate education of underrepresented groups, and this project will continue
and extend these efforts to the undergraduate level via coordination with
existing recruitment and retention efforts at Michigan
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the factors underlying secondary structure
(helix formation) in DNA and RNA are relatively well understood, the detailed
study of the driving forces and mechanisms of the formation of complex tertiary
structures in nucleic acids has not kept pace with the great recent advances in
RNA structural biology. The active conformation of the hairpin ribozyme is
generated by an interaction between two RNA internal loops to generate an
intricate docked structure with significant conformational rearrangements. It is
hypothesized that this transition is an example of double conformational
capture, in which both loops undergo fluctuations to conformation(s) resembling
their docked forms and only collisions between loops that are each sampling
those forms are productive for recognition. This hypothesis will be tested using
NMR spin-relaxation studies of each loop in isolation. Such experiments can
identify minor conformers, or "invisible states," sampled by each loop, and the
hypothesis predicts that the chemical shifts of these invisible states will
resemble those of the docked form. Recently- reported advanced chemical shift
calculation methods will be used to estimate the chemical shift changes expected
upon transition to a docked-like state. To rule out simple molecular unfolding,
a systematic determination of the NMR chemical shifts characteristic of the
unfolded state of RNA will be performed, thus producing a reference database
likely to be broadly useful to workers in the field. Observed chemical shift
changes to the invisible state(s) will be compared to those expected from both
fluctuations to the docked-like conformation (as hypothesized) and to simple
unfolded states. Finally, advanced molecular mechanics calculations will be used
to map out the details of the free-energy landscape implied by the NMR
experiments and to verify the existence of energetically accessible trajectories
corresponding to the proposed pathways.