* 1413641
* Macromolecular, Supramolecular and/or Nanomolecular Photophysics and Photochemistry of d10 and d8 Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2017
* Mohammad Omary, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2017
* USD 449,137.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program, Mohammad Omary of the University of North Texas (UNT) is developing a
new group of compounds for use as catalysts in alternative energy technologies.
The compounds serve to accelerate the rate at which water is decomposed to
hydrogen and oxygen, releasing the energy that once held the hydrogen and oxygen
atoms together in each water molecule. The compounds being developed in this
project are expected to have greater stability than existing materials in use,
thus extending the practicality of this promising new source of alternative
energy. The project is strengthening several existing
academic/government/industrial collaborations between UNT and other US
universities, national laboratories, and private sector entities as well as some
existing and new international collaborations. The research is having a broader
impact on energy-related science through the development of promising new
technologies.

In this project, a series of phosphorescent complexes with various molecular-
and nano-structural complexity are being investigated for their potential use as
photocatalysts for water splitting. New photocatalyst candidates based on metal-
organic compositions are being developed to engender greater material stability
under practical environments in the presence of water and sunlight. The project
focuses on a new design of practical multi-electron photocatalyst candidates
that can operate in an aqueous instead of organic or mixed organic/aqueous
media. The intent is to target water splitting in an efficient, environmentally-
responsible manner using catalysts that operate homogeneously, or
heterogeneously via solid films in order to increase ruggedness, concentrate the
active material, and utilize intermolecular interactions to potentially
sensitize cooperative electron transfer. Water solubility, while maintaining
high luminescence quantum yield and long phosphorescence lifetime, is a highly
desirable attribute for outer-sphere multi-electron photocatalysis. These
conditions are satisfied by multiple embodiments of the macromolecular,
supramolecular, and nanomolecular complexes that the Omary group is developing
in this project in an effort to improve the state of the art of current water
splitting photosensitizers. For inner-sphere processes, mono- and multi-nuclear
complexes are designed to act as energy reservoirs for 6-12 photoelectrons in
some solution compositions, whereas some solid photocatalysts have the potential
to provide an almost infinite reservoir of electrons. These hypotheses are being
assessed by examining the photophysical, photochemical, and electrochemical
properties of complexes possessing ten or eight valence electrons as a function
of concentration in solution or doping in thin films vs. the crystalline solid
state.