* 1413062
* Synthetic Entomology
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Ichiro Matsumura, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2018
* USD 676,771.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET, will support
studies of insect behavior. The broad aim of this project is to develop
techniques for synthetic animal biology, and to apply them to produce new
behaviors. The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is the logical starting point
for these experiments because it is well understood and experimentally
tractable. It has a brain and a nervous system, so it can taste, see, hear,
sense odors and touch, learn and remember. It has one of the most sophisticated
actuation systems found in nature-the capacity for controlled flight. The
proposed experiments will show how these behaviors can be harnessed and
engineered. In particular, its olfactory system, which governs its sense of
smell, will be genetically modified, so that the resulting strain will not be
able to smell anything except a commonly used explosive. Such flies could serve
as autonomous biological sensing systems for the detection of bombs and land
mines. The PIs will engage students at all levels in interdisciplinary research
on this topic, and collaborate with a group of local restaurant chefs to teach
the public about the science that underlies flavor and olfaction.

Technical description: Synthetic biologists design and construct useful
biological devices, but most work exclusively with microbes. Multi-cellular
species including Drosophila melanogaster possess complex traits such as
behavior, perception, cognition and memory. The investigators propose to
engineer a fruit fly that senses otherwise undetectable odors. The investigators
have bred a D. melanogaster variant that expresses the receptor for bombykol, a
sex-attractant pheromone produced by the silk moth, Bombyx mori. The native
olfactory receptor set does not function normally in the engineered fly, so it
should not be distracted from bombykol by the smell of food or other
attractants. In this project, the investigators will express insect odorant
receptors in cultured cells, and develop an assay for function (Specific Aim 1),
engineer olfactory receptors that better recognize an odorant,
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT, Specific Aim 2), breed new flies that express the
engineered olfactory receptor (Specific Aim 3), and t demonstrate the changes in
their behavior (attraction to TNT over the normally favored odorant,
benzaldehyde, Specific Aim 4). The results of these experiments will be
communicated to synthetic biologists (Specific Aim 4) and the general public
(Specific Aim 5). The results will improve the current understanding of the
structure and function of insect olfactory receptors, which have not been
crystallized and are unrelated to those of mammals. More generally, they will
extend the scope of synthetic biology to insects and encourage debate about the
application of engineering approaches to higher animals.