* 1413821
* Collaborative Research: Optically Driven Quantum Dot Spins for Quantum Information:  2- and 3-Qubit Behavior with Nuclear Spin Narrowing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Duncan Steel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

Gordon Moore, the founder of Intel, was the first to note that the number of
transistors per chip roughly doubled every two years (this is called Moore's
Law). The corresponding volume per transistor had to decrease exponentially with
time. Miniaturization would eventually lead to such a small number of electrons
per transistor that the discriminable charging effect of the electrons in a
transistor fails. The point where miniaturization destroys the transistor
function is known as Moore's limit. This limit is imminent within the next
generation of scientists and engineers. New avenues of progress beyond current
technology must be sought. This research follows the approach of quantum
technology to continue the evolution of information processing beyond Moore's
limit. It works to develop the necessary foundational knowledge for an approach
to devices, where the behavior of these devices is governed not by the usual
rules that govern the aggregate properties of a large number of particles, but
by the laws of quantum mechanics, which governs electrons in the atomic limit.
Specifically, this project focuses on the study of optically controlled
semiconductor quantum dots. A dot effectively traps one electron, which is
manipulated by ultrafast pulses of light that enable terahertz control speeds
without the complexities of metal contacts. The studies emphasize the isolation
of the electron from the influence of the other electrons (known as the valence
electrons) and the nuclei, in particular, which constitute the dot, and the
networking of the target electrons in separate dots. Light is used to excite the
valence electrons to control a single target electron and to entangle two target
electrons, while shielding them from the effects of nuclear fluctuations. The
primary intellectual merit is based on the scientific objectives of this three-
year research program; produce quantum entangled states between two electron
spins separated by a large distance, demonstrate a multi-quantum-bit high-speed
logic gate, and explore the feasibility of using optical control of nuclear
states to store and or process information. The broader impact includes
developing the basic knowledge to advance the technology of information
processing beyond Moore's limit via a highly interdisciplinary and collaborative
research program, training and preparing the next generation of scientists and
engineers for new challenges they will be facing, and facilitating efforts by
both our universities to inform and educate the public and students about the
importance of this quantum research to society's well-being, including how this
research is training students in STEM areas in order to maintain a competitive
work force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on quantum information
processing by ultrafast optical control of electron spins trapped individually
in structurally defined semiconductor quantum dots (QDs). Numerous advances made
possible by previous NSF support, have helped meet many of the milestones of
quantum operations required by the Di Vincenzo criteria. Recent advances such as
demonstration of the flying qubit and nuclear spin fluctuation freezing to
extend the electron-spin coherence time and creation of high optical quality
laterally positioned dots are fundamental to the quantum network approach to
scaling up the system. The critical discovery of nuclear spin fluctuation
freezing enables lengthening the coherence time of the qubit by over 2-3 orders
of magnitude for time scales lasting longer than 1 second. This allows the time
for a complete sequence of computational steps with the ultrafast control
including error correction. The method consists in freezing out the fluctuations
of the nuclear spins unavoidably present in QDs and temporally separates the
decoherence abatement from the control operations, in contrast to the common but
more limited and complex method of dynamic decoupling of the qubits being
processed at the same time. Building on these achievements five experimental
objectives to advance the frontier of scalable quantum information processing
based on optical control of the spins will be accomplished: demonstrate a two-
bit controlled not-gate and of a simple algorithm using a quantum dot molecule;
demonstrate teleportation of information in a single photon qubit to a QD using
spontaneous parametric (singe-photon) down conversion (SPDC) to produce the
single photon source; produce an entangled state between a quantum dot spin and
a spontaneously emitted photon (at 960nm) and convert it to the telecom
wavelength around 1.55 microns; demonstrate heralded entanglement of two QD
spins using photons.; and extend the work on nuclear spin fluctuation freezing
to using optically detected NMR to more completely understand the underlying
physics state of nuclei in the dot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is an
interdisciplinary research effort in the physics of semiconductor nano-
structures, high-precision coherent optical control, and spectroscopy of QDs.
These studies are paralleled by the coherent transient time domain studies
consistent with device applications and scalable architectures. The amelioration
of the environmental problem (decoherence) lies in the coordinated theoretical
and experimental treatment of the quantum correlated dynamics of the optically
controlled electron spin and the nuclear spins in the QD through the hyperfine
interaction without additional stochastic assumptions.The intellectual merit
arises from the increasingly sophisticated understanding of the interaction
effects between a microscopic system (the electron spins as the qubits) and a
macroscopic system (the dot environment, control or measurement) within quantum
theory. The broad bandwidth control of the quantum physics makes the QD system
the high speed processing unit partner to the quantum memory device of trapped
ions. The operating temperature of 4-10 K is above the milli-K required by gated
dots and superconducting circuits and optical control avoids some of the
connection problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is first in the
development of highly trained people critical to the infrastructure of quantum
technology, at all levels of higher education: postdocs, graduate and
undergraduate students. The second broader impact is that the optical approach
positions our research to play a key role in the transition from the electronic
devices that currently drive the Moore?s law to the new paradigm of post CMOS
era. The further miniaturization of the current devices that process classical
information will reach the quantum barrier where devices operating on quantum
information will take over. The future lies in a hybrid structure of classical
devices for interface with human and quantum devices for information processing.
The optical approach to quantum devices, based on the established III-V material
with a large industrial infrastructure and optical sources and gating based on
telecom technology, may provide a smooth transition to the hybrid structure.