* 1413332
* Experimental Studies of Pebble Accretion in the Protoplanetary Disk
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Joshua Colwell, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 269,613.00

The formation of planets around our own Sun and around other stars begins with
dust-sized particles sticking together and gradually forming larger and larger
objects. The stage of growth from pebble-sized objects to km-scale objects may
follow one or more of several different routes, depending on the distance of the
objects from the star and the age of the star. This project will experimentally
study a broad range of collisions between pebble-sized clumps of dust, ice and
rock to determine the conditions that lead to growth of larger objects. The
results of these experiments will help resolve fundamental questions about a
critical stage in planet formation, including the role that water ice and other
biologically important molecules play in the sticking process. Many of the
experiments will take place in a microgravity or free-fall environment in order
to replicate the conditions in the early solar system. Video data of the
collisions will be analyzed to understand the outcomes of similar collisions in
the early stages of planet formation. Undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in the experiments, and the video data will be shared through public
websites, allowing the general public, students, and researchers to visualize
this critical stage in the history of planetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity is an experimental
exploration of low-energy collisions in the protoplanetary disk to better
understand the collisional evolution of pebble-sized (cm-scale) aggregates and
solids, the initial building blocks of planets. The experiments will extend the
current database in parameter space by including icy particulates mixed in with
silicates to study the accretion efficiency in the outer solar system (beyond
the frost line where water vapor condensed) and by studying collisions between
large-scale aggregates at modest impact speed both with and without ice
particles in the aggregates. These pebbles may grow through pairwise collisional
accretion or participate in local gravitational instabilities to form larger km-
scale planetesimals. It is possible that some combination of these processes
took place, depending on the local conditions in the protoplanetary nebula. A
major source of uncertainty in the accretional growth model is the behavior of
small objects and aggregates of dust colliding at the low speeds expected (~0.1
- 10 m/s). The proposed experiments would add much-needed data to these models
to help determine the conditions under which accretional growth can produce
planetesimals and the outcomes of collisions between pebbles in various nebular
environments. The proposed work will involve a team of several undergraduate
students and one graduate student in the design, operation, and interpretation
of the experiments as well as publication of results. The experimental data
consist of high speed videos that will be shared with K-12 educators and the
broader research community through the public website
microgravity.physics.ucf.edu.