* 1413548
* CDS&amp;E:    3-D Simulations of i-Process Nucleosynthesis in the Early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,175.00

All of the elements other than hydrogen and helium are created inside of stars
by "nucleosynthesis" processes. The origin of the material that makes planets -
and people - is thus intimately tied to the detailed process that take place
within stars. The PI and his collaborators will use novel computational
techniques and the most powerful computing resources available to simulate
conditions inside the earliest stars in the universe. These simulations will be
used to evaluate a postulated, but unexplored, nucleosynthesis mechanism they
call the "i-process". Graduate students will be trained in cutting-edge stellar
modeling and computational astrophysics by one of the world leaders in this
field. The potential for probing new forms of nucleosynthesis are of interest to
the nuclear physics field as well as to astrophysics. Advanced techniques
developed in this program could have applications in other areas of
computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this investigation is to
simulate convection and nucleosynthesis processes inside the kind of stars that
were present early in the universe. They will develop novel "autocorrecting"
techniques to couple a 3-D treatment of convection with 1-D stellar evolution
models, and they will generate a large database of results and tools to mine
this database. These results will be accessible to the larger stellar modeling
community, and they will chart new territory in computational astrophysics.
These simulations should allow a probe of postulated nucleosynthesis processes
that are driven by neutron capture at rates intermediate between the s- and
r-processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the
Computational Physics Program in the Division of Physics and the Stellar
Astronomy and Astrophysics Program in the Division of Astronomical Sciences.