* 1413945
* Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds and Their Role in Alkane Metathesis, Dehydrogenation and Group-Transfer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Daniel Mindiola, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 302,013.00

In this project co-funded by the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) and Chemical Catalysis
(CAT) programs of the Chemistry Division, Professor Dan Mindiola of the
Department of Chemistry of the Indiana University - Bloomington will explore
dehydrogenation reactions of cyclic, linear, and branched alkanes with transient
and unsaturated titanium and vanadium complexes having metal-carbon multiple
bonds. Also to be studied are (i) the chemistry of a masked and unsaturated
vanadium(I) complex in group-transfer reactions; and (ii) the chemistry of low-
coordinate and early-transition metals (mainly Ti, V, Cr, and Nb) using a bulky
aryl oxide ligand (OAr).

As natural resources such as crude oil dwindle, novel chemical transformations
are needed to produce synthetic fuels in a environmentally friendly manner. A
potentially important application of the proposed research is to produce higher
hydrocarbons (fuel molecules) based on the volatile paraffins such as methane
and ethane. Students and research associates will be involved in synthesis,
catalysis and kinetics study all in combination to provide a strong foundation
to become a competitive scientist. Professor Mindiola will be working with
students from underrepresented groups through his association with the IU
chapter of the NOBCChE (National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical
Engineers).