* 1413177
* Phase mixing in the fluid mechanics and kinetic theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2014
* Jacob Bedrossian, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 11/30/2014
* USD 79,103.00

Nonlinear mixing is a ubiquitous behavior observed in fluids and plasmas which
plays an important role in understanding certain aspects of atmosphere and ocean
sciences, turbulence, astrophysics and controlled fusion. For example, it is
thought to be an important organizing mechanism in atmospheric dynamics that
helps to explain why hurricanes retain their characteristic vortex shape for
extended periods of time. Despite being a fundamental physical mechanism, the
theoretical and mathematical analysis of nonlinear phase mixing has remained
elusive. Moreover, many of these effects are difficult to isolate in
computational or physical experiments and here mathematical analysis can provide
important insights. This project specifically aims to expand our mathematical
understanding by studying the effect in a variety of fundamental 'case studies'
found in fluid mechanics and plasma physics.

The purpose of this program is to further the mathematical analysis of nonlinear
phase mixing, generally regarded as difficult due to the appearance of highly
non-normal linear evolutions and unusual regularity issues intertwined with
subtle nonlinear resonances. The PI will work to develop new tools necessary to
approach these problems with a focus on working towards four specific settings:
the vanishing viscosity limit of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
(NSE) near the 2D Couette flow, the nonlinear instability of 3D shear flows,
inviscid 'vortex axisymmetrization' in 2D Euler and Landau damping in Vlasov-
Poisson (or Vlasov-Maxwell) in presence of external magnetic fields. Many
related physically relevant problems exist, and may serve as intermediate steps
or additional lines of research. The work in fluid mechanics will expand further
on ideas employed by the PI and collaborator Nader Masmoudi in the recent work
on the stability of 2D Couette flow [arXiv:1306.5028], especially the use of
adaptive coordinate systems and the construction of norms which account for
weakly nonlinear resonances and the non-normal transient linear behavior. The
work in kinetic theory will further develop techniques used in the work of the
PI and collaborators Nader Masmoudi and Clement Mouhot on Landau damping
[arXiv:1311.2870], especially the efficient treatment of the plasma echoes. Most
likely, in order to expand the range of kinetic theory applications, some ideas
from the work in fluid mechanics may need to be adapted to the kinetic setting.