* 1413937
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Doping of Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Diffusion Mechanisms, Structure and Optoelectronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Anatoly Frenkel, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

Anatoly Frenkel of Yeshiva University in New York is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry for an International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) grant to study
small semiconductor crystals that have been doped with specific impurities.
These impurities allow the investigators to manipulate the electronic properties
of the semiconductors, although the ability to do this in an intentional and
controlled way is an area of science that is still developing. In this project,
impurities such as copper, silver and gold are added in controlled amounts to a
system containing the precursors of the hoped-for semiconductor crystals. The
location and nature of the impurities is then studied using a technique
involving X-rays. The work is allowing the investigators to develop a detailed
understanding of how the impurities find their way into the semiconductor
crystal and whether and how they move around within the crystal structure. This
research is having a broad impact on the development of potential new building
blocks for applications in optics, electronics, solar energy capture, and other
areas. The work is having a further broad impact on the educational
opportunities of the students who are involved in this unique international
collaboration. The work includes an international collaboration with Uri Banin
of the Hebrew University, Jerusalem (Israel). Professor Banin's work is
supported by the United States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF).

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) manifest unique size-dependent
effects and are being intensively investigated as potential building blocks for
applications in optics, optoelectronics, solar energy and biology. Exquisite
control over the size, shape, and composition of such NCs has been gained
through colloidal synthesis approaches. However, the ability to perform
intentional doping, and understanding the effects of dopants on the NC
properties remains an elusive challenge. This project has two main programmatic
foci: 1) achieving a new level of synthetic control for doped semiconductor NCs
that will provide a series of well-defined model systems for studying doping
mechanisms, and 2) the use of advanced X-ray absorption spectroscopy, electron
microscopy and Raman spectroscopy methods for their characterization. The study
is contributing to several important open aspects concerning doped NCs: (1)
Synthesis of doped semiconductor NCs and advanced structural characterization;
(2) establishing an understanding of the mechanisms governing the incorporation
of impurity atoms into a NC lattice; (3) studying the structural, electronic,
optical and charge transport properties of doped NCs; and (4) investigating the
formation kinetics, solubility limit and stability of colloidal NCs. In
addition, this work is providing new chemical and physical data for the
theoretical understanding of these systems.