* 1413020
* Low-dimensional and Group-theoretic Reduction Techniques for Coupled Oscillator Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2019
* Jan Engelbrecht, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2019
* USD 291,913.00

Networks of coupled oscillators abound in nature and science; heart pacemaker
cells, chemical oscillations, superconducting circuits, and swarms of fireflies
all provide examples of systems of oscillators that communicate with or
influence each other, and thereby coordinate collective behavior of the network
as a whole. These systems typically consist of large numbers of individual
oscillators, so their behavior can be extremely complicated and difficult to
analyze. But often the collective behavior of these complex networks is
surprisingly simple; for example, the oscillators may synchronize, as happens in
the heart pacemaker network or for certain species of fireflies that synchronize
so as to flash in unison. Other simple collective behaviors of oscillator
networks include phase-locked configurations, in which all the oscillators
converge to have the same period, or splay states, which are configurations in
which the oscillators are uniformly distributed in phase. Understanding the
mathematical principles that underlie or facilitate such simple collective
behaviors is a research problem of central importance in applied dynamical
systems. A persistent theme in this study is that the collective dynamics of
coupled oscillator networks can often be reduced to that of low-dimensional
systems, usually via the presence of hidden invariances or symmetries in the
system. Important examples are networks consisting of identical Kuramoto
oscillators, which are simple oscillators governed by trigonometric functions.
Such networks are invariant under a three-dimensional group of symmetries called
Mobius transformations, which play a key role in conformal hyperbolic geometry.
This invariance has been used to explain the stability properties of Kuramoto
networks and to completely classify the stable long-term dynamics of networks of
identical Kuramoto oscillators. Low-dimensional reduction of oscillator networks
can also be achieved through other techniques, such as complex-analytic
continuation and residue methods, which have also been employed in reducing the
classic Kuramoto model. This research project will build on such powerful
methods to extend and further clarify our understanding of collective behavior
in oscillator networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project on collective
behavior in oscillator networks has four parts. Project 1 will use Mobius group,
Riccati equation, and linear algebra techniques to study the general question of
whether a multi-population Kuramoto oscillator network supports "chimera
states," in which a portion of the population synchronizes while the remainder
is stably asynchronous. Project 2 will use analytic techniques including Fokker-
Planck methods and infinite-dimensional spectral analysis to study the stability
of synchronized and splay states in more general types of oscillator networks,
including integrate-and-fire networks, with the goal of better understanding the
exceptional nature of Kuramoto oscillators. Project 3 will apply the complex-
analytic techniques of the Ott-Antonsen ansatz to study a model of coupled spins
with random pinning and to understand the source of its low-dimensional
behavior. Finally, project 4 will investigate the design of Kuramoto networks in
an experimental setting, to realize all the possible long-term stable dynamics
predicted in the theoretical classification. In particular, the investigators
have established that there are four possible types of stable attractors for
identical Kuramoto networks: fully synchronized fixed points and limit cycles,
and fixed points and limit cycles in which all but one of the oscillators are
synchronized. This project aims to observe these stable "(N-1, 1)" states in an
experimental setting, as well as to explore the ramifications of such states in
superconducting arrays for the development and stability of coherence in quantum
computing. These projects afford opportunities for interdisciplinary
participation at the undergraduate and graduate level, ranging from numerical
and experimental simulations to theoretical, analytic
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is jointly funded by the
Division of Mathematics through the Applied Mathematics program and the Division
of Physics through the Physics of Living Systems program.