* 1413111
* Analytical representation of protein distributions in stochastic models of gene expression
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Rahul Kulkarni, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 170,000.00

One of the fundamental problems in biology is elucidating the molecular
mechanisms that give rise to phenotypic variations among individuals in a
population. It has been shown that phenotypic variations can arise without any
underlying differences in the genotype or environmental factors. Such
"nongenetic individuality" is observed in diverse cellular processes, ranging
from bacterial persistence to HIV-1 viral infections, and is driven by
randomness (noise) in the cellular levels of gene expression products such as
mRNAs and proteins. To quantify the effects of noise in gene expression, recent
single-cell experiments have obtained probability distributions characterizing
protein levels across a population of cells. Correspondingly, there is a need to
develop a general analytical framework for modeling and interpretation of the
distributions obtained from such single-cell experiments that will lead to
quantitative insights into how noise in gene expression is regulated. The goal
of this project is to develop new approaches for obtaining analytical results
for protein distributions in models of gene expression and its regulation. The
project will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the role of noise in
gene expression and its regulation in diverse cellular processes. The analysis
requires tools and approaches from physics and applied mathematics and will be
integrated with teaching efforts to effectively train students and future
scientists in this fast-developing field of interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise in gene expression is generally analyzed
using coarse-grained stochastic models. However, obtaining exact analytical
expressions for the corresponding protein distributions has been a challenging
for all but the simplest models. The project research will involve integration
of tools from queueing theory with approaches based on partitioning of Poisson
processes to address such challenges. The approaches developed will be used to
obtain both exact and approximate analytical results for models of gene
expression and its regulation. The resulting analysis of models with regulatory
mechanisms such as bursting, feedback and promoter-based regulation will lead to
quantitative insights into noise characteristics of the basic building blocks of
genetic circuits. The project research will also lead to analytical results that
characterize the role of noisy inputs in regulating simple biochemical switches
and suggest new approaches for estimating model parameters based on observations
of noise. The analytical results derived in the project will have multiple
applications ranging from synthetic biology to understanding phenotypic
variation in clonal populations.