* 1413954
* CNH-Ex:   A Model for Groundwater Allocation and Management at the Bakken Shale in Western North Dakota
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Zhulu Lin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 12/31/2017
* USD 249,423.00

Unconventional oil and gas production in U.S. has increased dramatically since
2008 due to advancement in hydraulic fracturing technology (also known as
"fracking"). According to Time Magazine (October 14, 2013), the oil production
at the Bakken Shale of western North Dakota increased about ten times since 2008
while the combined oil production at the Permian Basin and Eagle Ford Shale in
Texas more than doubled in the same time period. Similar stories can also be
told for the Marcellus Shale in Pennsylvania and New York and the Niobrara Shale
in Wyoming and Colorado. Whereas the onshore shale oil and gas development has
indisputably increased the nation?s energy production, its impact on natural
environment, especially on local water resources, remains poorly understood due
to the lack of research and data collection for this new subject area. This
project is a pilot study of the energy-water nexus at the Bakken Shale of
western North Dakota, using mathematical modeling to gain a better understanding
of the complex interactions between the region's human and natural systems that
are leading to unprecedented economic development and use of water resources.
This interdisciplinary study will also shed light on the gaps between current
industry practices and government policy. Given that the use of hydraulic
fracturing is still on the rise, the findings from this Bakken Shale study will
be of great importance to policymakers and communities in and around the
hydraulic fracturing oil regions in the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid
expansion of unconventional oil and gas production in western North Dakota, a
region rich in energy but scarce in water, has given birth to a novel water
allocation system - water depots, to distribute a large quantity of freshwater
for industrial uses in rural areas. The region's largest aquifer, the Fox Hills-
Hell Creek (FH-HC) aquifer, is the sole reliable water source for livestock
watering in rural North Dakota and Montana. However, there are growing concerns
about the existing and potential water withdrawal from the FH-HC aquifer due to
the large-scale water demand by the oil industry. It is imperative to understand
the dynamics of the water depot-based water allocation system and its
interactions with the underlying groundwater systems. This project will develop
an integrated hydro-economic model to study the dynamics of the coupled water
depot-groundwater system so that appropriate policy tools may be devised to
manage the regional groundwater resources for long-term, sustainable use. The
following methods will be employed to achieve this goal. (1) An agent-based
model will be developed to study the emergent patterns and dynamics of the water
depot-based water allocation system at the Bakken Shale in western North Dakota.
(2) The agent-based model will be integrated with the regional groundwater model
to simulate the rate of changes in the water levels of the FH-HC aquifer under
future socioeconomic and climate scenarios. (3) A Bayesian model averaging
method will be developed to estimate the variance associated with groundwater
model predictions due to uncertain parameters and imprecise model structures.