* 1413677
* Novel PT(II) Reagents for RNA Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Victoria DeRose, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Victoria DeRose from the University of Oregon to develop
new metal-based compounds for predicting the structure of ribonucleic acid (RNA)
biopolymers. A major realization in the post-genomic era is the extent to which
cellular RNA governs gene expression through different mechanisms, many of which
are still being discovered. The prediction and determination of the structure of
large RNAs are significant challenges in the pursuit of the elucidation of these
mechanisms. Small chemical probes can be powerful tools for the identifying
structural elements of RNA. The platinum-based compounds and methods developed
in this project are designed to provide such new tools for high-throughput RNA
structure prediction. As this project requires use of a combination of
synthesis, molecular biology, and analytical and computational methods, it
fosters interdisciplinary interactions between different branches of chemistry,
and it provides a workforce training environment for undergraduate and graduate
students, including women, who prepare for careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this program are to develop square-
planar, exchange-inert Pt(II) complexes as RNA crosslinking reagents and use
them as tools for RNA structure characterization. Pt(II) compounds crosslink
purine-rich but noncanonical regions of RNA, such as internal loops and
junctions. Pt(II)-crosslinked species are robust through RNA isolation methods
but reversible in mild conditions. To enable crosslink analysis, azide- or
alkyne-modified Pt(II)-"Click" reagents with installed handles for selective
post-treatment modification of Pt(II)-RNA species will be synthesized. Structure
analysis protocols will be developed based on the unique chemistry of the Pt(II)
complexes, including high-throughput sequencing methods and high-resolution mass
spectrometry. Phosphorothioate "bait" ligands will be incorporated in RNA to
create new crosslinking sites for the metal complexes. Efforts to enhance the
properties of Pt(II) reagents for RNA structure analysis will include
modification of clickable mononuclear compounds with longer linkers and testing
of multinuclear Pt(II) compounds. The Pt(II)-based crosslinking methods
described here have the potential to become tools for RNA structure prediction
and in-cell probes of RNA accessibility to small molecules.