* 1413031
* Neutrino Physics:  Solar - Borexino
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Robert Vogelaar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 655,400.00

Solar neutrino research has already discovered massive neutrinos and flavor
mixing, and is moving into an era where precision measurements can tell us about
the inner workings of the Sun. The carbon-nitrogen-oxygen (CNO) cycle is one of
the fusion reactions by which stars convert hydrogen to helium, releasing
electron-neutrinos. Should this next period allow the Borexino detector to
measure the CNO neutrino flux sufficiently well to infer the metallicity (the
abundance of elements other than hydrogen or helium) of the sun's interior, it
could test the fundamental assumption of homogeneity in the sun and provide
crucial information regarding opacities in the solar interior that are important
for helioseismology. Such studies could thus have a great impact on our
understanding of the sun, stellar astrophysics, the link between planetary and
stellar formation, as well as basic neutrino physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides funding for the continuing role of Virginia Tech in the Borexino
experiment, the world's purest large-volume liquid scintillator detector located
at the Gran Sasso National Laboratory in Italy, designed to measure the
principle components of the neutrino spectrum coming from the Sun as it converts
hydrogen into helium through fusion. They have measured the 7-Be, 8-B, and pep
neutrino fluxes from the Sun, and set a limit on the CNO neutrino flux. The next
three-year period with ultra-low background requires re-calibration to verify
these results, and to prepare the collaboration to move into a new 'CNO focused'
phase. The principle physics goals are 1) measurement of the CNO neutrino flux,
2) more precise results for the 7-Be and pep neutrino flux, and 3) a better
result for the pp neutrino flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact on
science, technology and outreach that is expected from the program includes: the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in current topical physics
research; experience with deployment and utilization of ultra-clean calibration
techniques; presentations of this research program to undergraduates, through
research projects, student presentations, lectures, and problems - exposing the
next generation of scientists from multiple fields to the excitement of
astroparticle physics; and a broad engagement of the neutrino community through
their Center for Neutrino Physics.