* 1413333
* Collaborative Research: De novo Protein Constructs for Photosynthetic Energy Transduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Michael Therien, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2017
* USD 498,500.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Michael J. Therien (Duke University), Jeffery G. Saven
(University of Pennsylvania), and William F. DeGrado (University of California
at San Francisco) for research to further the understanding of the precise way
plants capture energy from sunlight. Proteins perform many functions in living
organisms and catalyze the complex set of chemical reactions necessary for life.
Among the most critical of these functions is the conversion of energy from one
form to another, such as during photosynthesis, when plants convert sunlight to
chemical energy. As a result of this process, tons of carbon dioxide are removed
from the atmosphere every year. In this work, the investigators are building
artificial proteins that mimic the behavior of proteins in plants involved in
photosynthesis. This strategy provides an important means to test how natural
photosynthetic proteins work. Important insights can then be used to develop
novel proteins that enable energy conversion processes not found in nature. The
work will have a broader impact on diverse fields such as biology and energy
storage, through the heightened understanding of key molecular events involved
in photosynthesis. There is further broad impact on the training of the next
generation of scientists. The unique multi-institution structure provides
additional opportunities for students of all educational levels, graduate and
undergraduate as well as high school, to participate in an exciting
collaborative investigation being carried out in three different
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, key protein design principles
that provide for photosynthetic energy transduction and storage are being
elucidated. An integrated, multi-disciplinary approach is employed toward this
goal, and focus is on the evolution of peptide-cofactor complexes that undergo
photoinduced charge-transfer reactions, where the protein matrix stabilizes the
charge-separated state and guides the efficient separation of electrons and
holes. Toward this end: (i) light-harvesting and redox-active cofactors are
being designed and synthesized; (ii) de novo proteins are also being designed to
selectively bind linked assemblies of these units; (iii) these de novo proteins
are then expressed and characterized; (iv) de novo photosynthetic proteins that
undergo photo-induced electron transfer are being interrogated using state-of-
the-art pump-probe transient optical methods; (v) experimental data is guiding
cofactor and protein design and redesign, initially focusing on the positioning
of appropriate amino acid side chains near donor and acceptor redox sites to
modulate charge separation and charge recombination dynamics; and (vi) the
spectroscopic and dynamical properties of re-designed assemblies that control
orientation via self-assembly are being characterized as functions of their
nanostructured electronic environments. Information from this study is providing
new insights into aspects of protein structure and dynamics that are integral
for highly efficient photonic energy conversion, pushing the limits of
functional de novo design, and guiding the design of complex peptide-cofactor
assemblies that have unique photosynthetic
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program.