* 1413990
* CNH-Ex: Synergies and Feedbacks Between Local Direct Democracy and Large-Scale Biodiversity Conservation Efforts
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2018
* James Sanchirico, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 229,993.00

In much of the U.S., natural communities of native species remain largely within
protected areas. The maintenance of biodiversity thus relies on how strongly
native wildlife communities motivate conservation and on how effectively
conservation protects wild communities. This project explores two major
alternative mechanisms for this coupling between nature and society, the
purchase of lands or rights by conservation organizations and legislation
through ballot initiatives. Researchers will compare abundances of rare or
threatened native plant species and abundances of introduced plants that tend to
exclude native species in areas conserved through these different mechanisms.
The study will also investigate the factors that determine whether different
types of conservation actions are undertaken. The project will use California as
the study system, since both mechanisms have been widely employed in the state,
and a rich body of data is available. Results will inform conservation policy
and help guide future protection of native species in and beyond California.
Dissemination of findings will be enhanced by integration of the study with a
program to bring conservation practitioners into classrooms and public forums.
The project will also train undergraduate students, a Ph.D. student, and a
postdoctoral researcher.

This project will examine how local landscape, community and ballot
characteristics influence the probability of passage of conservation measures.
Researchers will also evaluate the potential ancillary benefits of public
initiatives in helping to safeguard biodiversity by protecting habitats that are
important for priority species and by protecting priority ecosystems through a
combination of GIS analyses and ecological field surveys. The project will
contrast the contribution to conserving biodiversity of parcels protected
through ballot measures with those protected through a more conventional
protected area acquisition strategy. Finally, researchers will apply spatial
optimization methods to evaluate how land conservation efforts undertaken by
large-scale actors can complement those of local-scale actors more effectively
in the future.