* 1413152
* Novel mechanisms of plant mitochondrial DNA repair
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2019
* Alan Christensen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 10/31/2019
* USD 660,788.00

The goal of this project is to provide fundamental knowledge of the energy
conversion centers of plants that will allow scientists to engineer more energy
efficient agricultural crops. The energy conversion centers or "powerhouses" of
plant cells are called mitochondria, which are small membrane-bound compartments
where the energy from carbon compounds is converted into a form that plant cells
can use. Mitochondria have their own DNA, which is easily damaged and must be
repaired to maintain efficient energy output. This project seeks to define the
mechanism by which important gene sequences in mitochondrial DNA are repaired so
that the efficient output of energy is maintained for plant growth. This project
also seeks to provide training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and
high-school students, and to increase the diversity of students who are
receiving research training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant mitochondrial genomes
are notorious for their large and variable size, high rearrangement rates and
low mutation rates. How coding sequences are highly conserved while the rest of
the genome expands and rearranges is a mystery. Recent work suggests a model
that the expansions and rearrangements are produced by error-prone repair
mechanisms while genes are repaired very accurately. Plant mitochondrial genome
rearrangements and repair errors lead to life-history trait changes such as male
sterility, and our understanding of basic mechanisms of repair is currently
inadequate for modeling and prediction of these processes and their outcomes.
The central hypothesis of this project is that much of the DNA damage in
mitochondria is processed through the various subtypes of double-strand break
repair, leading to accurate repair of genes by gene conversion and repair of
non-genes by inaccurate mechanisms including break-induced replication and non-
homologous end-joining. This hypothesis will be tested by altering the repair
pathways such that mismatches or double-strand breaks are created at known
positions within the Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondrial genome, both in coding
and noncoding DNA, and assessing which repair pathways have been used. This will
lead to better understanding of the mechanisms and pathways of DNA repair and
recombination in plant mitochondria. This work will also advance our knowledge
of the mechanisms and theoretical underpinnings of evolutionary change in the
mitochondrial genome. In addition, this project will provide training
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high-school students from diverse
backgrounds.