* 1413378
* Collaborative Research: Diffusion of foreign particles in complex fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Christel Hohenegger, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 166,000.00

Complex fluids are seen everywhere in everyday life. They appear in industrial
applications in the production of food products, cosmetics and advanced
materials; and they occur naturally as biological fluids like mucus, blood and
biofilms. Complex fluids are known to exhibit exotic properties, sometimes
acting like solids, while at other times flowing freely like liquids. These are
macroscale observations, but recent advances in particle tracking techniques
have shed light on fascinating dynamics that occur at the microscale as well.
Accurately characterizing and understanding the behavior of foreign particles in
complex fluids is vital for certain applications. For example, learning why some
particles penetrate biological fluids, while others do not, can be critical for
the development of successful drug delivery techniques. Furthermore, it has been
shown that the statistics of immersed particle paths can carry the signature of
important large scale material properties, making it possible to study expensive
complex fluids with microliter sized samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there
has been success in describing the motion of individual particles in complex
fluids, developing models for interacting particle populations has proven
frustrating for theoreticians. It is remarkable, for example, that there is no
mathematical model for particles that individually behave according to
fractional Brownian motion, but when close together, interact with each other
through forces mediated by the laws of a fluid environment. This collaborative
project addresses stochastic, numerical, and experimental issues arising in the
study of diffusion of foreign particles in complex fluids. Specifically, we will
consider two fluid models that amplify the fundamental relationships between
mechanical properties of the fluids and particles paths. The models are (1) a
linear viscoelastic fluid and (2) a motile suspension in a viscous fluid. In
addition to developing the mathematical tools to efficiently and accurately
simulate these models, we will use these simulations to address fundamental
theoretical challenges that confront engineers who use particle tracking
techniques.