* 1413857
* Workshop on Resilient Infrastructure For Sustainable Communities; Arlington, Virginia; 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Thomas Birkland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2016
* USD 96,834.00

This award supports a workshop, to be held in 2014, to identify research
directions to enable resilient buildings and other civil infrastructure for
sustainable communities. This workshop will engage research communities, such as
engineering, urban planning, architecture, engineered materials, systems design,
and social sciences, to identify research priorities for making such
infrastructure both resilient and sustainable for communities. Much of our
nation's civil infrastructure will experience significant loss of function,
operations, and/or integrity due to aging, high demands for services, and
different natural and technological hazards. Furthermore, current practice in
the design, construction, use, operations, maintenance, and deconstruction of
this civil infrastructure is economically and environmentally unsustainable.
This workshop will close the gaps in knowledge of these problems by reviewing
existing knowledge and identifying potential research directions and research
tools needed to put these research ideas to work.

The broader impact of this workshop is the creation of a research agenda that
can lead to innovations in designing, constructing and maintaining buildings and
other civil infrastructure to be both resilient and sustainable, thus
potentially yielding savings in cost, energy, materials, and other natural
resources. The workshop will consider how existing and new research tools can be
harnessed to improve and expand research and technology transfer. By setting
this research agenda, this workshop will catalyze research for resilient and
sustainable civil infrastructure to benefit the nation's welfare.