* 1413366
* Statistical Models for Mapping Genetic and Environmental Effects Regulating Shape Variation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Guifang Fu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 279,543.00

Evolution and natural selection have produced an extraordinary diversity in
shape and form among microbes, plants, insects, animals, and humans. This
project develops new statistical methods for understanding how genetics and
environmental factors combine to influence plant and animal morphology. Leaf
morphology is a key plant phenomenon that is sensitive to environmental stimulus
and is important for plant growth. Studying leaf shape leads to a better
understanding of ecology, evolution and atmosphere-biosphere interactions and
implications (e.g., climate change). This project focuses on the species
Arabidopsis thaliana, a small flowering Eurasian plant that is commonly used in
plant genetics studies because of the nature of its genome and the availability
of its genetic data. This project promotes interdisciplinary cooperation and
training between investigators and students in statistics, image analysis,
genetics, biology, and computer science. The tools produced by this project are
applicable for broader data-intensive and analytic research in paleoclimatology,
anthropology, agriculture, developmental biology, evolution, ecology, and
biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Arabidpsis thaliana plant
is cultivated under controlled conditions in a growth chamber, and photographs
document the shapes of mature leaves. Then high-dimensional curves are used to
create an accurate representation of individual leaf shape. With each shape
uniquely described, a two-stage statistical model, integrating Bayesian Lasso
and Functional Data Analysis, is utilized to detect significant genes that
regulate shape. A subset of genetic markers, single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), which significantly effect shape and respond to environmental factors,
is selected. Then the high-dimensional curve modeling is used to gain knowledge
of the detailed genetic and biological functions of the candidate SNP markers.
Combining high-dimensional data analysis that assesses leaf shape with the
examination of thousands of SNP markers requires computationally intensive
methods, both with respect to algorithms and data management. The tools
developed will be made available in user-friendly R and Matlab packages designed
for high-performance computing environments, for broad use by researchers with
similar interests in shape analysis.