* 1413380
* Addressing Unsolved Questions on Weathering of Surfaces in Space by Fast Solar Particles
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Catherine Dukes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 05/31/2019
* USD 440,126.00

This project seeks to advance the scientific understanding of the effect of
bombardment of surfaces in space by fast charged particles (ions) from the Sun.
Such effects include erosion as well as changes in both the chemical composition
and the appearance. The studies will be done in the laboratory, in conditions
similar to those existing in astronomical bodies without atmosphere. Examples of
these bodies are the Moon and asteroids, which are the subject of planned human
space missions. The results from the studies will advance science at the
fundamental level but also will be applicable to new energy technologies; ion
bombardment, for example, contaminates and limits the life of nuclear fusion
reactors. The project results are also relevant to the studies of advanced
materials; erosion by fast ions, for example, is of practical importance in the
fabrication of high-temperature oxide superconductors and in thin dielectrics
for use in microelectronics and photonics. The research will involve training of
students and postdoctoral researchers in a unique set of experimental
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be the most accurate to date in
reproducing the effects of the wind ions on the surface of the Moon, asteroids
and other airless bodies in the inner solar system. The laboratory studies will
use ultrahigh vacuum, in situ chemical analysis, and mass-selected ion beams. We
will examine samples of lunar soils, meteorites and simple minerals using
multiple surface analysis techniques and optical spectroscopy. The basic
phenomena to be studied quantitatively include sputtering (the ejection of atoms
and molecules by energetic ions), changes in elemental and chemical composition,
and changes in optical reflectance. The project will examine chemical reactions
induced by implanted ions, including radiation-enhanced aqueous alteration,
quantify the volatiles produced, and measure the magnitudes of sputter erosion
and re-deposition. For the first time, the studies will use simultaneous
irradiation with both protons and helium ions, to unveil synergistic effects;
irradiation of samples coated with thin ice will simulate interfacial chemical
reactions that may occur in asteroids; in situ examination of elemental and
chemical composition, including surfaces of carbonaceous chondrites in
meteoritic samples. The study on radiation-enhanced aqueous alteration is
expected to aid interpretation of asteroid Ceres, a target of the current Dawn
mission of NASA. The project will also involve graduate student training.