* 1413817
* Workshop:FIA investigator meeting fall 2013
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 11/30/2014
* USD 10,997.00

This grant supports the fall 2013 Future Internet Architecture (FIA) principal
investigator meeting. The meeting enables PIs to discuss four topics: 1) the
management of faults, which includes detection, localization,
isolation/avoidance/working around them, and repair/recovery; 2) routing where
the interest here is not the complete details of how the schemes are currently
doing routing, but what the different approaches provide as foundations for
routing, and what they require from a routing protocol; 3) the Internet of
Things (IoT), which is of interest to several of the projects that have a point
of view about sensors, machine to machine (M2M), etc.; and 4) performance, since
most of the FIA proposals do not distinguish themselves from the current
Internet on the basis of simple performance improvements (e.g., efficient use of
links), but do raise different and interesting questions about aspects of
performance. The goal of this session is to tease these questions out and
compare the FIA proposals in this light.

Intellectual Merit: The discussions of these topics lead to a better focus by
the various FIA projects on key issues, such as network management, which have
not received high-level attention in previous FIA meetings. The discussion also
lays the groundwork for a more substantive discussion of security, perhaps at
the next meeting in spring 2014. The discussions of routing and performance tie
the FIA efforts to some more traditional topics of network research. The
discussion of IoT provides a lens into the applicability of the different FIA
proposals for an important application space. The intention is that these
discussions provide an in-depth assessment of these issues, which should be of
direct benefit to the projects themselves as well as the broader networking
community.

Broader Impacts: The broader goal of the NSF FIA effort is enhancing the
relevance and impact of the NSF program of network research, intellectual
enrichment of the network research community, and the contribution of new
concepts and thought leadership to the future of the Internet. FIA in general
and the workshops in particular are a means to train a cohort of academic
network researchers in the practice of long-range architectural thinking. FIA
has the potential to contribute to a future Internet that is materially more
secure, robust, economically viable, and fit for the needs of society than the
Internet of today. The results of this workshop, posted on the FIA website
(www.nets-fia.net) for public dissemination, are expected to provide a
contribution to this broader goal.