* 1413925
* Impacts of Landscape Structure, Host Demography, and Management Interventions on Disease Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2021
* Kevin Crooks, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2021
* USD 2,226,457.00

This project will investigate how environmental factors and wildlife management
programs affect infectious disease spread in species that move large distances.
The researchers will evaluate populations of pumas in the Florida Everglades,
Colorado?s Front Range and Western Slope, and Southern California. The results
will be applicable to other wide-ranging species, such as large herbivores,
other carnivores, and even humans. Working with partners in state and Federal
agencies, the investigators will determine how the spread of disease is affected
by management actions such as hunting and relocation of animals; how future
disease outbreaks might spread through vulnerable populations; and how they
might be controlled via vaccination, development of quarantine buffer zones, or
other means. The project also includes outreach efforts to educate the public
about conservation issues, and engage students in relevant studies in disease
ecology. This project will involve students from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences.

The study will evaluate how the interaction between landscape structure and
management interventions affect disease spread in populations of wide-ranging
apex predators (Puma concolor). Using an exceptional database and corresponding
set of biological samples, and an experienced collaborative team, the research
will trace the spread of two apathogenic (i.e. non-pathogenic), contact-
dependent retroviral agents in geographically distinct puma populations under
three different management regimes: (a) supplementation and recovery of the
highly endangered Florida panther, (b) large-scale manipulative harvest
experiments of a rural Colorado puma population, and (c) steady-state management
of urban puma populations in the Colorado Front Range and Southern California. A
landscape genomics approach will inform advanced network models to determine the
relative importance of landscape structure and management actions on host
connectivity, demography, and, ultimately, disease dynamics. These apathogenic
transmission models will be tested with empirical data from a recent virulent
outbreak of Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV) in Florida Panthers. The model will be
used to predict disease spread of virulent agents using models based on
apathogenic agents, and to inform management programs to control disease
outbreaks. This integrated approach provides a basis for utilizing complex
molecular and geospatial tools to advance models to predict and mitigate
virulent disease outbreaks for wide-ranging species in complex landscapes.