* 1413920
* TWC: TTP Option: Frontier: Collaborative: MACS: A Modular Approach to Cloud Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Shafrira Goldwasser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 3,300,000.00

The goal of the Modular Approach to Cloud Security (MACS) project is to develop
methods for building information systems with meaningful multi-layered security
guarantees. The modular approach of MACS focuses on systems that are built from
smaller and separable functional components, where the security of each
component is asserted individually, and where the security of the system as a
whole can be derived from the security of its components. The project
concentrates on building outsourced, cloud-based information services with
client-centric security guarantees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MACS project
addresses a diverse set of security challenges. These include the design of
hardware with built-in secrecy and integrity properties, small and versatile
operating systems that offer minimal functionality but are simpler and easier to
analyze, privacy-preserving and verifiable memory access for outsourced
applications, security-preserving overlay and software-defined networks, and
algorithms for privacy-preserving verifiable outsourced computations and
database systems. Crucially, we combine all of these security mechanisms with
their piecemeal analyses into a global security guarantee. Furthermore, the
analysis is modular, allowing the substitution of components with others that
provide potentially comparable guarantees based on different techniques and
trust assumptions. The research team comprises experts in different aspects of
information security and cryptography. The research is highly collaborative and
pools together key areas of expertise in order to provide overall security
guarantees. A key component of the project is the Massachusetts Open Cloud,
which provides the research team with a test-bed for deploying and testing the
developed mechanisms in a production cloud. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves a significant outreach component with a number of goals. One goal is to
introduce technology professionals to cybersecurity and its central role for our
society and economy. Another goal is to introduce K-12 students to
cybersecurity, and through it to computer science in general. The program
targets students from both under-represented minorities and students with
exceptional academic potential.