* 1413596
* Combining Microseparations and Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry to Probe Peptidergic Signaling in Environmental Stress
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Lingjun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

Professor Lingjun Li of the University of Wisconsin at Madison is supported by
the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop multi-faceted analytical methodologies, largely based on ion mobility
mass spectrometry (IM-MS) and microseparation techniques for large-scale
functional discovery, quantitation and structural elucidation of neuropeptides
in a crustacean model system. Peptides play a key role in various physiological
processes and the selected crab model is an ideal platform on which to develop
novel mass spectral techniques and apply these techniques to gain biologically
relevant information. The project findings are expected to expand our knowledge
base in neuropeptide family organization and functional consequences of
neuropeptide multiplicity in these important model organisms, with a focus on
response to environmental stress.

In this project, studies are being conducted to develop multi-faceted ion
mobility mass spectrometry (IM-MS) and microseparation techniques for the
separation and analysis of neuropeptides. The project has four separate but
related specific aims: (1) to develop a multi-dimensional separation platform
based on pairing capillary electrophoresis (CE) with electrospray ionization ion
mobility-mass spectrometry (ESI-IM-MS), and use it for the analysis of
neuropeptides; (2) to develop an ion mobility- mass spectrometry (IM-
MS)-assisted isobaric tagging quantitation method and apply it to the study of
peptidomic changes in response to environmental stress; (3) to develop an IM-MS-
based site-specific strategy for rapid and accurate localization of D-amino
acids in peptide epimers; and (4) to develop a strategy based on IM-MS and
electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) to study the mechanism of gas phase peptide
sequence scrambling and its impact on peptide de novo sequencing and to
construct a collision cross section database to facilitate endogenous
neuropeptide identification.

During the course of conducting this project, a diverse group of students will
be trained in advanced mass spectrometry, analytical separation methodologies
and neuroscience. A partnership with the Madison Metropolitan School District
program to host and mentor high school students for summer research internships
will be continued and a web-based peptidome database system will be constructed.