* 1413551
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Identifying Adaptations to Pathogens and the Environments of the Americas via Native American Paleogenomic Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2016
* USD 31,216.00

Of major importance in the understanding of human biology is appreciation for
how novel and rapidly changing environments can impact human populations. As an
example of a major presumed impact of such environmental change, the genetic
susceptibility of Native Americans to specific infectious diseases has long been
postulated as a major factor for disease-related mortality after European
colonization, where morbidity rates reached upwards of 90%. Previous research,
however, has only examined DNA variation of living Native Americans, failing to
capture the genetic diversity of indigenous populations before European contact.
This makes it difficult to examine the extent to which genetics contributed to
this presumed susceptibility, as there must be reliance solely on statistical
assumptions. By directly analyzing genome-wide data of ancient Native Americans
that lived prior to European contact, this dissertation research project can
significantly contribute to the understanding of how humans interact with
pathogens in novel and rapidly changing environments, while addressing
fundamental questions about the genetic contribution to human
susceptibility/resistance to infectious disease. Cutting-edge DNA sequencing
methods will be applied to samples collected from living Pacific Northwest
Native Americans, as well as from the remains of their ancient ancestors who
lived previous to European contact. Recent advances in such DNA sequencing
techniques provide the ability to cost-effectively analyze entire regions of the
human genome that code for proteins (i.e., the exome) in ancient peoples; it is
these genomic areas from which an estimated 80% of human disease variation is
expected to derive. By statistically examining relevant genetic differences in
ancient Native Americans, the research will allow for detection of natural
selection signatures and ultimately test the hypothesis that a specific pathogen
landscape existed in the Americas - a landscape that was not present in other
geographic regions. As human genetic adaptations may have proven beneficial in
one ecological scenario but deleterious in another, where specific pathogens
were capable of exploiting particular immune configurations, observed changes
over time may help explain aspects of the historical experience of Native
peoples with European-borne pathogens. Furthermore, the data generated through
the methodology utilized in this research allows for the testing of hypotheses
concerning genomic adaptations to other ancient environmental variables in the
Americas, such as diet. This research, therefore, illuminates the dynamics of
human adaptation to new environments, in both the context of isolation and rapid
merging of populations, while emphasizing the key role played by pathogens as
humans expanded throughout the globe. And finally, this project facilitates
awareness of genomic research and helps foster interest in the pursuit of
careers in the sciences on the part of underrepresented minorities, as both
Native American researchers and students will be involved in the research and
associated activities.