* 1413072
* Collaborative Research: RECON, Probing the Outer Solar System with Occultations
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,09/30/2018
* John Keller, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 09/30/2018
* USD 245,000.00

This award funds work to expand a telescope network that was developed with a
pilot project, and carry out observing campaigns to measure size and shapes of
ten Trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) in the outer solar system, and search for
moons around them. TNOs are relatively small (diameters range from larger than
Pluto to smaller than 100km) frozen bodies that orbit the Sun beyond Neptune's
average distance, and formed at the same time as the rest of our solar system.
The investigators plan to determine the TNO sizes by observing them as they pass
in front of, and temporarily block, distant starlight. They will do this by
using 40 telescopes spread out throughout the western United States with the
help of 40 different communities of citizen scientists, whom they will teach and
train in research methods with workshops and other education efforts. The data
will be used to test models of solar system formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
occultation diameters will also be used to provide cross-calibration of thermal
radiometry-based diameters, extend the occultation sample down to 100 km
objects, and improve knowledge of albedo distributions. The team will also
constrain the binary fraction to a small smaller physical and angular separation
than is currently possible with other surveys, and search for low-separation
multiple component (moons) systems.