* 1413090
* RUI: Combatting Organophosphate Pesticides with New Molybdenum-based Catalysts in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Louis Kuo, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 220,116.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of Chemistry at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Louis Y. Kuo at
Lewis and Clark College that will involve undergraduate students. Inquiry-based
research will be performed in diverse fields including organic synthesis,
chemical catalysis, and coordination and phosphorus chemistry. With Professor
Kuo's guidance, undergraduates will actively participate in a hypothesis-based
investigations driven by the collection of data and the analysis of results
spanning different chemical disciplines. Written and oral dissemination of their
results will be communicated at local and international venues. The PI has a
proven track record of working with undergraduates on projects involving OP
chemistry. In the past 20 years, the PI has mentored 37 undergraduate and high
school students and has produced 21 publications with student coauthors. Another
outstanding feature of this project is the outreach and involvement of high
school students and a high school teacher through summer research. This
collaboration will impact STEM education and potentially contribute to greater
interest by students in sustainable environmental
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the catalytic
hydrolysis of sulfur-containing organophosphates (OP) by common, air stable and
safe molybdenum oxide complexes. The OP under examination are sulfur-containing
compounds that fall into two classes. The first class is the model compound
O,S-diethylphenyl phosphonothioate (DEPP) in which further derivatizations are
readily accomplished; DEPP also serves as a safe mimic of OP neurotoxins. The
second class of compounds is "live" OP pesticides in common agricultural uses
which are Phosmet, Chlorpyrifos and Malathion. This project provides mechanistic
information on the hydrolytic degradation of sulfur-containing pesticides. This
fundamental investigation focuses on OP hydrolysis through nucleophilic attack
and phosphate activation by oxo-molybdates. It also tests how soil (i.e. clay)
affects the various routes for OP hydrolysis by these new molybdenum complexes.
The research results will provide fundamental understanding of soil-effects on
important hydrolytic processes for pesticide degradation.