* 1413078
* Collaborative Research: Computational Models of Cilia and Flagella in a Brinkman Fluid
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Karin Leiderman, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2017
* USD 149,762.00

Motile cilia and flagella are dynamic, elastic, biological structures that
exhibit rhythmic motion. Through coordinated beating, cilia in the lung and
respiratory tract help to clear the airway of potentially harmful particles and
mucus. Impaired cilia motion can result in serious respiratory infection. This
impairment can be caused by an altered fluid environment, a characteristic of
cystic fibrosis, by defects in the cilia themselves as with primary ciliary
dyskinesia, or by other respiratory diseases. Similarly, a sperm is only able to
reach and fertilize an egg if its flagellum can propel it forward; impaired
motility results in infertility. Cilia and sperm beating is highly dependent on
the fluid environment, which contains fibrous, protein networks as well as
chemical signals. Understanding this relationship between elastic structure and
heterogeneous fluid is vital for development of delivery strategies for inhaled
drugs and medicines, new contraceptives, and aiding in infertility due to
reduced sperm motility. This project will focus on the development of new
computational models and numerical methods that account for these fibrous,
protein networks within the fluid to infer in vivo behavior of cilia and
sperm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experiments have shown that i) sperm-flagella
waveforms are altered when immersed in fluids containing networks of large
proteins and also with flagellar calcium concentration, ii) the previously-
considered `watery' fluid surrounding airway cilia actually contains a network
of large proteins, or, 'brush'. This project will focus on identifying emergent
waveforms of sperm flagella and airway cilia when nonplanar bending and internal
flagellar biochemistry are taken into account. Cilia and flagella will be
modeled as slender, elastic, structures immersed in a fluid governed by the
Brinkman equation. A regularized framework and fundamental solutions will be
used to derive new numerical methods for various confined geometries. The new
numerical methods will be computationally-efficient and developed for use on
high-performance computing systems. This research will identify factors that
modulate sperm progression towards the egg, explore various waveforms of cilia
and sperm, and investigate how a 'brush' in the fluid surrounding cilia might
affect transport of particles within that fluid.