* 1413260
* Fingerprinting Type I Supernovae: Quantifying Their Diversity and Sharpening Their Utility
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Maryam Modjaz, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 344,262.00

Exploding stars that show no Hydrogen in their spectra are called Type 1
supernovovae. They are vital for many areas of astrophysics. The most famous
sub-class are the Type Ia, which have yielded exciting results about the
accelerating expansion of the universe. However, for the next step in precision
cosmology, identifications are needed of Type Ia at very large distances, which
is difficult, because they are easily confused with other types of Type I
supernovae, namely Type Ib/c. This survey will study the observed differences
between these supernova types to eliminate mistaken classifications and thus
enable a better understanding of the acceleration of our universe at earlier
stages in its expansion, billions of years in the past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Type Ia are the result of thermonuclear explosions
of a C-O white dwarf in a binary system, Type Ib/c are core-collapse explosions
from massive stars, which have been removed of their outermost H layer. Type
Ib/c observations cannot be used to derive accurate distance measurements;
however, because their spectra look like Type 1a supernovae, they can
contaminate large supernova surveys. This award is to conduct a thorough
statistical analysis of optical spectra and lightcurves (records of light
emitted over time) of thousands of supernovae in order to distinguish between
Type Ia supernova and Types 1b and 1c and remove the impostors from the surveys.
This project will develop the tools needed to quickly and automatically identify
and remove Type 1b/c supernovae from surveys. The PI will provide these tools
and methods to the community for future observations with other telescopes, such
as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), which is expected to yield
thousands of new supernova candidates per night. The data will also be used to
test models of core-collapse explosions of massive stars, which will improve
knowledge of stellar evolution. The PI will train and mentor a graduate student
and undergraduate student in research, and she will also collaborate with an
external organization to recruit a promising high school student from an
underrepresented group in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be done through a two-pronged
approach: 1) utilizing the traditional spectral template approach with well-
established algorithms, and then 2) employing Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
to derive eigenspectrum bases, which if found in a robust fashion, can be easily
used to construct average spectral time-series templates and to identify any new
classification schemes within the available data. In addition, the PI will
clarify the link between SN spectral classification for SN Ib/c, including those
connected with Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs), and their purported stellar progenitors
by testing for hidden He in SN Ic. This will be done by comparing observed
spectra and light curves of a large set of SN Ib/c, for the first time, with
those predicted from two competing models. The PI will use spectra and
lightcurves of over 5800 supernova explosions that are recently published (such
as WISeREP and SUSPECT) or are in-hand.