* 1413158
* A Novel Anchoring Mechanism for Prokaryotic Surface Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Mechthild Pohlschroder, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 742,327.00

Archaea are prokaryotic organisms that are distinct from bacteria and although
they are well known for the ability of many species to thrive in extreme
environments, they are ubiquitous and can be found even in our gut and on our
skin. Many cell surface proteins are essential to cellular functions (processes
such as nutrient uptake, surface adhesion, and mating) and they must be
effectively anchored to the cell surface in order to carry out their functions.
In archaea, these attachment mechanisms are poorly understood and this project
will characterize a novel surface protein anchoring mechanism that is also
predicted to be used by many bacteria. The research project team will engage in
science education to inspire an interest in science in young children,
particularly those in underserved schools in West Philadelphia. The PI will
develop microbiology experiments that can be utilized by schools with limited
financial resources, and the researchers will participate in both in-class
instruction and teacher-training workshops hosted by the University of
Pennsylvania. In silico data suggest that many prokaryotes use a previously
unknown mechanism to covalently link the C-terminus of a substrate to a lipid in
the cell membrane. In archaea, this anchoring mechanism is likely catalyzed by
an archaeosortase (ArtA) in a process that is reminiscent of the anchoring of
surface proteins by the evolutionarily distinct bacterial sortase, an enzyme
that processes and covalently links the C-termini of substrates to the cell
wall. In vivo evidence supports the hypothesis that the Haloferax volcanii
S-layer glycoprotein is processed and covalently linked to the lipid bilayer in
an ArtA-dependent manner and has also revealed that other ArtA substrates play
vital roles in important biological processes. The goal of the proposed research
is to determine the specific roles that this ArtA-dependent anchoring mechanism
plays in H. volcanii cellular processes, using biochemical, mass spectrometric,
genetic and microscopic approaches. The proposed research will: 1) characterize
post-translational modifications involving ArtA in greater detail; 2) determine
structure-function relationships for ArtA, including the importance of a
putative catalytic amino acid triad, as well as identifying other proteins that
interact with ArtA; and 3) characterize the functional roles played by ArtA
substrates in cellular processes such as mating, motility and adhesion.