* 1413568
* Realistic simulations of the intergalactic medium CDS&amp;E
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2019
* David Tytler, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2019
* USD 392,579.00

The material that fills the vast spaces between galaxies (the Intergalactic
Medium, or IGM) is surprisingly poorly understood. One primary method of
investigating the IGM is through the light it absorbs from very distant very
bright quasi-stellar objects (quasars), which show hundreds of measurable
features at very specific wavelengths. Unfortunately, detailed computational
work is still unable to reproduce key aspects of the IGM, all at the same time
and using the same input parameters. This must mean that those simulations do
not correctly represent the real Universe. This study attempts to correct this
failing with a systematic investigation of the physics included in the numerical
studies, and a rigorous delineation of the valid regions of the large parameter
space to be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IGM makes hundreds of
absorption lines in quasar spectra that are sensitive to the thermal history of
the Universe, but, as noted, current numerical simulations cannot simultaneously
match several key features. The discrepancy is too large to be due to
observational errors, and is seen in multiple comparisons even when using
different numerical methods. This research team has decades of experience
observing the IGM and running high fidelity simulations, and is forced to
conclude that the simulations simply do not correctly represent our Universe.
Therefore, this project will search for a realistic representation of the IGM
through four new types of simulation, including a new radiation transport
solver, a high resolution large box simulation with parameterized feedback, the
first ever simulation of the IGM with self-consistent 3D radiative transfer, and
physically motivated simulations that explore a wide variety of other possible
heat sources. All these results will be synthesized, parameterizing precisely
how they change the appearance of the IGM, so as to select those parameter
values that will faithfully generate observations of the IGM. The work should
locate what is missing from our understanding of the IGM, and discover and
specify simulations that can exactly reproduce the main physical processes in
the IGM. It will lead to more accurate and robust estimates of the IGM
temperature, density and ionization, the intensity of the ultraviolet background
radiation, and the clustering of matter on small scales that is used to set
limits on neutrino masses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the simulations and the
generating codes will be publicly available. This team has a two decade record
of integrating education and diversity into their core research. Undergraduate
students will receive instruction in cosmology, astrophysics, spectroscopy, and
simulations, and they will work with advanced software tools.