* 1413980
* CNH-Ex: Legal, Economic, and Natural Science Analyses of Wind Plant Impacts and Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2018
* Julie Lundquist, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 248,673.00

This research project will examine the physical, economic, and legal
interactions among wind turbines, wind farms, and their local environments. The
project will seek answers to a set of important questions, including the
following: Who owns the wind? Who enjoys the benefits of positive downwind
impacts on crops and other wind plants? Who bears responsibility for negative
downwind impacts of newly constructed wind turbines? This project will quantify
the atmospheric and economic impacts of wind farms to more accurately assess the
complex implications of new wind farms on both natural and human systems. The
investigators also will propose nationwide legal frameworks that accurately
reflect the physical and economic impacts on wind farms' neighbors. Appropriate
legal guidance can result in greater efficiencies and reduce waste of wind
resources. Because it will couple physical, economic, and legal investigations,
the project will help to reduce the frequency of adversarial, litigation-based
solutions and maximize public benefit in a fair and predictable manner, thereby
providing the policy tools to optimize the development of the nation's
sustainable energy resources. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.

The production of energy from wind has increased significantly over the past
decade, and projections suggest this increase is likely to continue. The
establishment of more turbines in large wind farms brings the growing risk of
impacts on local environments, crops, and other wind farms, however. The
investigators will integrate atmospheric science and economic impact studies
along with systematic legal analyses to more effectively characterize the
complex interactions among natural and human systems downwind from wind farms,
and they will provide new insights regarding policy and other approaches to
maximizing benefits while reducing risks. The researchers will use publicly
available weather prediction to simulate wind farm impacts, which then will be
compared to extensive datasets of wind, turbulence, and turbine power production
data from three large wind farms in different regions of the country. If
improvements to the representation of wind farms in weather models are required,
these improvements will be made and made available for weather forecasters and
others. The investigators will analyze the economic impacts of wind development
on landowners within a wind farm and on downwind neighbors, and they will assess
local, state, and national wind case law in order to understand whether and how
wind farm atmospheric and economic impacts are accurately represented by current
legal frameworks. This categorization and analysis will provide a new resource
to other wind law researchers. The weather simulations and aggregated economic
and legal data created in this project will be maintained on a publicly
available data archive to enable future investigations of wind energy economic
and legal impacts.