* 1413449
* Plasmonic Substrates for High Performance SPR Detection in the Kretschmann Configuration
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Quan Cheng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 424,123.00

Supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry, and the Instrument Development for Biological Research Program in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure, Professor Quan Cheng and his research
group at the University of California-Riverside are developing new materials for
the detection of biomolecules using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) methods. SPR
is a type of measurement where the light reflected from a metal surface or
scattered from metal particles of nanometer dimensions can provide information
about the molecules or chemical reactions occuring at the metal surface. SPR-
based biosensing technology provides effective tools for study of molecular
interactions, facilitates the understanding of biological chemistry, and related
fields such as drug discovery. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
coupling of propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) and localized surface
plasmons in the substrate using the Kretschmann configuration. Several
structures such as aligned nanorods and nanovoids are employed to generate new
platforms to improve the coupling and thus the detection performance. Specific
goals of the research in this work include: 1) developing plasmonic nanoparticle
films and 2-D periodic nanostructures as SPR substrates for enhanced label-free
analysis; 2) developing ordered porous films on the Au substrate to induce
strong optical/plasmonic coupling that improves SPR detection; 3) applying the
newly developed SPR substrates for analysis of molecular interactions that
involve membrane proteins and aptasensing. LDI-MS analysis with the substrates
will be explored as well to systematically evaluate the scope and pragmatism of
on-chip orthogonal detection. The highly interdisciplinary nature of this
research program also offers diverse opportunities from which students can gain
experience when dealing with different problems in surface chemistry,
nanotechniques, optics and bioanalytical chemistry.