* 1413671
* Extreme mass ratio multiple stellar systems: understanding the origin of the brown dwarf desert and directly imaged planets
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Gaspard Duchene, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 268,171.00

This award funds an observational program to determine the frequency of close,
very low-mass stellar companions to massive stars (those with 3-8 times the mass
of the Sun). The results will be used to test the physical limit of the star
formation process and to better understand the existence of the so-called "brown
dwarf desert" phenomenon, which is used to describe the scarcity of brown dwarfs
within about 3-5 astronomical units (AU) of binary stars, and plays a large role
in planetary and star formation models. The AU is a unit of length approximately
equal to the distance between the Earth and Sun. The results will be used to
test star formation models and the nature of sub-stellar companions discovered
in brown dwarf and exoplanet searches. They will also provide useful context for
extrasolar planet (planets that orbit other stars) imaging surveys. The PI will
supervise and mentor two undergraduate students with research internships on
this project.

To accomplish this work, the researchers will use extreme adaptive optics
systems with the ShaneAO instrument at the Lick Observatory and the Gemini
Planet Imager in order to measure the number of extreme mass-ratio binary star
systems. The project will comprise two types of targets: one from rich young
star clusters within 1 kpc and less than 100 Myr, and another from field stars
unassociated with clusters. After the data are reduced, faint companions will be
identified from the data after point-spread-functions have been removed from the
images of the high-mass stars.