* 1413770
* Spectral Analysis of Stochastic Neural Oscillators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Peter Thomas, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2019
* USD 237,000.00

Many aspects of brain function involve the coordinated activity of millions of
nerve cells. Individually, these cells can behave like tiny clocks, emitting a
steady stream of pulses that communicate with each other. The synchronization of
these oscillators ("clocks") plays a role in both healthy and diseased brain
states. Deepening the understanding of how groups of brain cells synchronize
("tick" together) or desynchronize ("tick" separately) will deepen the
understanding of the brain systems underlying motor control, epilepsy,
breathing, information processing, and cognition. This project addresses a
conceptual gap in the theoretical understanding of oscillating nerve cells.
Today, most theories about how nerve cells synchronize rely on the assumption
that each cell behaves with nearly impeccable precision. However, real nerve
cells have stochastic variability, and their behavior is partly irregular and
unpredictable. In constructing mathematical models of nerve cells that can
account for variability, mathematically challenging problems arise. Solving
these mathematical problems can improve the ability to quantitatively describe
the clocklike behavior of individual nerve cells. This project will contribute
to the BRAIN Initiative by providing deeper insight into many nervous system
disorders.

This project addresses a mathematical problem at the foundations of
computational neuroscience and neurophysiology: the reduction of oscillatory
systems to a phase oscillator description, in the presence of noise. The
asymptotic phase of a deterministic dynamical system possessing a stable limit
cycle was introduced in mathematical biology in the 1970s. Today, the biological
significance of phase oscillator models is difficult to overstate. The
fundamental notions of phase and phase resetting depend on classical results of
invariant manifold theory for systems of deterministic differential equations.
But noise is ubiquitous in biological dynamics. In recasting models of
biological oscillators to take into account random fluctuations, the classical
"asymptotic phase" is no longer well defined. This project develops a new
definition for the asymptotic phase of a noisy oscillator, defined in terms of
the complex eigenfunctions of the forward Kolmogorov operator, describing the
evolution of the density on the state space. This "stochastic asymptotic phase"
coincides with the classical phase in the case of vanishing noise intensities.
However this new definition does not rely on the classical phase of a related
deterministic system. Unlike the classical phase, it is equally well defined for
systems that require noise for sustained oscillation.