* 1413868
* EAPSI: Exploring the relation between four-dimensional and two-dimensional quantum field theories
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Anderson Trimm, Trimm                   Anderson       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The interactions of elementary particles are described using a framework called
quantum field theory. When particles interact weakly, precise calculations can
be made which agree with experimental results. However, a satisfactory
theoretical understanding of the dynamics of strongly-interacting particles -
such as the binding of quarks to form a proton - is still lacking. This problem
becomes much more tractable in quantum field theories with supersymmetry, in
which many exact computations can be made. This research will focus on recently-
discovered relations between supersymmetric quantum field theories in four
dimensions and a class of quantum field theories in two dimensions. Such
relations are very useful, as computations which are very difficult in the four-
dimensional theory often become simple and algorithmic in the two-dimensional
theory. This research will study a generalization of a well-known 4d/2d
relation, which will lead to new 4d/2d pairs. Understanding more examples - and
the mathematical structures involved - should help lead to an algorithm to
construct 4d/2d pairs. This research will be done in collaboration with
Professor Yuji Tachikawa, a leading expert in the field, at the University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Specifically, this project will study the instanton partition function of 4d N=2
supersymmetric gauge theory, with gauge group SU(N), in the presence of a
surface operator, labeled by a partition of N. It has been conjectured that, in
the pure gauge theory, the instanton partition function is equal to the norm of
a certain coherent state in the Verma module of a W-algebra, obtained by the
quantum Drinfeld-Sokolov reduction corresponding to the same partition of N, of
the affine sl(N) Lie algebra. This conjecture will be checked, by explicit
computation, for examples which have not yet been studied. This project will
also extend the correspondence to quiver gauge theories. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.