* 1413445
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Effects of Social, Behavioral, and Biological Exposures on Fetal and Postnatal Skeletal Growth and Body Composition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Michelle Lampl, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 19,336.00

Significant differences in health outcomes reflecting social, environmental, and
economic disadvantages persist and the biological mechanisms underlying these
inequalities remain poorly understood. Descriptive epidemiologic studies
identify that both intrauterine and early postnatal environments play a role in
the transmission of health disparities across generations. This dissertation
project by doctoral student Amanda Mummert (under the supervision of Dr.
Michelle Lampl, Emory University) examines whether the specific exposures of
chronic psychosocial stress and poor nutrition, fundamental disadvantages noted
among populations exhibiting health disparities, have intergenerational effects
on fetal and infant skeletal growth and body composition.

The primary hypothesis of the study is that fetal and infant exposure to chronic
stress and high calorie foods will lead to distinct deficiencies in skeletal
growth and bone mineral density, as well as increased adiposity and decreased
adiponectin production in infancy. Challenges to conducting this research in
humans include our long reproductive periods and the invasiveness of the
proposed research plan, which are overcome by testing this hypothesis in a
translational model of human health. The research therefore utilizes an
appropriate primate model, a sample of 56 Rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta)
maternal-infant pairs housed at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center.
Ultrasonography, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, anthropometrics, and
biomarker assays will be repeated on mothers and infants at 90 and 150
gestational days of age, as well as 3 and 6 postnatal months of age. These
biological assessments will be accompanied by behavioral observations to
document the occurrence of stress-like behaviors and mother-infant nursing
interactions. Additionally, food intake for mothers and weaned infants will be
continuously quantified through the use of automated feeders that dispense food
in response to microchip signals.

By exposing how innate physiology is impacted by two primary social determinants
of health, nutrition and chronic stress, this research contributes to the
Healthy People 2020 priority to better characterize the complex contributions of
environment and biology to human health. While infectious disease remains a
significant public health issue, the global burden of morbidity and mortality is
deeply rooted in social and structural issues, including unemployment and
poverty, a lack of social support, and chronic stress. It is imperative to
investigate how these larger social factors 'get under the skin' and impact
human health for public health planning purposes, particularly as chronic
disease rates and health care costs continue to rise. In particular, this
research is anticipated to reveal currently unknown biological mechanisms that
contribute to long-term health inequalities that may serve as biomarkers for
interpreting the effectiveness of public health interventions.