* 1413717
* Some Topics on Path Dependent Partial Differential Equations and Stochastic Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Jianfeng Zhang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 254,877.00

In many practical problems the object under study can be characterized as the
unique solution to certain partial differential equations. This requires the so-
called Markov structure of the problem, namely, the object depends only on the
current value of a certain underlying process. In many applications, for example
in many financial models, the problem may be non-Markovian, namely, the object
depends on the whole history of the underlying process. The investigator and his
colleagues study what are called path-dependent partial differential equations,
which would enable them to apply standard ideas and techniques to a much larger
class of applied problems. The major difficulty, however, is that in such a non-
Markovian framework the object process is typically not smooth and thus cannot
be understood as the solution to the equation in a classical sense. The main aim
of this project is to study certain weak solutions, called viscosity solutions,
for such equations. The investigator considers conditions that ensure the
existence, uniqueness, and stability of these solutions, and develops numerical
methods to compute them. He also studies time-inconsistent problems via
stochastic differential equations. Such problems arise naturally in many
economic and financial applications such as prospect theory and contract theory.
Graduate students will be trained in the course of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of path-dependent partial differential
equations considers paths to be a variable; notable examples including path-
dependent Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations and Isaacs equations. It provides a
convenient framework for stochastic optimization problems with diffusion control
and economic or financial models with volatility uncertainty in a non-Markovian
setting. The investigator and his colleagues have previously developed a theory
of viscosity solutions for problems in which the state space is not locally
compact and the dominated convergence theorem fails. In this project he develops
the theory further in three directions, mainly motivated by various
applications: (i) extending the convex analysis used in standard viscosity
theory for partial differential equations to the path-dependent setting and
providing a new proof for the comparison principle under weaker conditions; (ii)
investigating the regularity of viscosity solutions; and (iii) proposing
feasible numerical methods. The investigator also considers time-inconsistent
problems. There are typically two types of strategies for such problems: pre-
commitment and consistent planning. Most studies of continuous time models focus
on the latter one. A novel approach for the former one is proposed, by using
multidimensional controlled backward stochastic differential equations. The main
innovation is to relate the time inconsistency to a comparison principle and to
introduce a new order for comparison. The approach may also provide new insights
for some open problems on multidimensional backward stochastic differential
equations, which lack a standard comparison principle.