* 1413900
* CNH: Slowing the Expansion of Woodlands and Increasing the Resilience of Grasslands in the Southern Great Plains
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Bradford Wilcox, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,369,999.00

What determines the boundaries between grasslands and shrublands or forests is
of major scientific interest, particularly since these boundaries can shift over
time, sometimes relatively swiftly and seemingly permanently. In large areas of
the central and western U.S., woody plants have been spreading into grasslands.
Previous research has implicated change in climate and grazing pressure as
likely contributing factors. This project extends that work to include effects
of governmental policies and social attitudes on the use of fire to keep
grasslands open, and to include the impacts of conversion between grassland and
woodland on ecological services and resultant economics. Researchers will
compare three regions with contrasting degrees of woody encroachment in Kansas,
Oklahoma, and Texas to test the hypothesis that changes between grassland and
woodland are driven by interactions between fire and grazing regimes that are
constrained by policy and culture. The project will provide web-based
educational materials, workshops, and tools for private landowners, extension
agents, USDA staff, and K-12 science teachers. Results are expected to enhance
the scientific basis for maintaining economically valuable grasslands in rural
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the interactions between
social and biophysical processes on wildlands in the Southern Great Plains in
the context of a novel social-ecological framework. This framework is centered
on grassland state changes resulting from woody plant encroachment, and
elucidates the socio-ecological properties that emerge when feedbacks,
thresholds, and nonlinearities are accounted for. To test the hypothesis that
grassland-to-woodland state changes are driven by interactions among fire and
grazing regimes that are constrained in space and time by society, policy, and
regulations constraining the use of prescribed fire, research will combines
empirical biophysical, social, and economic research within a dynamic,
iteratively evolving agent-based model (ABM) linked to land cover. This ABM will
analyze the factors that influence decision-making by land managers with respect
to the use of prescribed fire as a management tool; forecast changes in regional
woody plant cover and ecosystem carbon mass under different scenarios of fire
use; project the effects of change between grasslands and woodlands on
portfolios of ecosystem services including forage production, groundwater
recharge, stream flow, and carbon sequestration; and translate changes in
ecosystem services into economic metrics.