* 1413850
* PFI:AIR - TT:  An Accessible Robotic Platform for Children with Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2015
* Roberto Casas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 196,710.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating technology
to fill the necessity for accessible technologies that can support the needs of
children with diverse disabilities. The project will result in a scale-up of a
commercially viable accessible robotic platform that supports children with
disabilities in achieving their developmental milestones. This accessible
robotic platform has the following unique features: it combines accessible
interfaces and tablet Apps with an interactive mobile robot that is adaptable to
children with diverse needs; it provides just-in-time verbal and non-verbal
behavioral interaction for engaging a child through the autonomous monitoring of
the child's engagement level; it provides an integrated therapeutic and/or
educational experience that addresses the diverse needs of children, while
providing a solution for variations found in their disabilities. These features
provide the following advantages, as compared to the leading competing tablet-
controlled robotics platforms available in the marketplace today: 1) the
technology capitalizes on the general appeal of robotics and the pervasiveness
of tablet devices to derive a low-cost, quality solution that is inclusive of
all children with/without disabilities; and 2) improves the effectiveness of
home-based therapeutic/educational interventions that can enhance the quality of
life of children with disabilities. This project addresses the following
technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application - 1) provides reliable, continuous operations in the real-world at
low-cost by redesigning the current lab-prototype electronics and hardware
package, 2) provides appropriate interactive robot responses for engaging
children with disabilities by coupling our tablet-robot interactive behavior
theory with accessible tablet interfaces, and 3) allows ease-of-use by
clinicians, teachers, parents, and children through the redesign of our software
infrastructure.

The accessible robotic platform is important because there are currently no
accessible robotics platforms available in the marketplace designed for children
with disabilities, especially those with motor disabilities. In addition, given
that there are over 93 million children worldwide living with a disability and
that robotics is now a major U.S. national initiative, there is a large
potential of making both a commercial, as well as a social, impact in this
space. The US assistive technologies market has a forecast value of $55 billion
by 2016, which is up from $4B in 2011, and we expect the potential economic
impact of translating this technology into the marketplace will positivity
contribute to this growth rate within the next 5 years. This will directly
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the assistive technologies domain.