* 1413074
* RUI: Electrophilic Modulation of the Heat Shock Response System
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rebecca Connor, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2018
* USD 217,583.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Rebecca Connor of Dickinson College to
investigate how stress affects individual cells in tissues and organs. It is
thought that one way cells protect themselves against environmental stresses
such as toxins is through a process known as the heat shock response. This
project is investigating how certain stress-inducing molecules interact with
proteins involved in the heat shock response. It is known that the body's
ability to make use of this protective system decreases with age, so the work is
also giving deeper insight into how the cellular aging process occurs. This work
is having a broader impact on the understanding of basic biological processes
that help to maintain good health. Knowledge gained from this work will be
useful for a number of fields, including toxicology. The work is having a
further broad impact on the training of the next generation of scientists
through the many undergraduates at this institution who are participating in the
research project.

In this project, studies are being carried out to determine how parthenolide and
similar electrophilic molecules chemically affect the cellular heat shock
response system (HSR) of cells through covalent modification of the chaperone
proteins Hsp70 and Hsp90 and the transcription factor, Hsf1. Peptide enrichment
of affinity tagged parthenolide derivatives combined with MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis
identifies covalently-adducted amino acids. Mutation of these residues as well
as covalent adduction sites previously published in the literature are being
used in combination with kinetic binding, protein refolding, co-
immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic shift assays to build a complete picture
of the effect of modification on heat shock protein (Hsp) function. Both the
identification of specific amino acid residues involved in the activation of the
heat shock protein response by electrophilic molecules and the quantification of
the specific effects on binding affinity, chaperone activity and DNA binding of
the Hsps found in the heat shock complex are helping clarify how the heat shock
response is controlled. The sensor mechanisms of the heat shock complex are
important for the cellular response to environmental toxins and other molecules,
as well as cellular senescence.