* 1413454
* Homogenization for Sea Ice
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 320,000.00

Sea ice is a critical component of Earth's climate system, and a leading
indicator of climate change. The precipitous losses of summer Arctic sea ice
observed in the past few decades have a significant impact on Earth's climate
system, and have far outpaced the projections of most global climate models. One
of the fundamental challenges of climate science is to develop more rigorous
representations of sea ice in climate models, and incorporate important small
scale processes and structures into these large scale models. The research
funded by this grant will address this central issue. The investigators will use
the mathematics of composite materials and statistical physics to develop
methods of rigorously calculating the effective or homogenized properties of the
sea ice pack which are necessary for improving projections of the fate of
Earth's ice packs, and how polar ecosystems may respond. The effects of
planetary warming are far reaching, and a better understanding of sea ice and
its role in climate will improve our ability to predict changes in storm tracks,
precipitation and temperature patterns, etc., affecting large populations.
Moreover, this work will advance our understanding of the properties of
composite materials and their use in industrial, engineering, and medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research topics in this grant encompass
a range of key problems which will not only advance how sea ice can be
represented in climate models, but will the push the boundaries of the
mathematics of composite materials. The marginal ice zone (MIZ) is the outer
region of the ice pack where dense pack ice transitions to open ocean, and its
"width" is an important climatic length scale. Recent advances in objectively
identifying MIZ width and geometry have led to the discovery of striking trends
as the climate has warmed, which are based on an idealized concentration field
satisfying Laplace's equation. Here we will generalize this analysis to include
an inhomogeneous, effective diffusivity in the multiscale transport equation,
which can, through inversion schemes, capture the actual satellite-derived
concentration field. We will investigate how this effective coefficient is then
related to smaller scale information about floe geometry and configurations.
This approach will provide a basis for analytical investigation of MIZ dynamics
including its susceptibility to deformation. In related work, we will explore
representations for ice pack rheology similar to a recently obtained polydisc
integral formula for the effective elasticity of two phase composites. Such
representations involve spectral measures on the torus whose moments are related
to microstructural statistics, and we will investigate the structure of the
spectral measures and their dependence on composite microgeometry.