* 1413036
* Collaborative Research: Lipidomic Profiling, Dynamics, and Functions of Head-group Acylation of Membrane Lipids in Plant Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Basil Nikolau, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2016
* USD 145,466.00

Membranes separate the cell from its environment and compartments within the
cell from one another. In the cells of a plant, membranes are composed of
lipids. These lipids also have other crucial metabolic and cellular functions
that are only now being established. These lipids also have crucial metabolic
and signaling functions that are only now being established. As plants develop
and are exposed to environmental signals, membrane lipids are extensively
chemically modified. Recent advances in lipid analysis have revealed that
addition of a fatty acid to a membrane lipid, called polar lipid head-group
acylation, is a major modification process, but relatively little is known about
this process or its physiological significance. This project will address the
hypothesis that head-group acylation of lipids functions to improve plant
adaptation to environmental stress. To identify the role of head-group acylation
when plants are under stress, genes encoding enzymes responsible for head-group-
acylated lipid metabolism will be identified. By examining plants that are
missing these genes and enzymes, in comparison to plants that contain them, the
functions of membrane lipid head-group acylation in plant stress responses will
be determined. These activities will identify metabolic steps with potential to
enhance stress tolerance in plants and improve agricultural productivity and
quality. Relevant data will be integrated into a plant functional genomic
knowledge base. Further, the work will provide interdisciplinary training in
biostatistics, chemistry, and biology to postdoctoral trainees, and it will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research through
collaboration with a faculty mentor and undergraduate student at historically
black Langston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve
current understanding of the role of membrane lipid modification in producing
and maintaining complex cell membranes, and influencing organismal performance.
In the context of whole glycerolipidomes, new mass spectrometry-based approaches
will be used to identify and characterize changes in lipid head-group acylation
in response to a biotic stress, Pseudomonas syringae infection, and an abiotic
stress, phosphate deficiency. To identify the gene product(s) responsible for
head-group acylation, the lipid profiles of knockout mutants of candidate genes
will be obtained and compared to the lipid profiles of wild-type plants. Data
from functional analysis of the knockout mutants under stress will be correlated
with lipid levels, providing additional information about the roles of head-
group acylation in plant function. The effects of application of acylated head
groups or head-group acylated lipids to plants also will be tested. Lipid
profiling and functional data will be integrated into a novel metabolic database
to expand knowledge of metabolic networks.