* 1413963
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Location-Independent Networks: Evaluation Strategies and Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2019
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 700,851.00

As the global Internet expands to satisfy the demands and expectations of an
ever-increasing fraction of the world's population, profound changes are
occurring in its interconnection structure, traffic dynamics, and the economic
and political power of different players in the ecosystem. These changes not
only impact network engineering and operations, but also present broader
challenges for technology investment, future network design, public policy, and
scientific study of the Internet itself. And yet, from both scientific and
policy perspectives, the evolving ecosystem is largely uncharted
territory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two related transformations of the Internet
ecosystem motivate this project: the emergence of Internet exchanges (IXes) as
anchor points in the mesh of interconnection, and content providers and Content
Delivery Networks (CDNs) as major sources of traffic flowing into the Internet.
By some accounts over half the traffic volume in North America now comes from
just two content distributors (Youtube and Netflix). This shift constitutes the
rise of a new kind of hierarchy in the ecosystem, bringing new constraints on
existing players who need to manage traffic on their networks to minimize
congestion, resulting in tussles among commercial players as well as between the
private sector and regulatory bodies, at the expense of users suffering degraded
quality of experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
characterize the changing nature of the Internet's topology and traffic
dynamics, and to investigate the implications of these changes on network
science, architecture, operations, and public policy. The first task is to
construct a new type of semantically rich Internet map, which will elucidate the
role of IXes in facilitating robust and geographically diverse but complex
interdomain connectivity. This map will guide the second task: a measurement
study of traffic congestion dynamics induced by evolving peering and traffic
management practices of CDNs and ISPs, including methods to detect and localize
the congestion to specific points in the network. Data used will include
measurements gathered using CAIDA's global active measurement infrastructure
Archipelago (Ark), as well as data contributed by industry players for use in
validation and refinement of methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this
project will advance the scientific community's understanding of the evolving
Internet by developing and applying a more sophisticated model of the physical
Internet topology. The inquiry is structured to pursue new methods of analysis
and insights into the interaction between CDN dynamics, interconnection at IXes,
and network performance. Results, including the sharing of collected and curated
data sets, will also inform related fields, including traffic modeling,
infrastructure resiliency and protection, network economics, industrial
organization, and future network architecture
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, results will be disseminated via
publications, conferences, industry meetings, online lectures, web pages. CAIDA
and CSAIL will jointly host annual international interdisciplinary workshops to
close the loop between empirical research results, theoretical modeling
activities, and policymaking. By providing unbiased data about the evolving
Internet ecosystem, the proposed research has the potential to be of great value
to Internet users, network operators, and governments.