* 1413183
* Understanding the contribution of a chromatin remodeler to regulation of tissue-specific gene expression in Arabidopsis plants
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2018
* Joseph Ogas, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2018
* USD 786,000.00

The long-term goal of this research is to enable scientists to manipulate the
identity of specific tissues in plants to increase their agricultural potential.
For example, this research may identify a factor that can be inhibited to enable
leaf tissue to begin producing root proteins, and thereby form roots.
Unshackling the constraints imposed by a fixed tissue identity could have a
substantial practical impact by enabling modification of plants to enhance their
utility for food, fiber, and fuel. All organisms contain the blueprint of how
tissues are formed and what proteins are produced in genes in a highly organized
dynamic complex of proteins and nucleic acids referred to as chromatin. Factors
play a critical role in regulating production of tissue-specific genes that
determine the developmental identity of specific tissues such as leaf and root.
How genes are expressed in different tissues is of particular interest in plants
because changes in gene expression during development are extremely malleable in
this kingdom. Although some of the factors have been identified that control
tissue-specific genes, very little is known about the regulatory mechanisms and
machinery that enable genes to transition from one state or the other. The
protein will study one of those factors to decipher the mechanism by which it
can control gene regulation in plants. The proposed research is also aligned
with the education mission of NSF. The Principal Investigator (PI) strongly
supports undergraduate research and has considerable record of engaging
undergraduates in research projects that provide them with a transformative
scientific experience. These types of research experiences often play a critical
role in prompting students to pursue a Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) career. In addition, graduate students will undertake the bulk of the
proposed research, which will provide them with a solid foundation in science
associated with research involving genomics, biochemistry, and genetics. The PI
has an extensive experience in teaching undergraduate and graduate students and
strongly believes in motivating topics in the classroom based on current efforts
in the lab. Lessons learned by working with students on the proposed research
will provide the bases by which the PI will continue to transform the
educational experience of students as head advisor in the Department of
Biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental organizational subunit of
chromatin is the nucleosome, which consists of DNA wrapped around an octamer of
histone proteins. Factors that control chromatin structure, referred to as
chromatin remodelers, play a critical role in regulating expression of tissue-
specific genes that determine the developmental identity of specific tissues
such as leaf and root. The protein that will be studied in this work, the
chromatin remodeler PICKLE (PKL), is thought to contribute to both regulation of
tissue-specific genes by serving as a component of a chromatin-based switch that
enables both negative and positive regulation of these genes. Thus deciphering
the mechanism of PKL action at these loci will illuminate for the first time how
the machinery of plants enables fluid determination of gene expression and
developmental identity. The proposed experiments will elucidate a fundamental
chromatin-based pathway that restricts developmental identity in plants and
thus, are likely to identify novel targets by which developmental identity can
be manipulated in recalcitrant species. This proposal will examine the role of
the chromatin remodeling protein PKL in determination of developmental identity
in Arabidopsis thaliana, a plant that is widely used for laboratory research.
PKL alters the structure of nucleosomes and is necessary for proper expression
of genes that specify developmental identity. Many of these tissue-specific
genes are regulated by the repressive epigenetic mark H3K27me3 (trimethylation
of lysine 27 of histone H3 ? a specific modification of a histone protein),
which is used to prevent expression of tissue-specific genes in inappropriate
tissues (for example to keep root genes off in leaf tissue). PKL is necessary
for both repression and activation of H3K27me3-regulated genes, indicating that
it acts as both a repressor and an activator of gene expression. This proposal
will address the hypothesis that PKL is a component of a chromatin-based switch
that enables both negative and positive regulation of developmental genes. This
proposal will characterize how PKL contributes to chromatin structure and
expression from genes that are regulated by H3K27me3. Specifically, the project
will analyze the chromatin of the entire genome to distinguish between different
models of PKL action. It will examine how PKL activity is regulated by
identifying the modification state of nucleosomes that interact with PKL as well
as test the hypothesis that nucleosomes remodeled by PKL are a better substrate
for the complex that promotes the H3K27me3 modification. Genetic and biochemical
screens will be used to identify new factors and pathways that enable PKL-
dependent processes.