* 1413726
* Kernel approximation with scalable bases
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Thomas Hangelbroek, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 106,106.00

Problems involving the approximation and representation of data taken from
scattered sites in space, from surfaces, or from more complicated structures
arise in diverse scientific fields. Kernel methods are valued for their ability
to treat such unstructured data. They are also important examples of meshless
methods, computational tools that function successfully without the need of
accompanying structures like grids or triangulations. The principal investigator
plans to study analytic and computational properties of scalable localized bases
(a powerful new methodology for working with kernels) and to use these bases to
address some fundamental challenges in kernel based approximation. The
investigator expects to generate algorithms that will be of use to scientists
and engineers who work with unstructured data and large-scale datasets.
Throughout the project, the investigator will mentor graduate students by
involving them in both the theoretical and the applied aspects of this research.

Unlike other computational tools (like wavelets, splines and piecewise
polynomial finite elements), kernel methods do not explicitly involve a scaling
operation: as data becomes more dense, the kernel is not required to be dilated.
This allows kernels to produce approximates from complex geometrical
configurations where a single scale is not apparent. However, it often leads to
problems involving large, poorly conditioned linear systems, the solution of
which is both slow and unstable. It has been demonstrated that in many cases the
underlying function spaces possess stable, highly localized bases that can be
constructed rapidly. There is compelling evidence that near linear processing of
many computational problems is possible, and fast algorithms may exist to treat
many of the basic operations involving kernels. The proposed research seeks to
generate scalable bases in new settings (i.e., for new kernels and on new
manifolds), to understand and overcome fundamental problems stemming from
boundary effects and highly non-uniform arrangements of data, and ultimately to
implement parallelized, fast algorithms for kernel approximation with these
bases.