* 1413862
* Center for Sustainable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,000,000.00

The Center for Sustainable Polymers (CSP) will use a comprehensive strategy to
discover innovative routes to plastics derived from renewable feedstock
chemicals such as sugars, plant oils, and other naturally sourced starting
materials. The CSP vision is to design, demonstrate and develop economically
competitive polymers that combine product performance and negligible
environmental impact, resulting in tangible societal benefit. The work of the
Center is divided into three thrust areas. Thrust I focuses on the development
of new methods to convert plant-based resources into viable starting materials
for polymer synthesis based on traditional chemical methods and by harnessing
the biochemical action of microorganisms. These and other starting materials are
converted into polymers in Thrust II using new environmentally friendly
techniques that are more efficient and more effective than currently practiced
technologies. Thrust III focuses on translating these advances into competitive
materials using sophisticated polymer architectures that lead to improved and
sustainable plastics, elastomers, and thermosets. The CSP aims to impact society
by transforming the US polymer industry to a more sustainable enterprise while
enhancing the education and career development of students and young scientists
involved with the Center. Additional broad impact will be realized through the
engagement of Center personnel with public policy experts, interactive exhibits
at the Minnesota State Fair that teach concepts of sustainable chemistry to the
general public, development of curricular materials related to sustainable
polymers and green chemistry for students of all ages, research opportunities
for underrepresented groups in the sciences, and a comprehensive Industrial
Affiliates Program that integrates commercial relevance and facilitates
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thrust I, Next Generation Feedstocks, is
focused on conversion of inexpensive bio-based molecules such as saccharides,
triglycerides and terpenes to monomers that can be used to generate both
established and new polymers. The monomers are produced using both chemical
processes, such as catalytic reductions and selective functionalizations, and
metabolic processes involving biocatalysis by organisms. For example, new routes
to commodity and next-generation monomers using catalytic deoxygenation
reactions are being developed. High throughput screening efforts for these
methods are being utilized in conjunction with computational modeling approaches
to help guide the choice of catalyst species. Microbial hosts are being
reengineered to help produce several different families of functionalized
hydrocarbon monomers suitable for subsequent polymerization. This strategy leads
to flexible pathways by which chain length and functionality in the resulting
monomer can be altered. In Thrust II, Controlled Polymerization Processes,
Center investigators are searching for methods to convert biobased monomers into
polymers with precisely controlled molecular structures. Here center researchers
are implementing precision catalytic transformations that allow for highly
selective and efficient polymerization processes. In addition, new routes to
recyclable crosslinked thermosets and the development of new sugar-based
polyesters, carbonates, and acrylates are being pursued. And the final Thrust
III area, Hybrid Polymer Structures, addresses how sophisticated and
revolutionary polymer architectures such as multiblock polymers can be exploited
to uncover new and innovative properties based on sustainable polymer building
blocks. This work includes computational strategies that aid in guiding the
synthetic efforts. Integration of these three scientific focus areas, and
collaboration with industrial partners, ensures that the ultimate goal of the
Center, economically competitive and high performance sustainable products,
becomes reality.