* 1413712
* Kinetics and spectroscopy of free radical intermediates in tropospheric reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2019
* Mitchio Okumura, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 445,769.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Mitchio Okumura
of the California Institute of Technology is researching the oxidation
mechanisms of volatile organic compounds that form air pollution. Professor
Okumura will provide excellent training for his graduate students utilizing
modern experimental physical tools, as well as with scientific reasoning. They
will utilize fast laser spectroscopic techniques to detect free radical species
and observe how changes occur as they flow through atmospheric oxidation
processes. The award will contribute to building the nation's scientific
infrastructure through collaborations within the university, among three other
universities, and two government funded research laboratories. International
collaboration will also be expanded with individuals from the French National
Synchrotron. Professor Okumura has a proven record in encouraging the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities, which will be
strengthened through outreach to underrepresented groups by the expansion of
formal connections to classrooms in local K-12 schools. Prior outreach programs
created by the Okumura Group will continue to be developed to teach elementary
school students about air pollution while inspiring their interest in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on characterizing the fates of
peroxy radicals, which are ubiquitous intermediates in atmospheric oxidation.
These species will be studied using many techniques: Cavity Ringdown
Spectroscopy, Multiplexed Photoionization Mass Spectrometry, and Photoelectron-
Photoion Coincidence Spectroscopy. The complementary approaches are designed to
fully reveal how peroxy radicals evolve in atmospheric mechanisms and to
characterize how their diverse chemical fates can lead to photochemical smog and
secondary organic aerosol. Specific systems studied include the peroxy radicals
derived from isoprene, the most important non-methane hydrocarbon emitted into
the troposphere, and acetyl peroxy, whose reactions are believed to recycle
oxidant in the tropics. The research will quantitatively address open questions
about how unsaturated species are oxidized in the atmosphere and will lead to an
understanding of organic aerosol formation and hydroxyl radical recycling
mechanisms.