* 1413790
* Collaborative Research:  A New Paradigm for Simulation Optimization: Marriage between Expectation-Maximization and Model-Based Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/14/2013,08/31/2015
* Enlu Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 122,444.00

The research objective of this award is to create new simulation optimization
algorithms that combine rigorous theoretical performance guarantees with the
robust empirical behavior of a class of random search techniques called the
model-based methods. The research approach is based on integrating the principle
of the well-known Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm from the field of
statistics into model-based methods. In particular, through exploiting a novel
connection to the EM algorithm, this research will investigate a unifying
framework to design and implement new model-based algorithms for solving a broad
class of simulation optimization problems with very modest computational effort.
These algorithms will be studied in terms of their properties (such as
convergence and convergence rate) using a fusion of theories and tools from EM,
stochastic approximation, and Quasi-Newton methods. A variety of applications
from biostatistics to electric power systems will also be tested for the
purposes of evaluating the practical utility of the developed techniques and
algorithms.

If successful, the resulting techniques will have applicability in a wide array
of industry and science sectors. Through collaboration with bio-statisticians,
the developed algorithms will be applied to optimal drug dose-response
experimental designs, with potential benefits to health care. In addition, the
intended applications to electric power systems will also promote synergy among
different disciplines. The research resulting from this project will be
disseminated through publications, software development, and participation at
national and international conferences. This award will also be closely
integrated with the education and training of students in mathematical science
and engineering by incorporating new developments into the advanced courses
taught by investigators at different institutions, and promoting the
participation of female students in research.