* 1413610
* Eyes on the future: optimizing science output for next generation surveys with joint crowdsourced and automated classification techniques
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Claudia Scarlata, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2018
* USD 625,952.00

Future galaxy surveys will produce so much data that astronomers will no longer
be able to rely on their previous methods of classifying them in order to
extract the science of galaxy formation and evolution through cosmic history.
Although "crowd-sourced" galaxy classifications tap into a vast resource of
volunteer labor, even major efforts like the Galaxy Zoo (GZ) will not be able to
keep up. This project will build on the GZ database, extending methods to other
epochs in the Universe, and simultaneously use the results of the citizen
science work together with machine learning to develop new automated
classification tools. Using the proven research value of involving the public
and the broader community, and with a new generation of intelligent computer
methods, this study will build on the best of both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
crowd-sourced galaxy classifications have proven their worth on a decade of data
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), there remain two major challenges to
making them a standard component of the data processing pipelines for the next
generation of surveys. The first is proving the utility of the method at high
redshifts, where more galaxies have irregular or clumpy morphologies. The second
acknowledges that even crowdsourcing does not have the capacity for the data
volume and rates that are to come, requiring new more sophisticated machine
classification algorithms. This project will develop catalogs for high-redshift
crowd-sourced data and for simulated galaxies, and develop a new automated
classification tool that extends to higher redshifts with a training pipeline
adaptable to multiple galaxy surveys. It includes three science projects: (a)
directly constrain galaxy size and mass growth rates; (b) measure any
relationship between bar-dominated disks and fueling of active galactic nuclei,
and (c) quantify the demographics and evolution of disk sub-structures. Efforts
to automate morphological classifications using parametric and non-parametric
techniques have been reasonably successful for SDSS, but did not extend to
deriving the necessary detailed structural parameters. The GZ crowd-sourcing
project has been successful beyond expectations, providing scientifically viable
parameters from volunteer work and leading to over a hundred peer-reviewed
papers. This study will extend both of these approaches in preparation for much
larger future surveys, which expect to produce as much data per night as ten
years of SDSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-level catalogs to be produced, and
the new classification algorithms to be used, are to be released publically, and
will be a valuable resource for the community. Along with informal guided-
inquiry projects, GZ will be implemented into undergraduate astronomy courses.
Students involved in this work will get well-defined PhD projects and acquire
technical skills valuable in their future professional careers.