* 1413666
* Polymer-Protein Hybrid Materials for the Selective Capture of Water Pollutants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Matthew Francis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Matthew B. Francis of the
University of California, Berkeley, is synthesizing new materials for use in
removing pollutants from water. The new materials are constructed by attaching
proteins to polymer supports. Since proteins bind to highly toxic substances,
the resulting hybrid materials can be used to remove pollutants such as PCBs,
estrogens or other toxic organic chemicals from drinking water. In this project,
procedures are being developed to more precisely control the ways that the
protein and polymer are attached. Further studies are then carried out to
determine how well the resulting materials bind to various pollutants that have
proven difficult to remove from water. The work is having a broad impact on our
ability to tackle difficult environmental problems by addressing challenges to
public health, improving the safety of manufacturing processes, and helping to
remedy environmental contamination sites. The work is having a further broad
impact on the training of future scientists through a project that combines
knowledge from multiple fields in chemistry, biology and materials science.

In this research, hybrid materials consisting of proteins attached to polymeric
supports are being constructed. Proteins are unrivaled in their ability to bind
highly toxic species in complex environmental samples. To use them for
remediation purposes, new synthetic methods are needed to wed polypeptides with
polymeric materials in such a way that the resultant substances can facilitate
recovery and improve stability. In this project, new techniques to attach
polymers and other supports to the N-terminal position of virtually any desired
protein in a single, efficient chemical step are being developed. Two versatile
chemical modifications are being studied. In both of these, a single instance of
a desired functional group in a single location can be attached while producing
stable linkages. The first strategy involves a chemoselective oxidative coupling
reaction promoted by ferricyanide ion, while the second exploits the highly-
selective reaction between pyridine-2-carboxaldehyde (P2CA) derivatives and
N-terminal amino acids to form 4-imidazolidinones. Both strategies have already
proven useful for the introduction of interesting functional groups on model
proteins in good yields. This project is building on the earlier results by (1)
developing new coupling agents and conditions to achieve increased levels of
reactivity; (2) determining the effects of amino acid sequence on reactivity
using combinatorial peptides libraries; and (3) confirming the observed
reactivity patterns by attaching proteins and evolved peptoid ligands that can
bind difficult-to-remove pollutants to inexpensive polymer supports. These new
methodologies are being tested on PCBs, estrogens, and other toxic organic
pollutants commonly found in drinking water sources. Heavy metal-binding
versions of these agents are also being produced.