* 1413722
* Mechanistic investigation of protein translocation on DNA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Norbert Reich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 632,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Professor Norbert Reich of University of California Santa Barbara to
investigate how cellular proteins locate specific positions on DNA. It is well
known that DNA stores genetic information that is transcribed and translated
within cells in other biological molecules and that underscores the life of
every cell. The "reading and interpretation" of the DNA information require and
are modulated by interactions with other molecules in the cell, particularly
proteins. The search by proteins of specific locations on DNA is challenging
because DNA appears very uniform. This proposal focuses on how the proteins
identify specific locations on DNA to bind to and then how they translocate on
the DNA to which they are bonded. This work will have a broader impact on
scientists' ability to determine how the information stored in DNA is
productively interpreted, which is a process common to all cells. It is having
further impact on the education of the next generation of scientists, both
undergraduate and graduate students, capable of recognizing and addressing
scientific issues relevant for human health. Furthermore, Professor Reich and
his students actively engage in activities aimed at explaining to broad
audiences how science works and what benefits science brings to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins that act on DNA are responsible for the
vast majority of the functions of DNA. The overarching goal of this proposal is
to provide a deeper understanding of one such protein, the bacterial DNA adenine
methyltransferase (Dam, modifies 5'-GATC-3'). The ability of Dam and related
enzymes to carry out multiple cycles of catalysis (processive catalysis) is
critical to their biological roles. Yet, current models of processive catalysis
are based largely on enzymes faced with entirely different biological challenges
and do not account for the characteristics of these enzymes. For example, DNA
methyltransferases efficiently modify multiple recognition sites with highly
variable intersite distances, and this processivity is modulated by interacting
proteins and DNA sequences that flank the target sites. The aims of the research
are to investigate the mechanism, regulation, and in vivo importance of
processive catalysis by Dam. Several strategies will be pursued to address
broadly relevant and unanswered questions of how Dam and other proteins act
processively with DNA substrates over intersite distances beyond the ones
predicted by conventional models, how some proteins, such as Dam, rely on intra-
segment transfer to efficiently move large distances, and what is the mechanism
whereby the monomeric Dam modifies both strands of DNA without leaving the DNA.