* 1413864
* EAGER: Council for Big Data, Ethics, and Society
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2014,09/30/2016
* danah boyd, Data & Society Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,840.00

Big data are changing the ways in which individuals are tracked and the
corresponding ways in which science must respond. Data uses run the gamut from
public health modeling to personalization of online content to potentially
discriminatory practices. Big data involve not just using new tools to get
better answers but also new social, cultural and ethical issues. This award
establishes a model for dealing with the ethical, social and legal impacts of
big data projects from their outset, with an eye to developing next generation
protocols to cover these kinds of impacts. A multidisciplinary council will be
established to engage with and complement discussions already underway in
mathematics, the sciences, engineering, and computer science. The goal of the
Council will be to address issues such as security, privacy, equality, and
access in order to help guard against the repetition of earlier mistakes and
inadequate preparation. Through public commentary, events, white papers, and
direct engagement with data analytics projects, the Council will develop
frameworks to help researchers, practitioners, and the public understand the
social, ethical, legal, and policy issues that underpin big data
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functionally, the goal will be to help guard
against the repetition of known mistakes and inadequate preparation by working
across domains and disciplines involved in big data projects. In the process,
those working on this project will develop new and powerful paradigms for
identifying and understanding leading edge social, political, ethical, and legal
issues. Both the research outputs and the coordinated network will help inform
the design of scientific projects. Furthermore, the public-oriented nature and
accessible outputs of this project will provide input for public discussions
surrounding the big data phenomena by engaging with journalists, educators, and
public policy makers. This project will create an influential community of
thought leaders that can help shape the understanding of the complexities of the
big data and also provide engagement for young scientists.