* 1413044
* Synthetic Genetic Regulatory Networks to Study Emergent Properties of Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Chase Beisel, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 797,991.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in the CBET, uses
synthetic biology to address the properties of gene networks. Regulation of gene
expression is crucial in many areas of biology, including differentiation, stem
cell biology, and proper maintenance of tissues. To ensure proper gene
expression, multiple genes regulate each other in a complex web of interactions
called gene regulatory networks. One approach to understanding the function of a
gene regulatory network is to try to construct that network using synthetic
circuits, and then directly examine how the construction of the synthetic
network impacts the stability and robustness of gene expression. In this
project, investigators explore these concepts of stability and robustness, as
well as sharpness in patterns of gene expression in the model organism,
Drosophila melanogaster (the fruit fly). In order to create synthetic circuits
in the fruit fly, the investigators will first develop new synthetic biology
tools for controlling gene expression in a complex organism, such that these
synthetic gene regulatory networks can be created. This work should lead to both
new tools in synthetic biology for complex organisms as well as new
understanding of gene regulatory network properties associated with pattern
formation in the fruit fly. The investigators will also work with Science House,
a North Carolina State University organization that oversees K-12 outreach to
engage both high school students and teachers in the use of engineering
principles in the study of biology, with a goal of enhancing participant?s
appreciation and comfort with the use of quantitative tools in the study of
biology.

Technical description: Gene regulatory networks (GRNs), complex webs of genetic
interactions, are hypothesized to explain emergent properties of developing
tissues, such as the robustness and sharpness of gene expression. However,
hypotheses of how these properties emerge from specific GRN motifs are difficult
to verify, partly due to the high degree of complexity found in native GRNs. To
overcome this difficulty, an alternative approach is proposed in which simpler,
synthetic GRNs are designed to directly test these hypotheses. In this project,
investigators will first develop tunable gene expression tools in Drosophila,
including the use of ribozymes and other RNA expression control devices, as well
as predictive tools for the design of such expression control devices. They will
then investigate the robustness of gene expression when controlled by a negative
feedback motif, as well as the sharpness of gene expression when controlled by a
mutual repression motif. Previous studies of emergent properties of GRNs have
produced as-yet untested hypotheses from computational models. This work will
first develop standardized tools to tune gene expression levels in Drosophila,
with expected applicability to other multicellular model organisms. The work
will also test how specific GRN motifs result in the desired emergent properties
of robustness and sharpness of gene expression boundaries. The work has broad
applicability due to its focus on network motifs rather than specific systems or
signaling pathways.