* 1413319
* Where are the Broad Absorption Line Outflows Situated and How Important are they to Active Galactic Nuclei Feedback?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Nahum Arav, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 497,034.00

Quasars are the most luminous objects in the universe. The active galactic
nucleus (AGN) that is the quasar's powerhouse can outshine its entire host
galaxy. In the more than fifty years since their discovery, a picture has
emerged of a quasar as a supermassive black hole residing at or near the center
of a large galaxy. Interstellar gas in the galaxy, perhaps the residue of stars
disrupted by tidal forces as they orbit close to the black hole, falls into the
black hole and in doing so is heated to very high temperatures and emits copious
radiation over a wide range of wavelengths. Along with the gas inflow, it is
also clear that quasars drive gas out of the nuclear region. This is evidenced
by jets of material emitted by a minority of quasars but also by an outflow seen
in absorption in the spectra of many quasars. These objects are called broad
absorption line quasars or BAL quasars in reference to the broad spectral
features due to mildly-ionized atomic species seen in their ultraviolet spectra.
Long thought to be oddities, it is becoming clear that many or most quasars
demonstrate such spectral features when viewed along certain lines of sight. An
outstanding question is how the BAL outflow is generated. Is it gas that is
launched from very near the black hole or is its genesis from somewhere outside
of the nuclear region? The answer is important because, depending on its
strength, the BAL wind can affect the properties of the host galaxy through so-
called quasar feedback. This project will use detailed spectral analysis and
imaging of a number of BAL quasars to better determine where the BAL gas
originates and what its properties are. The project will engage a number of
undergraduate researchers many of whom are women or underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the most important parameter to be
determined for broad absorption line outflows is their distance from the central
source (R). A definitive answer will go a long way to: (a) determine whether
these outflows are energetic enough to generate the sought after "quasar mode
feedback," which is suggested by theorists to be a key mechanism for influencing
the assembly history of galaxies and clusters; (b) establish the role of the
outflows in the connection between the supermassive black hole and the host
galaxy; (c) allow for realistic modeling of the outflow's origin and
acceleration. Most AGN researchers and especially dynamical modelers, favor a
picture where BAL outflows are launched from the AGN accretion disc and are
observed in its vicinity (R~0.01-0.1 pc). However, in a recent series of papers
the principal investigator's team measured R to more than 20 outflow components
in 10 individual quasars and in every case found R to be between 100-10,000
parsecs. The large difference between the previously assumed and measured R has
dramatic consequences since the outflow's mass flux and kinetic luminosity are
linearly dependent on R. A prominent result was the team's finding of the most
energetic quasar outflow measured to date, with ample kinetic luminosity to be a
major contributor to AGN feedback. Therefore, if these large R flows are
representative of most BAL outflows, they can supply the theoretically desired
quasar mode feedback. This project will advance this unique observational and
modeling program by observing a heterogeneous set of objects, to analyzing
samples in well-designed surveys, acquiring direct imaging spectroscopy of these
outflows, and extracting R from rich new data sets of BAL variability. The
result should definitively assess whether BAL winds can be a dominant agent of
AGN feedback.