* 1413768
* RUI Collaboration: Designing Ultra-cold Atom Circuits in Quasi-2D Confinement
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2018
* Mark Edwards, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 11/30/2018
* USD 155,000.00

This theoretical research program, to be performed by a collaboration between
Dr. Mark Edwards of Georgia Southern University and Dr. Charles W. Clark of the
Joint Quantum Institute (JQI), an institute run jointly by the University of
Maryland and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), will be
devoted to the design and study of new "atom circuits" for the purpose of
developing an ultra-precise rotation sensor and for gaining a greater
fundamental understanding of quantum matter at ultra-cold temperatures. An "atom
circuit" is an atomic gas confined by laser light and held at temperatures just
a few billionths of a degree above absolute zero. Gases of identical atoms
confined at such low temperatures cause the constituent atoms to exhibit their
wave-like quantum nature and the gas can form a state called a "Bose-Einstein
condensate" (BEC). A BEC is a system of identical atoms all of whose matter-wave
shapes are the same. Bose-Einstein-condensed gases can be manipulated by the
confining laser light into arbitrary shapes such as rings and the atoms can be
made to flow around circuits within the confinement. Such systems are called
"atom circuits". These circuits have the potential to be at the heart of quantum
devices that can sense rotations and magnetic and gravitational fields in an
ultra-precise way. This research program will design new atom circuits and
develop theoretical tools for characterizing and probing them. This work will
performed in close collaboration with experimental researchers at
JQI/NIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is designed to enable two
talented Georgia Southern University undergraduate physics majors to gain
cutting-edge research experience in the area of ultra-cold atom theory thus
advancing discovery while promoting learning. Edwards and the Georgia Southern
students will communicate with both the JQI research group headed by Charles
Clark and with members of the Laser Cooling and Trapping group at NIST, headed
by Gretchen Campbell, using Google Hangout. Georgia Southern students will
attend the weekly Quantum Information/Bose-Einstein meetings at NIST via the
internet. The project will enhance the infrastructure for research and education
by maintaining an established collaboration among an undergraduate institution
(GA Southern), a national laboratory (NIST), and a major research university
(University of Maryland). Broad dissemination to enhance scientific and
technological understanding will be accomplished by bringing distinguished
scientists to the Georgia Southern University campus to present colloquia and by
developing visualization capabilities with the new digital projection system in
the Georgia Southern Planetarium. Finally, new atom-circuits have the potential
to be at the heart of a new generation of practical devices that will find
applications in navigation, metrology, geodesy, and studies of the fundamental
properties of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration will conduct a
theoretical exploration of various designs of atom circuits formed by confining
a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) gas in an optical potential consisting of a
horizontally oriented red-detuned light sheet and an arbitrary two-dimensional
potential within this plane created by various red- and blue-detuned laser
beams. Advances in optical trapping technology have enabled the creation of
ultra-cold atom systems strongly confined in the vertical direction while being
subject to an arbitrary potential in the horizontal plane. New atom-circuit
potentials will be devised and studied. Studies of these systems will include
(1) circuit behavior, (2) development of simple models of circuit operation
analogous to Kirchhoff's rules for electronic circuits, (3) theoretical
development of possible experimental probes to measure parameters appearing in
these simple models, (4) effects of the environment, such as finite temperature,
on circuit operation. The major tools that will be developed will be the
Zaremba-Nikuni-Griffin (ZNG) theory in the laboratory and rotating frame. The
ZNG theory treats the system as a combination of a BEC and a thermal cloud that
can be weakly perturbed. The result is a finite-temperature, non-equilibrium
system.