* 1413664
* An Empirical Examination of the Evolution of Innovation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Eric Hayden, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,166.00

This research will study how gradual mutation accumulation can bring about
sudden and dramatic changes to a simple genetic system. We are studying a
ribonucleic acid (RNA) that can propagate genetically, but which also is able to
act as an RNA enzyme, to chemically convert (cut or splice) other RNA fragments.
The form that is most active in RNA cutting and the form that is most active in
RNA splicing are genetically and chemically similar; they are separated by less
than 20 mutations. We will study the biochemical properties of all the
intermediary forms to see how activity of an RNA enzyme changes into its
opposite. In some of the non-scientific critique of the evolutionary concepts,
the very existence of such sudden changes in evolution have been cast into
doubt, and we expect that the dissemination of the results of this research will
help facilitate a discussion of how scientific experiments can address difficult
questions in evolutionary biology. This research will bring together a graduate
trainee in biomolecular sciences and a computational biologist, and these
researchers will also participate in this univeristy's programs that are aimed
at broadening the participation of groups underrepresented in science,
mathematics, engineering and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of
this research will reconstruct and evaluate the evolutionary pathways between
two RNA molecules with two distinct structures and functions. RNA molecules are
chosen because they allow analysis of both mutational changes and their
functional consequences in high-throughput using modern sequencing technology.
About one million intermediate forms between these two starting molecules will
be constructed in the lab. Each of these intermediate sequences will be tested
for their ability to perform each of the two functions. The results will be used
to construct two ?fitness landscapes? that overlap. All possible pathways
between peaks within and between the two landscapes will be explored
computationally to predict how evolution could be aided or hindered by the
structure of these landscapes, and to determine under what scenarios this type
of evolutionary innovation is possible.