* 1413613
* The Interplay Between Membrane Structure and Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Ka Yee Lee, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,148,247.00

In this research project, the PI will establish a comprehensive paradigm for
understanding the mechanisms by which membrane-binding peptides and proteins
distinguish one membrane from another. This is a fundamentally important
question in biology and will be explored in the context of immune response,
focusing on two canonical examples of immune targeting of membranes during
immune response. This paradigm will advance knowledge in multiple disciplines by
providing a foundation for understanding how proteins selectively recognize
membrane targets. The project will also form a union between a multitude of
experimental techniques and thereby contribute to many scientific fields
including, but not limited to, molecular immunology, membrane biophysics, and
interfacial x-ray and neutron scattering.The proposed research activities will
provide training opportunities in a highly interdisciplinary area, and will help
train the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists. The PI will further
enhance the content of a graduate course in membrane biophysics, as well as the
curriculum development of a new interdisciplinary degree-granting program in
Biophysical Sciences. Apart from graduate students and postdocs, research
opportunities will be extended to qualified high school, undergraduate, summer
research as well as international exchange students. The PI has spearheaded and
will continue to run a 7-week summer research program, placing 14 rising high
school seniors from the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools in laboratories
across the Biological and Physical Sciences Divisions at the University of
Chicago. It is the hope that an early exposure to research can help entice these
young students to consider a career in science. The PI will continue to host
undergraduate and REU student for research in the laboratory. Science,
especially the concept of interdisciplinary science, will be brought to school
children through outreach activities, including participating in 'Physics with a
Bang!', and performing science demonstrations to lower school students. The PI
is committed to increasing the representation of women in academic science.
Efforts will be made to address the opportunities for women in academic science
through the PI's work with the Provost Office and her involvement in the Women
in Physical Sciences Division Committee at the University of Chicago as well as
the Chicago Women in STEM organization in the Greater Chicago
Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the membrane bilayer has evolved
from a simple mosaic system to one with a complicated heteregeneous lateral
structure. The elucidation of how different lipids species within a membrane
interact with one another, and how these interactions give rise to the defining
properties of lipid membranes has provided fundamental insight into the
organization and structure of lipid membranes. The project leverages expertise
in the characterization of membrane systems, using model membrane systems and
exploiting a suite of biophysical techniques (surface-pressure measurements,
optical microscopy, fluorescence binding assays, atomic force microscopy, x-ray
and neutron scattering) to provide new perspectives on two fundamental and
reciprocally related questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) How do membrane properties
influence interactions with membrane targeting peptides and
proteins?&lt;br/&gt;(2) How does the interaction of peptides and proteins alter
the properties of a given membrane?&lt;br/&gt;The project specifically addresses
these central questions in the context of immune response, focusing on two
canonical examples of immune targeting of membranes during immune response: the
disruption of pathogenic membranes by antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and the
recognition of phosphatidylserine (PS) lipids exposed on the extracellular
leaflet of host cells as an effector of immune regulation. Both AMPs and
peripheral PS membrane binding proteins have been hypothesized to employ
sensitivity to differences in membrane properties to mediate their differential
recognition properties. Thus the primary focus of this project is to first
establish the sensitivities of a representative AMP (protegrin-1) and PS
receptor family (T-cell Immunoglobulin and Mucin-containting or TIM) to
fundamental membrane properties. Additionally, the project also aims to
reciprocally understand how the interactions of these peptides and proteins
alter the underlying membrane properties.