* 1413495
* Collaborative Research: Continuation of the XENON Dark Matter Search at LNGS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Elena Aprile, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,562,300.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics with profound implications for our view of the
Universe. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting
Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after the Big Bang. If
WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our galaxy may be detectable
via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located deep underground to help
reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays.

The identification of Dark Matter (DM) poses a challenge that is being addressed
with a variety of complementary approaches and technologies. The direct search
for DM with the XENON project at the Gran Sasso laboratory promises an extremely
cost-efficient approach to cover vast regions of expected DM parameter space.
This award will enable the US groups in XENON to participate in the operations
and data analysis of XENON100 well into 2015 when the start of the scientific
program with XENON1T is expected. With a strong presence at Gran Sasso, the US
groups will maintain a leading role in the commissioning and operation of
XENON1T.

Broader Impacts: A number of students as well as post-doctoral researchers are
involved in the XENON project at universities across the US. They are exposed to
a variety of subjects in fundamental physics and cosmology, and trained in the
development and application of state-of-the-art technologies, preparing them to
become future leaders in the field. The instrumentation and techniques used in
XENON are relevant to a wide range of applications, from areas in homeland
security and medical imaging, to the analysis and statistical treatment of large
data sets.