* 1413317
* The Road to the Virgo Cluster: The DECam/IRAC Galaxy Environment Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Casey Papovich, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 246,378.00

This is a proposal to move forward our understanding of the variety of processes
that are responsible for observed galaxy properties, and how these vary with
galaxy environment, e.g. galaxies that have few neighbors versus galaxies that
are crowded closely together. This is important to help scientists to
distinguish the relative importance of properties that contribute to the growth
of galaxies, including environment as mentioned above, the amount and type of
stars being formed in galaxies, and how the visible matter in galaxies interacts
with the dark matter associated with them. The proposers will do a large survey
of galaxies and their environments at distances that correspond to when the
Universe was young, but mature enough that clusters of galaxies had formed and
some galaxies had formed nearly all their stars. It is important to look at
galaxies at this epoch, as that is when it is expected that environmental
effects are strong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes the development and
implementation of several public outreach and curricular activities, to be
carried out both by him and the supported postdoc. The PI is at an institution
which has a significant population of under-represented minorities. The proposed
integration of the project data into a lab for astronomy students is a great
example of bringing research into the classroom, and it provides an opportunity
for the postdoc to acquire experience in education and outreach. The PI also
plans monthly public lectures for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal describes the first systematic survey of galaxy environment at
z=0.8-1.5. The survey will combine deep optical imaging from 0.3-1 micron with
deep near-IR imaging from 3-5 micron over an area more than 15 times that of the
COSMOS survey. In this way, the new survey will open the redshift z=0.8-1.5
universe in a way that the Sloan Digital Sky Survey has opened the local
universe at z=0.1. The team will measure the relation between galaxy stellar
masses/halo masses and its dependence on environment and address the following
questions. When do galaxy scaling laws appear and how do these depend on
environment? What are the physical mechanisms that transform galaxies to red
sequence galaxies with low mass-specific star-formation rates? How do these
mechanisms depend on galaxy mass, environment, and redshift?