* 1413614
* Theoretical Insights into Chemical Functionalization of Carbon Nanotubes: from Chirality Separation to Photoexcited Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Dmitri Kilin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,433.00

Svetlana V Kilina (North Dakota State University Fargo), Dmitri S Kilin
(University of South Dakota) and Andrei Kryjevski (North Dakota State University
Fargo) are supported in an award co-funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program, the Office of the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods (CTMC) program. The project is to use computational
techniques to investigate carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which are small tubes with
carbon connected together. Series of carbon-carbon bonds may spiral around the
axis of the tube, and different spiraling rates indicate different types of
CNTs. The tubes can be decorated with attachments of small organic molecules or
polymers (functionalization), and the choices of which attachments and where can
be customized so as to design, for example, what light comes out and how intense
it is when an outside light shines on a CNT. Another goal being pursued is to
use computations to optimize the molecular decoration for each type of CNT so
that chemical processes may be used to separate sticky bundles of CNTs with
different rates of spiral, which is the usual way CNTs are produced. Having them
separated is ideal for carrying out experiments on CNTs, since experiments can
then provide much more discriminating information. The computations for the
decorated or functionalized CNTs use both quantum and classical mechanics to
interpret and predict properties relevant to experiments. This research aims to
facilitate control over the processes of solar energy capture and conversion in
functionalized CNTs at the fundamental level, and, thus, will be relevant to
chemistry, materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functionalization of CNTs by small organic
surfactants and conjugated polymers can improve chemical control of their
optoelectronic and transport properties as well as offer promise in separation
techniques for obtaining CNT samples with similar chiralities. The objective of
this research is a systematic theoretical investigation of morphology,
electronic structure, and excited state dynamics of CNTs functionalized by
different types of conjugated oligomers and polymers. Using computational
modeling, the investigators are working to understand fundamental physical
processes occurring at organic-inorganic interfaces and governing the operation
of CNT-based optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices such as exciton relaxation
and recombination, charge transfer, and creation of several excitons from one
absorbed photon (carrier multiplication). Density functional theory (DFT) and
time dependent DFT (TDDFT) are being used for computing accurate electronic
structure and optical response of polymer-CNT hybrids. Furthermore, quantum-
classical non-adiabatic dynamics methods are being used to model phonon-mediated
dynamics including charge and energy transfer in these systems. A novel approach
to the calculation of quantum efficiency, the number of excitons generated by a
photon, based on DFT augmented by the many body perturbation theory technique of
quantum field theory is being applied to functionalized CNTs. Calculations of a
variety of spectroscopic observables permit direct comparison and validation
with ultrafast laser spectroscopic data (by other lasboratories) probing the
fundamental electronic dynamics in functionalized CNTs. Just as importantly,
these calculations provide explicit interpretations and predictions of the key
phenomena occurring in the experimental measurements.