* 1413660
* RUI: Following the Variability - A Key to the Properties and Evolution of Post-AGB Stars and Proto-Planetary Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2022
* Bruce Hrivnak, Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 273,700.00

Over billions of years, stars similar to our sun evolve to form red giants that
eventually eject their outer shells, forming planetary nebulae (PNe). Planetary
nebulae play an important role in the chemical evolution of the galaxy by
returning material created within stars to create brand-new stars. The
transition from red giant to planetary nebula is an important but relatively
short-lived stage of stellar evolution, lasting only a few hundred thousand
years. The goal of this proposal is to study the basic physical properties of
objects in this transition phase that are referred to as proto-planetary nebulae
(PPNe). This project will use a variety of observations and techniques to carry
out this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PPNe represent intermediate mass objects
in the late stages of stellar evolution that are transitioning from Asymptotic
Giant Branch (AGB) stars to PNe. The proposal will continue and extend an
existing program of photometric and radial velocity measurements of post-AGB
stars and PPNe within our own galaxy and in the nearby Large and Small
Magellanic Cloud galaxies. The combination of photometric light curves, color
measurements, and radial velocities will permit the direct determination of
fundamental parameters like stellar radius and luminosity. In addition, stellar
pulsation models will be used to constrain the mass and luminosity of the PPNe.
Finally, the program will investigate the degree of binarity in PPNe and its
effect on the shaping of PNe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project will provide numerous and wide-ranging
opportunities for the training of new scientists, the education of liberal arts
students, and the science infrastructure at the PI's institution. The project
will communicate its results to the public through open houses held at the
observatory on the campus of the PI's home institution. The PI will continue to
give community and professional lectures and will incorporate the results of the
research into those presentations.