* 1413060
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Infinite-Dimensional and Stochastic Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2019
* Peter Bates, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2019
* USD 215,000.00

While many physical, biological, climatological, and financial processes appear
to be subject to random or stochastic forces, there are also coherent structures
underlying these processes that give some measure of predictability. This
project is laying the groundwork both for the determination of these hidden
structures and for analyzing specific situations arising in several
applications. Among these is the embryonic development of the wing of a fruit
fly and its newly discovered relation to current through potassium channels in
the cell membrane. Part of this project is to develop and use sophisticated
mathematical techniques to understand that ionic current. The fruit fly model
has implications for mammalian development and may lead to an understanding of
the cause of some serious birth defects. Applications of the abstract
mathematical investigations also include understanding of other dynamical
systems subject to random perturbations, including the density distribution in
highly excited plasmas or the fine structure of an alloy and how defects are
distributed and evolve in time.

This project builds upon the past work of the principal investigators and others
to establish the existence of coherent structures embedded in the phase space of
complex dynamical systems, both finite- and infinite-dimensional and both
deterministic or subject to random forcing. The fundamental and abstract theory
to be developed during the course of the project lies behind concrete and
observed phenomena in the physical and biological sciences, particularly at the
molecular, microscopic, or nano-scale. Infinite-dimensional dynamical systems
are required to represent the temporal and spatial fluctuations of quantities
subject to physical laws or biochemical processes, such as the distribution of
bone morphogenic protein in a developing embryonic fly wing, the current through
an ion channel in a cell membrane, the density of a relativistic plasma, or the
motion of microscopic defects in an alloy, to name just a few of the systems
considered in this project. Furthermore, as complex as these may be, stochastic
perturbations must be considered due to thermal or other fluctuations in the
environment and imprecise measurement of quantities at small scales. While one
cannot hope to give exact representations of all states subject to complex
spatial and temporal interaction, one can sometimes glean information due to the
presence of robust, but possibly hidden, structures such as invariant manifolds
and their invariant foliations whose existence is implied by the laws governing
the processes under investigation. The goals of this project are to discover the
conditions under which such structures exist, even when stochastically forced,
and to examine the implications in the particular physical and biological
systems underlying the equations.