* 1413096
* Physical Chemistry of Macromolecules as Probed by High Resolution Solid State NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Kurt Zilm, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 512,545.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Chemistry Division supports
Professor Kurt Zilm of Yale University to develop new nuclear magnetic resonance
methods for investigation of the chemistry, dynamics and structures of
biomolecules. The research will use relaxation methods to identify how structure
is related to the dispersion in internal protein and water motions, and to
obtain distances in biologically relevant macromolecular complexes. To extend
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance to more complex and size limited samples,
new instruments will be developed with 1 to 2 orders of magnitude higher
specific sensitivity. These will combine paramagnetic condensed acquisition with
very fast cryogenic magic angle sample spinning, as well as microliter sample
size dynamic nuclear polarization hardware. When developed, these capabilities
will be applied to characterize mutant visual pigments and functionally distinct
isoforms of prion protein oligomers. Currently, these are samples where
obtaining nuclear magnetic resonance data is impractical on sub-microliter
samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a well-known
diagnostic tool in medicine that uses nuclear spin information, often in water,
to distinguish different types of tissue in the body. The study of nuclear spin
properties of water in proteins is directly related to understanding and
improving contrast in MRI technology. This research involves fundamental studies
of the distribution of water in proteins, knowledge from which will help improve
the sensitivity and the spatial resolution of MRI experiments. The research
program also encourages under-represented minorities to enter science careers
through involvement in the public education program "Science on Saturdays," a
series of scientific lectures and hands-on demonstrations attended by up to 300
members of the public at a time.