* 1413978
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research:Programmable Inter-domain Observation and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,676,122.00

The Internet is an essential part of modern society, playing a vital role in a
wide range of educational, commercial, military, and social activities. However,
network operators today have a limited ability to observe and control the paths
used to carry traffic across the Internet. For example, although it is often
beneficial for several networks to cooperate?e.g., a content provider and
cellular network jointly picking the best paths from content to
customers?existing Internet routing protocols make it difficult to share
information or collaborate to select routes. These limitations contribute to a
host of problems, including decreased path stability, degraded performance, and
service outages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a system called
IN-CONTROL that aggregates information from participating networks and active
measurements into an inter-domain network information base (iNIB). The iNIB
presents operators with a unified interface for making observations about global
forwarding paths and a rich control interface for issuing requests to steer
traffic along preferred paths. To build the iNIB, the project is focusing on the
following tasks: (i) developing provenance-based techniques to obtain reliable
results from computations performed over potentially-untrustworthy data (ii)
designing deployable mechanisms for observing and controlling Internet
forwarding paths, and (iii) building a scalable implementation that incorporates
optimizations to reduce resource demands for answering iNIB queries. The
intellectual merit of this research lies in developing reliable abstractions for
observing and controlling Internet forwarding paths and a scalable
implementation that can be readily deployed on the current Internet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include reducing the fragility of the
Internet, and broadening the interdisciplinary community of researchers working
on problems related to inter-domain networking. This project also provides
research experiences for undergraduate students and members of under-represented
groups.