* 1413395
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Neuroendocrine & Neurobiological Bases of Complex Social Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,05/31/2018
* James Rilling, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 29,836.00

Recent scientific advances in our understanding of the forces shaping social
behavior have been driven by growing appreciation of the influence of hormones,
especially the neuropeptides oxytocin (OXT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP).
These hormones are being implicated as essential mechanisms in shaping a range
of affiliative and aggressive social relationships and behavior, including pair-
bonding, territoriality, parenting, and cooperation. Fully comprehensive
understanding of how these hormones function could provide not only knowledge of
the organization of social life, but also therapeutic benefits to organisms,
including humans, with social impairments. Research into oxytocin and
vasopressin utilizing rodent models has begun to suggest potential treatments
for several human conditions, including autism spectrum disorders, social
anxiety, and schizophrenia. While these studies provide essential data on the
roles of hormones such as OXT and AVP, they are limited by the fact that they
focus on animals with social systems characterized by less complexity and
richness, relative to those of our species. With the goal of more thoroughly
investigating the roles that these hormones play in mediating complex social
behavior, this dissertation research by doctoral student Daniel Coppeto (under
the supervision of Dr. James Rilling, Emory University) will utilize
anthropological and neuroscientific approaches to linking hormones and social
behavior in two primates with complex, yet differing social systems.

This project will advance the study of how oxytocin and vasopressin mediate
complex social relationships by investigating the roles that these hormones play
in the social lives of two types of baboons with vastly differing societies, the
hamadryas and the anubis baboon. Like humans, baboons display a range of
sociality and intricate social structures, and as such, present a unique
opportunity to employ an animal model with enhanced relevance to understanding
the phenomenon in our own species. To test the hypothesis that these contrasting
societies can be understood through assessing the roles of oxytocin and
vasopressin, this project will first collect biological samples to measure
oxytocin and vasopressin levels utilizing enzyme immunoassays, comparing these
between the two subspecies. By then linking the hormonal data to observations of
social behavior of the subjects within social groups of each subspecies, the
project will provide a highly contextualized understanding of how OXT and AVP
mold sociality. These will be complemented through neurobiological examination
of how oxytocin and vasopressin receptors are distributed in the brain, as
differences in the pattern of brain hormone receptors are a common avenue by
which these hormones may affect behavior.

The results of this research will have impacts across several dimensions, from
basic science and education, to potential therapeutic translation. While this
project will show how oxytocin and vasopressin are integral to shaping primate
societies, it also will demonstrate in appropriate animal models how these
forces are capable of influencing our own behavior. Likewise, an analysis of how
these hormones operate in primates will provide insight into how they can
potentially be refined for usage in therapy for a range of human social
disorders.