* 1413185
* A Theory of Muscle Contraction Based on Molecular Measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Sam Walcott, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2019
* USD 239,700.00

Muscle contraction is a fundamental biological process. The same molecular
machinery that powers voluntary movement, heart contraction and gastric motility
is responsible for diverse cellular processes, from cell motility to cell
division. A detailed understanding of this process could revolutionize, among
other things, prosthetic design and treatments for heart disease and cancer.
However, understanding muscle contraction is difficult because it spans vastly
different size scales. Contraction starts with molecular interactions that cause
the relative sliding of two sets of protein filaments. This sliding causes
subcellular, cellular and macroscopic structures to contract. Over the past
hundred years, measurements have been made at each scale, from classical studies
of whole muscle to recent single molecule experiments. Despite this wealth of
data, there is no widely accepted theory of muscle contraction suitable for,
say, prediction of locomotor strategies or understanding how molecular defects
lead to heart disease. The long-term goal of this research is to develop a
quantitative description of whole muscle, single cells and single molecules.
Accomplishing this goal requires the development of 1) models that accurately
describe molecular measurements; 2) methods to efficiently simulate these
models; and 3) techniques to bridge size scales. This project focuses largely on
the first two requirements. These will be achieved through three specific aims,
each to be completed in collaboration with an experimental lab. The
investigators use Monte-Carlo simulations, numerical solution of partial and
ordinary differential equations (PDEs and ODEs, respectively) and analytic
solution approximations to develop and validate 1) an integro-PDE model of
molecular interactions; 2) an ODE model of activation; and 3) an integro-PDE
model of myosin binding protein c. Each step in model development will be tested
and refined by quantitative comparisons to experiments. The final result of the
project will be a rigorous, experimentally validated molecular model of muscle,
which will not only be a critical step toward a bottom-up model of muscle
contraction, but will also represent an important contribution to muscle
biophysics. Further, the mathematical techniques and equations used to develop
this theory have applications beyond muscle contraction, applying more generally
to geometrically constrained chemical reactions that occur in a variety of
systems (e.g. adhesion of cells to surfaces, bundling of cytoskeletal filaments
and frictional sliding).