* 1413001
* Physics, cosmology, and exoplanetary science with the white dwarf stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* James Clemens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2018
* USD 474,158.00

White dwarfs stars are the remnants of stars like the sun that form after their
nuclear furnace has gone out. There are billions of them in our galaxy and most
are not doing anything interesting besides cooling off. However, some of them
orbit in close binary (double-star) systems in which the stars eventually spiral
together causing massive explosions, others pulverize comets and asteroids left
over from their planetary systems, and still others have "starquakes" that let
us conduct seismology of their interiors. This project will study interesting
examples of white dwarfs to learn about the supernova explosions that
astronomers use to measure distances, the composition and configuration of
exoplanetary systems, and the physics of material that is 10 million times
denser than lead and cannot be produced or studied in any terrestrial
laboratory. This program will also facilitate student training in instrument
development and provide a new observational capability for the astronomical
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team of graduate students will
carry out 3 separate investigations using white dwarfs as tools to study (1)
whether hot DQ white dwarfs result from mergers of two sub-Chandrasekhar mass
white dwarfs, (2) whether metal-rich white dwarfs with circumstellar dust are
accreting planetary material, and (3) the properties of ZZ Ceti stars. The
common thread is observations to be obtained using the SOAR telescope with the
Goodman Spectrograph, which was built by the PI. With partial support from this
award, the PI will build a red-channel for the spectrograph, which is of great
interest to the observational community and which will further enable the three
key observational programs.