* 1413254
* Novel Biosensors for Monitoring Nitrogen Uptake at the Cellular Level for Improving Fertilizer Utilization by Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Wolf Frommer, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,446,347.00

Nitrogen (N) is a key essential nutrient for plants. Crop yield depends
critically on massive nitrogen fertilizer input. The annual production of 15
million tons of N-fertilizer needed currently consumes ~1% of the world's annual
energy production. However, plants absorb only a fraction of the applied
fertilizer and the rest leaches into the groundwater, pollutes the environment
and damages drinking water supplies. Therefore, increased efficiency of nitrogen
uptake and use by crop plants is desirable on a variety of levels. To promote
this increase in efficiency, we need a better understanding of the cellular
basis of N acquisition and distribution from roots to the rest of the plant.
However, we do not understand exactly where, when and how roots acquire N or how
they control uptake and distribution in the plant. A key impediment to this
understanding is the lack of suitable technologies, with sufficient spatial and
temporal resolution, for monitoring N acquisition and its regulation. Dr.
Frommer's lab at the Carnegie Institution for Science recently pioneered the
engineering of novel tools that monitor the activity of key proteins responsible
for moving nitrogen from the soil into the roots. This project will improve
these new tools, implement them in plants, and use them to directly monitor N
acquisition. The project will also integrate knowledge from this and other
publicly available plant biology resources to generate a spatio-temporal map of
N-acquisition in roots under different N regimes. This project will also train
the next generation of scientists. Specifically, postdoctoral scholars and
graduate students will be trained in engineering and implementation of activity
probes with the goal of improving the ability of plant roots to acquire
fertilizers, thus reducing fertilizer use. Undergraduate and high school
students will work with experienced scientists to develop a series of databases
providing information on fertilizers, nutrition, as well as molecular detail on
how plants acquire N. These resources will be available to scientists and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Frommer lab recently succeeded in engineering
the key transporters for N-acquisition from the reference plant Arabidopsis as
fluorescent biosensors that have the potential to report transporter activity
and thus regulation of N uptake and distribution with high temporal and spatial
resolution. Major aims of this project are to: (1) Engineer and optimize the
fluorescent activity sensors for ammonium, nitrate and oligopeptide
transporters, gain insights into their mechanism and use them for structure-
function analyses; (2) Deploy the fluorescent sensors to characterize regulatory
proteins that interact with N transporters to gain insights into their
regulation by making use of candidates identified in a novel resource, the MIND
membrane protein interactome database; (3) Implement the sensors in wild type
and mutant plants and measure transport activity in individual cells of intact
roots using quantitative fluorescence imaging technology; (4) Engineer
fluorescent sensors for nitrogen forms, i.e. nitrate, ammonium, glutamate,
glutamine and dipeptides and deploy them in plants to monitor the dynamics of
the different nitrogen forms in vivo; (5) Integrate novel information gained in
this project with that from public resources to create a cellular resolution
root map of nitrogen uptake and its regulation (to be built by students). The
project makes use of cutting edge technologies (fluorescent sensors,
quantitative imaging, microfluidic devices, cell specific expression resources)
to obtain an integrated quantitative view of the mechanisms of N acquisition in
roots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Cluster in the MCB Division and the Physiological and
Structural Systems Cluster in the IOS Division.