* 1413532
* Evolutionary dynamics of collateral gene silencing by piRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Justin Blumenstiel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 07/31/2019
* USD 673,290.00

Transposable elements (TE) are DNA sequences that can change their position in
the genome and thereby produce a variety of harmful mutations. Animals,
including fruit flies, have evolved a defense mechanism to guard against TE
movement whereby small RNAs, called piRNAs, can destroy essential RNA
intermediates produced by the TEs. Exactly how piRNAs work is not well
understood, and the overall aim of this project is to study how piRNAs
specifically target TE RNAs without destroying beneficial RNAs. The research has
the potential to provide valuable insights into prevention of harmful mutations
that could cause genetic defects or death. The project will have broader impacts
for undergraduates, graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, who will
receive training in genetics, evolution and bioinformatics. Added benefit will
derive from production of internet videos that will serve as general tools for
education about various topics in genetics and evolution.

piRNAs play a critical role in genome defense by destroying TE RNAs. This
research will determine how the piRNA defense mechanism is constrained by the
harm that occurs when piRNAs mistakenly target RNAs from normal genes and thus
result in off-target, or collateral, gene silencing. Using different species of
Drosophila as a model, the work will test the hypothesis that species with high
TE content are more affected by these collateral effects. One series of
experiments will determine whether species with higher TE content have less
variation in expression of the piRNA machinery, increased silencing by piRNA,
and stronger maternal effects on gene expression. Other experiments, in which
piRNA expression is artificially increased, will reveal whether there is a
functional tradeoff between genome defense and off-target effects. This work
will provide important information about how the mechanisms that protect the
genome are governed by the harmful effects of collateral gene silencing, which
can be considered to be a form of "genomic autoimmunity".