* 1413429
* On Heavier Chalcogen (Se and Te) Interfacial Chemistry and Charge Transfer in Monolayer-Protected Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* YuYe Tong, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 490,000.00

Metal nanoparticles are metal particles of very small (nanometer scale)
dimensions. They possess novel chemical and physical properties that are very
different from those of large particles or bulk metals. Dr. YuYe Tong of
Georgetown University and Dr. Thomas Allison at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology conduct research to gain a better understanding of the
structural parameters that govern the properties of metal nanoparticles. The
long-term goal is to harness the novel properties of nanoparticles for practical
applications (such as electronic or optical devices, biomedical diagnosis, and
drug delivery). This project provides interdisciplinary research opportunities
to students, training them in the use of the state-of-the-art instruments for
studying nanoparticles. Through Georgetown University's partnership with the
Cesar Chavez Public Charter Schools in Southeast Washington DC, which have very
high population of students of underrepresented groups or from low-income
families, Dr. Tong participates in a project to help develop new chemistry
curricula for local charter schools. This project serves as a springboard to
attract more women and underrepresented students to STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tong and Dr. Allison explore the use of heavier
chalcogen (Se and Te) as alternative anchoring elements to the prevailingly used
sulfur for attaching organic molecular wires to metal surfaces. Using a
combination of experimental techniques and Density Functional Theory (DFT)
computations, they aim to gain a better mechanistic understanding of the metal-
chalcogenolate interfacial chemistry and its ramifications on charge
transfer/transport in single monolayer-protected nanoparticle (MPN) and MPN
assemblies. Specifically, this research entails: 1) the synthesis of different
sizes (1 to 5 nm) of nanoparticles of different metal elements (Au, Ag, Cu, Pt,
and Pd), which are protected with ligands of different organic backbones (alkyl
and aryl), alkyl chain lengths (C6, C8, and C12), and anchoring chalcogen
elements (Se and Te); 2) the characterization of the afore-synthesized MPNs by
in situ electrochemical (EC) spectroscopic (NMR/IR/Raman) techniques and ex situ
X-ray photoemission spectroscopy; and 3) comparative mechanistic investigations
of charge transfer through a single MPN and MPN assemblies using EC scanning
tunneling microscopy and traditional EC measurements.