* 1413583
* RUI: Determination and Functional Analysis of the Cyanobacterial Lipid Droplet Proteome
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Michael Summers, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2019
* USD 628,139.00

Cyanobacteria are amongst the few bacterial species that form the internal
structures known as lipid droplets, which are of interest to the biotechnology
industry. These droplets could supply material for food, fuel and the chemical
and pharmaceutical industries. These droplets increase in the cell when growth
slows, but almost nothing is known about their associated proteins, how they are
formed, or their physiological function. This study will identify the proteins
associated with these structures, and infer the function of these proteins by
altering their expression and observing the resulting effects. In addition to
assigning roles to genes with unknown function, this work will extend our
understanding of a poorly understood structure in these photosynthetic
organisms. This project will engage undergraduate and Master's level students
(including students from groups under-represented in science) in research
projects in molecular genetics, biochemistry, and bacterial physiology. In the
research laboratory, students will learn to plan and conduct experiments and to
interpret experimental data under the mentorship of the principal investigator.
In the teaching laboratory, students will conduct semester-long original
research projects designed to teach the theory and practice of molecular
biology.

The overall goal of this Research at Undergraduate Institutions project is to
understand the function and formation of cyanobacterial lipid droplets. This
will be accomplished as a result of two specific objectives. First, the proteins
associated with purified lipid droplets will be identified by mass spectrometric
analysis, and additional proteins will be targeted for study based upon their
similarity to proteins found in lipid droplets in other systems. Putative lipid
droplet associated proteins will be tagged using fluorescent protein fusions and
tested for localization to lipid droplets. A bacterial 2-hybrid system using
proteins from the lipid droplet proteome will be used as bait to screen for
additional interacting proteins from a peptide library. Second, the role of each
identified protein will be experimentally determined by over-expression and
mutation. The resulting strains will be screened for phenotypic alterations from
wild-type with regard to growth under various carbon/nitrogen/light conditions,
lipid droplet morphology, and the ability to resume growth following stationary
phase or stress. Specific mutants and over-expression strains will be
characterized with regard to structure, lipid composition of isolated droplets,
and associated enzymatic activities or photosynthetic abilities to determine the
function of these proteins and role of lipid droplets in cyanobacteria.