* 1413780
* PFI AIR-TT: Improving Data Base Management System Performance Through Micro-Specialization
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Corey Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 05/31/2016
* USD 201,861.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the novel
technology of micro-specialization to fill the need for improving the speed of
database management systems (DBMSes) and enterprise application software (EAS).
The next step necessary for commercialization is to demonstrate how the process
can be automated. The project will result in a proof-of-concept set of software
tools that will take a collection of identified invariants and micro-specialize
the DBMS source code automatically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enhanced version of
those tools will have the following unique features: it will be (i) scalable,
i.e., can handle realistic DBMS code bases, up to millions of lines of source
code, with acceptable performance; (ii) robust, i.e., able to handle language
features that can be tricky for compilers; and (iii) effective, i.e., able to
generate high-quality specialized code that realizes the desired performance
improvements. These features provide the following two main advantages. First,
it does not require an expensive and time-consuming rewrite of the DBMS source
code, but can be applied to existing DBMS code. Second, it is independent of,
and orthogonal to, other approaches to DBMS performance improvement measures.
This means that any investments a DBMS vendor may have made in developing other
performance improvement technologies are not nullified by our approach; rather,
our approach further enhances the effects of those technologies by producing
additional improvements in performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gap as it translates from research discovery
toward commercial application, that of automating micro-specialization. It is
not practical for these vendors to manually perform micro-specialization on the
end-user DBMSes since micro-specialization tailors the DBMS code to the
specifics of an installation and so is different for different installations.
Rather, what the vendors will want, and the product we will provide, is a
software development environment that allows developers to quickly, efficiently,
and reliably perform micro-specialization on their customers' DBMSes, that they
then license to their customers: the DBMS end users. In order to commercialize
our idea, therefore, we next have to show that the process can be largely
automated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Dataware Ventures to be
responsible for the development side of the project, focusing on large-scale
testing and refinement of the functionality and efficacy of the code
specialization algorithms developed by researchers at the University of Arizona.
Specifically, Dataware Ventures will perform software development, carry out
large-scale testing and evaluation, and provide relevant feedback to UA
researchers, aiding in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DBMS micro-
specialization is important because most organizations with non-trivial data
processing needs, including virtually all medium and large businesses and
corporations, rely on enterprise application systems for their data processing
and analysis. These applications generally run on top of a DBMS, which handles
the actual storage and retrieval of data. The performance of the underlying
DBMS, i.e., its ability to process large amounts of data within an acceptable
amount of time, is therefore of crucial importance for providing timely and
accurate information to business decision makers. In addition, the potential
economic impact is expected to grow to $157B in the next three years, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in enterprise application systems and in
the underlying technology of database management systems.