* 1413281
* Modeling Nitric Oxide Signaling Chemistry at Non-Heme Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2014
* Timothy Warren, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Nitric oxide is a gas generated in biological systems that serves as a molecular
messenger to assist in blood pressure regulation, enhance blood flow,
participate in heart and lung health, and help nerves communicate. Long lasting
effects connected to nitric oxide have been attributed to molecular derivatives
of nitric oxide, which naturally occur in the blood and cells. This study seeks
an understanding of the discrete molecular pathways by which these species form
and interconvert to gain a deeper understanding of nitric oxide's role as a
messaging molecule. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students engaged in
this project will gain broad scientific experience as they probe these reactions
using specially designed chemical models that emulate key features common to
many classes of proteins that interact with nitric oxide. Outreach to younger
students (5th-8th grade) will show in a fun and engaging way how nature uses
molecules for biological communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding
Professor Timothy H. Warren from Purdue University to examine molecular
mechanisms that underlie nitric oxide (NO) signaling by examining the
interconversion of NO, S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs) and nitrite (NO2-) at relevant
copper and zinc biological sites employing specially designed synthetic models.
Binding of NO at copper-thiolates that emulate type 1 copper sites as well as
interaction of RSNOs with zinc-thiolates will be examined to observe reversible
S-NO bond formation and cleavage. Especially in the zinc system, these studies
will form a foundation to connect the metal-centered reactivity of the
gasotransmitter H2S with NO and NO2-. Additionally, binding of NO at thiolate-
free copper(I) and copper(II) complexes will be examined to understand factors
that control the reactivity of copper-bound NO, including unusual anaerobic
oxidizing behavior connected with the formation of N2O. Detailed insights
obtained for the interconversion of NO and its redox congeners at copper and
zinc sites will be further enhanced through spectroscopic and computational
collaboration with domestic and international partners.