* 1413134
* The Distributed Regulatory Network that Integrates Local and Systemic Signals to Regulate Heat Shock Response
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Erel Levine, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 742,738.00

The award, funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in MCB and the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program in CBET, is to study
how the response of an animal to noxious environmental conditions is coordinated
across the cells and tissues of its body. The PI will use a combination of
experimental and computational approaches to study the response of a model
animal (a nematode) to elevated temperatures, an ancient mechanism present in
all kingdoms of life. Novel experimental tools developed by the PI will be used
to discriminate autonomous responses of individual cells from response that is
coordinated among cells or throughout the organism. These data will be
integrated into a computational model aimed to identify mechanisms used to
guarantee a consistent response. A central goal of this project is to develop a
conceptual framework for studying distributed biological systems, essential for
adaptation of an organism to changing environment and for combating disease and
cancer. To increase awareness to inter-disciplinary research, the PI will form a
virtual network of high-school students and teachers who will take part in the
research program. Emphasis will be given to recruitment of teams from schools in
disadvantaged areas. Participants in the project will learn key concepts in
genetics, statistics and physics, and will gain personal experience in inter-
disciplinary research.

The heat-shock response is a highly conserved molecular response to
environmental conditions that disrupt protein homeostasis. Its major role is to
prevent protein misfolding and aggregation, both under normal conditions and
under stress. In a multi-cellular organism this is a major challenge, as the
proteome of different cells can be markedly different. Heat-shock response
therefore provides an opportunity to address a fundamental question about
signals and regulation in a multi-cellular organism: how the regulatory network
controls a coordinated response, while allowing different levels of activation
that fit the needs of specific cells. In this project the PI will test the
hypothesis that an integration of systemic and local signals drives the
activation dynamics of Heat-shock factor 1 (HSF-1), a highly conserved central
regulator of heat-shock response. Multiple signals converge to regulate the
activity of HSF-1. Some signals convey local information about the status of the
proteome in the cell, while others are transmitted from other cells and neurons.
To shed light on the distribution of signals that drive the dynamics of HSF-1,
the PI will measure dynamical and stochastic correlations between cells during
heat-shock response. Careful quantitative characterization of the response of
HSF-1 and its downstream targets to local and external signals will be conducted
using transgenic strains in a unique microfluidic-based setup developed by the
PI. The acquired data will drive the development of a spatially extended
computational model to predict systemic and local aspects of the regulatory
network. The computational model is will be used to identify inter-cellular
interactions and make predictions about their functional roles. These
predictions will be tested experimentally. In light of this model, the PI will
characterize the embryonic and post-embryonic development of the heat-shock
response network.