* 1413739
* Collaborative Research: Resolving How Excited-State Dynamics Couple into Long-Range Structural Changes in Native and Synthetic Light-Induced Photosensitive Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Delmar Larsen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2019
* USD 417,629.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Delmar
Larsen from University of California, Davis and Wouter Hoff from Oklahoma State
University to study how light is captured by living organisms and converted into
biological activity. All organisms use proteins to tune their response to
external stimuli but some have developed specialized proteins that are sensitive
to light. An example in the human body is the protein rhodopsin, located in the
eye, that absorbs light for sight and initiates a cascade of signaling events
that transmit the information in that light to the brain. In this research, a
protein known as Photactive Yellow Protein, or PYP, is being investigated since
it has become a well-studied model for many light-initiated process involving
proteins. Understanding the molecular basis for the activity of proteins is
important in a fundamental sense. It is also necessary for the development of
new tools by which investigators might design proteins with new functions for
both biomedical use and industrial use, such as hydrogen fuel generation or
waste remediation. The work has a broad impact on a wide array of fields. The
investigators are further broadening the impact of their work by developing new
modules for their online library ChemWiki, which is currently being used by
millions of students every month enrolled in over thirty courses at multiple
universities. As part of the current project, the investigators are now
constructing UltraWiki and PhotoWiki that will provide new platforms for
disseminating information about light-induced biological processes to both
students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoreceptor proteins are
ideal systems to study functional protein reaction activity since they are
triggered with short pulses of light, and their signaling activity may be
directly followed via spectroscopic techniques. This project focuses on
investigating the photoinduced reaction mechanisms underlying the conversion of
photons into biological activity within novel PYP photoreceptor systems via the
application of transient spectroscopic approaches. Specifically, the research is
examining the photochemical and conformational changes in the PYP class of
photosensors. These reaction mechanisms are being characterized through a
synergistic combination of molecular biology approaches to generate novel
photoreceptor systems and multipulse ultrafast spectroscopic techniques capable
of resolving transient electronic, vibrational, and structural dynamics on a
timescale of femtoseconds to milliseconds. Interrogation of the electronic
dynamics, primarily via pump-probe or pump-dump-probe approaches, is being used
to resolve inhomogeneity, excited-state and ground-state evolution, and
photoproduct formation kinetics. These signals are complemented with mid-IR
probing and novel dynamic FÃ¶rster Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET) experiments to
provide structural insight into the transient changes in molecular interactions
and configuration of photoreceptors systems upon light activation.