* 1413700
* Collaborative Research: Unlocking the mechanism of tRNA translocation through the ribosome using large-scale molecular simulation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Karissa Sanbonmatsu, New Mexico Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2019
* USD 685,329.00

Ribosomes are molecular factories residing inside living cells responsible for
reading genetic instructions originating in DNA and assembling proteins from
amino acids based on these instructions. Ribosomes read genetic information by
latching onto a long string-like molecule messenger RNA that contains the
genetic instructions for one single protein molecule. The ribosome must convert
the language of RNA into the language of protein. To accomplish this, the
ribosome employs another class of RNA molecules called transfer RNA molecules,
which convert the RNA alphabet into the protein alphabet. Much of ribosome
research over the past 40 years has focused on the movement of transfer RNAs
through the ribosome; however, the precise molecular mechanism has eluded
researchers. It is only recently, with powerful supercomputers, single molecule
imaging, and relevant atomic resolution structures, that this question can be
addressed in atomic detail. Understanding how the ribosome works may lead to
breakthroughs in the development of bio-inspired nanoscale computers, helping to
fuel the nanotech industry. Understanding the ribosome may also lead to new
insights into the origin of life and the origin of the genetic code. Broader
impact of the project include teaching and learning in concert with discovery by
training two graduate students. Each student will be trained in both molecular
simulation and single-molecule imaging. The PI will also construct an immersive
3D visualization environment at Bradbury Science Museum and establish the New
Mexico Consortium Visualization Center. The PI will also participate in the
annual "The Supercomputing Challenge" for New Mexico middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
study mechanism of ribosome head swivel using an integrated approach of
molecular simulations and single molecule imaging. In head swivel, the head
pivots around the neck, while the messenger RNA strand moves simultaneously
around the neck and the transfer RNA moves through the inside of the ribosome.
Simulations will be performed to understand the global motions of the ribosome
occurring during head swivel. Detailed simulations will produce predictions for
the energy landscape of head swivel. Fluorescent labels will be placed on the
ribosome to monitor head swivel as a function of time using single molecule
experiments. These same labels can be added into simulations to obtain
comparisons between simulation and experiment and provide atomistic
interpretations of the experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Computational Physics Program in the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.