* 1413417
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Human Retinotopic Mapping by Conformal Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Yalin Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 208,000.00

Retinotopy is the mapping of visual inputs from the retina to neurons in the
brain. A retinotopic map is a visual of a particular occurrence of neuron
activity taking place on a specific location in the brain. By analyzing the
stimulus-referred functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) response,
retinotopic maps of the human visual cortex are generated. It has been
hypothesized that human retinotopic maps are conformal mappings, but to date no
theoretical models have been developed to quantify these maps. This project uses
conformal geometry and fMRI data to study retinotopic maps in an attempt to
model visual cortical organizations in the brain. This project will: (i) compute
the intrinsic geometrical features that will determine and/or validate the
conformality in the human retinotopy; (ii) model the relationships between the
retinotopic maps in extrastriate visual areas and those in the primary visual
cortex; (iii) develop methods to quantify retinotopic maps of individual
subjects. The mathematical models applied in this project combine tools from
topology, conformal geometry, complex analysis, optimization, and quasiconformal
Teichm√ºller theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual processing areas have been
estimated to occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate
neocortex. However, an understanding of visual cortical organizations still
remains elusive due to their biological complexity. Retinotopic mapping of the
human visual cortex, therefore, can be an important tool for studying the
brain's circuitry. This project will produce theoretically sound and practically
efficient methods for quantifying retinotopic maps. These methods will lead to
non-invasive biomarkers of visual functions and may lead to cures for visual
deficits. The computational theories and algorithms developed in this project
will have applications in other fields, including computer vision, computer
graphics, sensor networks, and geometric modeling. This project contributes to
the BRAIN Initiative by increasing our knowledge of visual cortical
organizations in the human brain and by developing laboratory infrastructure for
knowledge discovery from brain imaging data. This project will create an
interdisciplinary environment for graduate and undergraduate students and will
develop interdisciplinary courses at the interface of mathematics and
neuroscience.