* 1413189
* Zinc Fingers as Templates for Metal Complex Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Nicholas Farrell, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2017
* USD 520,000.00

DNA is recognized with exquisite specificity by a group of proteins collectively
known as zinc fingers. The DNA-zinc finger interaction has important biological
consequences, for example when cells divide or viruses multiply. The proposed
experiments will explore a newly discovered means for disrupting the interaction
using metal containing compounds (specifically platinum) discovered in the
laboratory of the principal investigator. Future research will be conducted to
understand and control this property for the development of new medicines like
anti-viral (especially HIV) compounds. The approach will be both experimental
(chemical and biological) and theoretical (computational). The project
represents an excellent example of the linkage between basic research and
discovery on one hand, and important societal benefits on the other. The
research project will also be part of an international collaboration exposing
graduate students to the subject, and to cross-cultural
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Nicholas Farrell from
Virginia Commonwealth University to characterize reactions of zinc finger
proteins by the systematic study of steric and electronic effects of
functionalized coordination compounds on the kinetics and thermodynamics of zinc
displacement and disruption of protein structure and function. A specific focus
will be on the HIV NCp7 nucleocapsid protein (NC), and the mechanism of
platinum-metal nucleobases as nucleocapsid-nucleic acid antagonists through
interruption of the NC-RNA(DNA) interaction will be examined. The factors
affecting selective "non-covalent" ligand-biomolecule recognition through
enhanced pi-pi; stacking between metallated nucleobases and the tryptophan-
containing nucleocapsid will be examined. Secondly, such recognition can lead to
formation of the "covalent" metal-thiolate bond and subsequent zinc ejection. We
will explore the analogy of weak "organic" and "inorganic" electrophiles to
design specific interactions differentiating the distinct Cys2His2, Cys3His and
Cys4 zinc finger-binding sites.