* 1413999
* CNH-Ex: Investigating the Dynamic Intersections Among Economic Development, Urbanization, and Forest Degradation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2014,11/30/2019
* Julie Silva, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 11/30/2019
* USD 249,774.00

This project will investigate how economic and environmental changes affect the
relationships among urban energy demands, urban and rural livelihoods, and the
health of ecosystems that urban residents rely on for critical resources. The
project will focus on issues associated with the complex ways in which human
responses to changing demographic, economic, and environmental conditions lead
to local-level decisions that can have significant impacts on the ways in which
urban areas and the resource systems on which they depend function. The project
will help develop new theoretical insights into what incentivizes human behavior
regarding natural resource use under rapidly changing economic, demographic, and
environmental contexts, and it will enhance methodological capabilities to
identify changes in ecosystems in locales that traditionally have not been
subject to ongoing monitoring. The project also will improve capabilities to
forecast patterns of resource supply and demand related to changing
socioeconomic and environmental conditions. The project has the potential to
benefit society by informing policies that aim to combat environmental
degradation and facilitate sustainable urban growth. The project will yield
valuable data that will be made readily accessible through institutionally
maintained archives, thereby facilitating future research, and it will provide
special graduate student education and training opportunities. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent scientific research has identified poverty,
environmental degradation, and extreme weather as key drivers of urbanization in
Africa and in many other parts of the developing world. Although only 30 percent
of the African population lived in urban centers in 2000, this percentage is
projected to double by 2050, with the majority of growth occurring in small- to
medium-sized cities. Given the heavy reliance on charcoal as an energy source in
African cities, rapid urbanization likely will increase forest degradation. This
project will investigate interactions among urban and rural livelihoods and the
health of the Miombo woodland ecosystems. Miombo woodlands are the most
extensive forested ecosystem in Africa, covering 2.7-million square-km
throughout eight southern African countries. The researchers will investigate
how local-level decisions regarding charcoal production and consumption in
changing economic and environmental contexts influence rates of forest
degradation in Mozambique's Miombo woodlands. They will examine the charcoal
trade in Tete, a mid-sized but rapidly growing city, to analyze how simultaneous
economic and environmental change impact the well-being of people and the
landscapes in which they live. They will integrate socioeconomic analysis and
ecosystem modeling to better understand forest degradation in poorer regions
that are rapidly integrating into the global economy. The results of the
socioeconomic analyses will enable the refinement of an ecosystem model that
accounts for consumer and producer preferences in charcoal production systems
and their impact on forest degradation rates. The model will be used to simulate
charcoal-driven forest degradation under various social, economic, and
environmental scenarios in order to identify patterns that could compromise the
sustainable use of Miombo woodlands and the well-being of urban and rural
residents. Although focusing on a specific case study in Mozambique, many facets
of the analysis will be of value in understanding coupled natural and human
system dynamics in other nations and ecosystems.