* 1413869
* WORKSHOP: iConference 2014 Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Karen Fisher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2014
* USD 29,778.00

This is funding to support travel for a diverse group of U.S. PhD students and
distinguished faculty mentors to participate in a doctoral colloquium (workshop)
on research on information science that will be co-located with the 2014
iConference to be held March 4-7 in Berlin, Germany, and jointly hosted by the
Berlin School of Library and Information Science at Humboldt-Universitat zu
Berlin and the Royal School of Library and Information Science at the University
of Copenhagen. The iConferences, the annual meetings of the iSchool community
(cf. http://ischools.org/ for more information) are a leading forum that brings
together faculty, students, research staff, and industry practitoners with a
common interest in supporting and augmenting human engagement with information
and technology. Open to broad participation, the iConferences have been
successful in building a sense of community around the information field,
bringing together people who otherwise might rarely interact with one another,
and helping them share findings and exchange views relating to their
interdisciplinary research. More information about the 2014 iConference may be
found online at http://ischools.org/theiconference/call-for-participation/.

The 2014 iConference Doctoral Colloquium, which will take place on March 7, 2014
(the final day of the iConference), will be a day long research-focused meeting
of approximately 35 selected PhD candidates studying all aspects of information
science (IS) together with 12 distinguished mentors (NSF funds will be used to
support 16 student participants from U.S. institutions). The primary objective
of the Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the next generation of information
science researchers. To this end, it will provide the student participants with
an environment in which they can share and discuss their goals, methods and
results at an early stage of their research. By participating in the doctoral
colloquium, students will gain feedback on their work both from the mentors and
from other students, which should allow them to enhance their research. Students
will also develop a better understanding of the different research communities
engaged in the study of information science, and learn how to position their
work within the IS community. In addition, the colloquium will provide students
with opportunities to make new professional connections beyond their own
disciplines.

Broader Impacts: The iConference doctoral colloquia traditionally bring together
the best of the next generation of researchers in information science and
related areas, allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Participation is encouraged from a broad range of relevant
disciplines and approaches, thereby broadening attendees' perspectives on their
topics of study and promoting advancement of the field. No more than one student
will be accepted from any given institution, and priority will be given to
students who have not previously attended an iConference Doctoral Colloquium.
The organizers will proactively work to include women and minority
representation among the student participants to the extent possible. As a
consequence of these steps, the student and faculty participants will constitute
a diverse group across a variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the
students' horizons to the future benefit of the field.