* 1413898
* The Social Organization of Collaboration in the Chemical Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Laurel Smith-Doerr, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 130,739.00

Science is an increasingly collaborative venture. To understand important issues
in science policy, one must thus understand scientific collaboration. Two
pressing, current issues in science policy involve women's participation in
science and ethical issues in science. This project investigates collaboration
in the chemical sciences in order to develop deeper knowledge about both women
in science and how scientists think broadly about ethical issues and
responsibilities in their field. The United States' continuing competitiveness
in developing innovative science and engineering demands both broader
participation in those fields and continuing high standards of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite over thirty years of research on women in science
(mostly in purely academic settings) and significant investments, the
persistence of gender gaps in science remains without an adequate explanation.
Investigation of the chemical sciences allows this project to look at the
determinants of success in research collaborations, both in academic and
industrial settings. Although policies and programs for recruiting women to
science make assumptions about why women are drawn to science (e.g., for
altruistic reasons like helping others), very little research to date has
investigated the social processes and organizational contexts by which gender
can be related to broad ethical approaches to science. This project employs
rigorous qualitative methods -- a combination of intensive interviews with women
and men chemical scientists and ethnographic observation of their research
collaboration meetings -- to build new, empirically-grounded theory. The
observation methods in this project allow for investigation of (1) how different
approaches to collaboration among men and women chemists are employed on a daily
basis and (2) which kinds of laboratory organization are most conducive to
innovative collaboration. Interviews with chemical scientists provide data on
how scientists think about responsibilities of scientists in their field,
including perceived responsibilities in research collaboration. The sustained
three-year observation allows for following the arc of collaborative research
relationships over time. Given that collaboration is a key mechanism in the
process of knowledge production in chemical sciences, investigating what it
looks like on the ground (i.e., what scientists view as worth pursuing and how
they manage collaboration) is vital to understanding the productivity of science
investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
contributions of this project to the science of science policy and innovation
are expected to include building basic social-science knowledge about
collaboration, with a particular emphasis on the respective involvements of
women and men in research collaboration and how scientists think about their
collaborative responsibilities. This project provides new data and derived
insights on how to address collaboration and career issues for women in science,
which will be crucial for future decision-makers who seek a grounded basis for
policies that create greater equity. The focus on integrating equity and ethical
climates provides insights into how responsible conduct of research training
improves both payoffs from investments and the scientific work environment. This
project also integrates research and teaching; graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher working with the principal investigators will have
opportunities to learn to be effective collaborators in the social sciences
while they are studying the theory of effective collaboration and observing and
analyzing the outcomes of research collaboration in the chemical sciences.