* 1414985
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Impact of an Unusual Meteorite at the Onset of Younger Dryas Using a Greenland Ice Core
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Ji-Hye Seo, Seo                     Ji-Hye
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The Younger Dryas is a major cooling period from 12,900 to 11,600 years before
present subsequent to the last glaciation. The cause of this abrupt cooling is
poorly understood. A highly controversial hypothesis suggests that a number of
meteorite or comet impacts triggered sudden release of meltwater from proglacial
Lake Agassiz (Great Lakes), disrupting oceanic circulation, and eventually
leading to long term cooling. Recently, remarkably high Platinum and low Iridium
concentrations have been discovered in the Greenland ice core at the onset of
Younger Dryas, indicating an unusually Platinum enriched iron meteorite impact.
However, another study suggested that these abnormal concentrations could be
from weathering of ancient terrestrial material. Therefore, this project will
analyze another ice core from Greenland to substantiate the recent discovery and
determine the nature of meteorite. The project will be performed in
collaboration with Dr. Sungmin Hong at Inha University in Korea, and his
collaborators at Korea Polar Research Institute, who are experts in Platinum and
Iridium analyses in ice cores. This research will provide insight into the cause
of an abrupt cooling climate during Younger Dryas, and advance understanding of
mechanisms of climate change.

The research will determine Platinum and Iridium concentrations at the onset of
Younger Dryas in the North Greenland Ice Core Project (NGRIP) ice core. These
analyses are technically challenging as ice samples require decontamination of
the NGRIP ice core, which could have been contaminated during drilling, and high
sensitivity measurements of platinum metals, whose concentrations in the ice are
expected to be extremely low (in 10-15g/g or femtogram/g). This project aims to
decontaminate the NGRIP ice core in ultraclean working conditions and measure
Platinum and Iridium using sector-field inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP-SFMS). This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the National Research Foundation of Korea.