* 1414634
* EAPSI: Understanding water availability through the modeling of groundwater flow and temperature of the Heihe River in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sarah Evans, Evans                   Sarah          G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

A warming climate in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau in China has led to decreases in
permafrost extent and water insecurity. While it is speculated that there will
be large-scale changes in water resource availability, it is unknown at what
magnitude and rate these changes will occur. To test this, a three-dimensional,
groundwater flow and temperature model will be developed for the Hulugou
watershed, the headwaters of the Heihe River located on the northern edge of the
Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Sihai Liang, a noted expert on quantitative hydrology and the Hulugou watershed,
at the China University of Geosciences in Beijing. Conducting this research in
China affords a unique opportunity to gather necessary field measurements. This
research will help the hydrologic community by providing new knowledge on the
effect of climatic changes on regional water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how thawing and
freezing permafrost affects groundwater storage and movement. A coupled
hydrogeologic model will incorporate the physics of water phase change, allowing
for modeling of pore water freeze and thaw and permeability dependence on ice
saturation. Model inputs will be constrained and calibrated by collecting and
analyzing new field data from the Hulugou watershed. Major outcomes of the model
will include: spatial and temporal distributions of subsurface temperature,
fluid pressure, groundwater recharge, and discharge to the land surface. Model
results will corroborate relationships between climatic effects on this
watershed and a similar watershed in the Rocky Mountains in Colorado. While
these two watersheds are under similar climatic stresses and both potentially
experiencing declines in water resources, underlying causes may differ. This NSF
EAPSI is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.