* 1414865
* EAPSI: Linking Beliefs about the Social Consequences of Emotions with Emotional Behavior
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Nicole Senft, Senft                   Nicole         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Emotion regulation and emotional behavior depend on cultural context, but the
mechanisms underlying these cultural differences are unclear. Recent work has
found that the belief that emotions spread predicts reports of increased
emotional expression and support seeking in Americans. The proposed study
extends previous research to 1) identify the relationships between the beliefs
that emotions spread and in-the-moment emotional behavior, and 2) explore
whether these relationships are consistent across cultural contexts or are
culturally dependent. Assessing the relationship between emotion beliefs and
behaviors in two cultural contexts with documented differences in models of
emotion will contribute to a more nuanced understanding of emotional behavior
across cultural contexts. This understanding may improve the ability for
international and multicultural settings, such as workplaces and schools, to
facilitate intercultural interactions and benefit from their diversity. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Eunkook Suh at Yonsei
University in Korea.

In order to test these questions, American and Korean participants will be
primed to think that emotions are either very easily spread or not easily
spread. Emotional behavior will be assessed through videos of participants
describing recent emotional experiences as if they were speaking to a close
friend. It is hypothesized that European Americans primed with the belief that
emotions spread will express higher levels of positive and negative emotions. If
this pattern reflects basic emotional processes, it is expected that Korean
participants will also be more expressive following this prime. However, concern
about the negative consequences of emotions on relationships and interactions is
more salient in Korean than American contexts. If the relationship between the
belief that emotions spread and emotional behavior depends on culture, Koreans
may be less likely to express emotions following the prime that they spread
easily to others. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Research Foundation of Korea.