* 1414469
* EAPSI: Development of novel silicon microchamber to investigate mechanical and electrical properties of cochlear structures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniel Marnell, Marnell                 Daniel         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The primary function of the mammalian cochlea is to provide the brain with
information about the acoustic environment - specifically, it decodes with a
high degree of precision information about the frequency and intensity of
incoming sounds. As a result, how the cochlea is able to achieve such remarkable
frequency selectivity and high sensitivity has been a hot topic in hearing
research. In order to better study how the cochlea functions, a novel
microfluidic device will be developed and fabricated under the expertise of Dr.
Yong-Jin Yoon at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. The creation of
a device that imitates several features of the cochlea will allow us to better
identify the operating principles of the mammalian cochlea, and make
contributions not only to the field of hearing research, but also the field of
mechano-transduction in general.

According to the prevalent theory, the cochlea achieves frequency selectivity
through mechanical resonance of a central partition that holds the sensory
epithelium. However, experimental ground supporting this theory is weak, and
existing measurements of the mechanical properties of the cochlear partition
still do not provide clear evidence for this theory. For example, previous
measurements of cochlear partition stiffness are measured using point force,
rather than the more physiologically relevant form of fluid pressure. In an
effort to overcome this problem, a microfluidic chamber that imitates the
cochlear compartments will be developed. This microchamber will allow to place
excised sections of the cochlear partition from an animal model in an
environment that is physiologically, mechanically, and electrically similar to
its in vivo state. The excised section of the cochlear partition is then
stimulated with fluid pressure, and nanoscale measurements of the tissue
displacement in all three dimensions are recorded. A previous design of the
microchamber was fabricated using stereolithography, but calibration of
electromechanical stimuli has proven to be difficult. To overcome the
limitations of the current design, a new silicon-chip version of the
microchamber will be designed and fabricated using standard microfabrication
techniques. This technology will allow to add features such as an embedded
pressure transducer for the calibration of fluid pressure applied to tissue
specimens. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.