* 1414954
* EAPSI: Studying advanced treatment methods for removal of pharmaceuticals from sewage effluent
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Danielle West, West                    Danielle       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The abundance of pharmaceuticals found in natural water sources has increased as
their applications and production has increased. In the environment,
pharmaceuticals have the potential to be toxic, increase microbial resistance,
and yield other unforeseen environmental adverse effects. Effluents of municipal
sewage treatment plants represent a major pollution source of pharmaceuticals in
the environment. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to study different
advanced treatment methods to further remove pharmaceuticals in sewage effluent.
In collaboration with Dr. Zhimin Qiang, an expert in wastewater research at the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, this study will determine the most applicable
method to remove typical pharmaceuticals from sewage effluent by advanced
treatment processes.

The toxicity, microbial resistance, and unforeseen adverse effects in the
environment, induced by pharmaceuticals, necessitate a comprehensive study of
abatement, degradation pathways, and toxicity changes of each target pollutant
during advanced oxidation processes (AOPs). The selected AOPs include three
O3-based and UV-based (e.g. O3/H2O2, UV/O3, and UV/H2O2) technologies, which
have great potentials to effectively remove pharmaceuticals from sewage
effluent. Six frequently detected pharmaceuticals in sewage effluent, including
sulfadiazine (SDZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), trimethoprim (TMP), metoprolol
(MET), roxithromycin (ROX), and caffeine (CAF), will be selected for this study.
The abatement of these pharmaceuticals by the AOPs will be studied, along with
their degradation byproducts identified by liquid chromatography time-of-flight
mass spectrometry (LC/Q-TOF-MS) to propose degradation pathways. In addition,
this project will evaluate the pollutant removal efficiency, energy consumption,
and operation factors of the different AOPs, to determine the most applicable
method. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.