* 1414839
* EAPSI: New insights into the effects of chemical composition and surface structure on spider silk adhesion and prey retention
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Candido Diaz, Diaz                    Candido
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Adhesion is an important consideration in construction and repair. Organisms
have evolved different adhesives for survival in nearly every environment on
earth. In chemical adhesion the formation of chemical bonds and sharing of
electrons create attractive forces between surfaces. For example, spiders
utilize a sticky aggregate glue to keep their prey ensnared in their webs. This
project will test how adhesion strength of aggregate glue varies based on
surface roughness, hydrophilicity, and chemical composition. In collaboration
with Dr. Tadashi Miyashita at the Unversity of Tokyo - the only researcher to
have previously studied the silk of the spider Cytarachne - the research will be
determined which surface characteristics have served as evolutionary pressures,
leading to optimal glue adhesion. Identification of the chemical composition of
glue droplets will be conducted. By studying spiders, it can lead to the
utilization and mimicking of aggregate glue chemical compounds leading to
substrate specific synthetic adhesive products.

Aggregate silk is composed of a glycoprotein core and an aqueous droplet of
salts. The combination of salts and the glycoproteins act together to form a
bond between the silk threads and prey. Spiders from the genus Cyrtarachne are
specialized moth-hunting orb-weavers, only found within Asia and more commonly
in Japan. These spiders have evolved to prey on moths by utilizing reduced orb
webs with unusually large, viscous droplets of glue. Successful prey capture
relies primarily on the prolonged adhesion between the glue and exoskeleton.
Varying surface structures and chemical compositions may react with
glycoproteins and hydroscopic salts differently resulting in scenarios in which
Cyrtarachne aggregate glue under or over performs. Adhesion tests will be
conducted by the pull-off method. Information will be gained on what chemicals
they contain, and when they are strongest. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.