* 1414662
* EAPSI: Investigating inferential use of metaphors in chimpanzees
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Alexander Schlegel, Schlegel                Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Humans have the ability to flexibly manipulate mental representations such as
images, symbols, and concepts. This ability may have allowed our early ancestors
to construct new and complex social groups and tools, and today it remains vital
to a range of human endeavors including science, art, and mathematics. A likely
prerequisite to flexible mental manipulation is the ability to use metaphors,
which involve mapping concepts between informational domains. For example, one
can try to understand life by comparing it to a stage onto which one makes an
entrance, performs for a period of time, and then exits. Metaphors underlie much
of human cognition, but it is unknown if animals can use them as well. Previous
work has shown that chimpanzees spontaneously construct conceptual metaphorical
mappings between social status and physical space (i.e. dominant is higher,
submissive is lower). In collaboration with Drs. Tetsuro Matsuzawa and Ikuma
Adachi at the Kyoto University Primate Research Institute in Inuyama, Japan,
this study will test whether chimpanzees can use such metaphors to make
inferences about the social status of others.

Specifically, the study will investigate whether a chimpanzee will later infer
that a second chimpanzee is socially dominant if an image of that second
chimpanzee is shown above images of other chimpanzees in an initial
familiarization task. The test subjects' sense of dominance will be assessed by
measuring their looking time while viewing movies showing the conspecifics from
the familiarization task engaged in dominant and submissive behaviors that are
either congruent or incongruent with their previously displayed positions. If
chimpanzees can make this inference, then perhaps humans evolved novel uses of
existing cognitive structures. If they cannot, then entirely new neural systems
may be responsible for the unique abilities that humans possess. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.