* 1414988
* EAPSI: Assessing Microbial Activity in the Shale and Implications for Natural Gas Extraction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jessie Wishart, Wishart                 Jessie         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Extracting natural gas from shales by hydrofracturing has increased globally in
recent years. Hydrofracturing is a modified version of oil well drilling that is
designed for extraction gases rather than fluids from a subsurface reservoir.
Hydrofracturing produces millions of liters of contaminated waste fluid that is
difficult to dispose of in an economical and environmentally-friendly manner.
Treatment of these fluids is a great public health concern. The origin of
contaminants in waste fluids is not well understood nor is the role of
microorganisms that can remain biologically active in the fluids and shales.
This research will investigate the degree to which microbial cells present on
shales are active and the types of carbon sources that they utilize including
whether these sources can come from the shale itself. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Drs. Fumio Inagaki and Yuki Morono, experts on
subsurface microbial communities, at the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science
and Technology which will provide access to a premier biogeochemistry
laboratory. This research will develop a better understanding of biogeochemical
processes occurring during shale hydrofracturing and should lead to improved
waste fluid treatment and hydrofracturing methods to reduce environmental
contamination.

The breakdown of organic compounds in the subsurface by microbiological activity
can result in the co-release of toxic elements such as heavy metals. This
research will determine what organic compounds associated with drilling fluids
and Marcellus shale are biologically available. Nano secondary ion mass
spectrometry (NanoSIMS) will be used to trace the assimilation of stable
isotope-labeled organic compounds into microbial cells derived from waste fluids
as well as whether cells attached to shale can utilize native organic compounds
in the shale. NanoSIMS analysis determines the percentage of cells that
assimilate a certain stable isotope-labeled or shale-derived carbon source. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.