* 1414600
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at the Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Kagan Tumer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the Thirteenth International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS), Paris, France, May 5-9,
2014. This is the premier international conference for researchers in agents and
multi-agent systems (MAS) across a fully international research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This consortium is oriented on research and career
development for students who have identified their PhD topics and are just
embarking on that independent research. The central activities for the DMC
include opportunities for students to present and discuss their work with their
peers; interaction with an identified group of senior researchers for advice on
Ph.D. research, a "careers panel" to discuss career choices in industry and
academia, small group activities led by assigned mentors, and a great deal of
opportunity for interactions with the international research community in AAMAS,
which might lead to future collaborative activity. In addition, the DMC includes
a Tutorial Program with full-day and half-day tutorials that will provide
detailed overviews of specific subfields by leading researchers in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring student travel to AAMAS conveys many benefits
beyond the DMC program. The sponsored students have full access to a well-
developed AAMAS workshop and conference program covering a diverse range of
research areas in this community. This is an opportunity for students to engage
in discussion with scientists from around the world and to explore new research
directions and topics. This year AAMAS also includes unique conference
activities in Robotics, Virtual Agents, Innovative Applications and Special
Challenges and Visions. Students also have the opportunity to attend the
Demonstrations track. Such demonstrations of agent technologies and agent-
related software and hardware are a significant source of motivation and
inspiration to budding researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
supporting this student participation is clear. AAMAS is the major international
conference that will figure prominently in the research careers of students who
remain involved in agents and MAS. Students gain valuable research insights from
the exchange of technical ideas in this broader venue. In the process, they make
valuable connections with potential collaborators from around the world. As
intelligent software and embodies systems become more prevalent, it is clear
that advances in intelligent agent technology will have significant impact in
virtually any domain imaginable, including such national priorities as health
and well-being, e-commerce, and national defense.