* 1414568
* I-Corps:  Innovative Use of Internet Classifieds in Law Enforcement Investigations
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Artur Dubrawski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses the use of machine learning techniques on massive on-line
information for identifying patterns useful in law enforcement practice and
public policy. The quantity and complexity of public data make it impractical
for manual browsing and tracking by investigative forces seeking to identify
illegal activities. For example, there is a need to automate the process of
detection of informative patterns in human trafficking, and especially sex
trafficking. Ubiquity of the Internet provides the perpetrators, who take
advantage of trafficking victims, with the ability to solicit services on
advertisement web sites. This data is publicly available and contains
information potentially useful to law enforcement investigators to understand
crime patterns and to track the perpetrators. This team proposes to study the
commercialization opportunity of a prototype analytic tool which they developed
for the task. This technology may save time and increasing law enforcement
productivity and effectiveness by providing new leads that would otherwise be
missed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a framework for demonstrating
practical utility of machine learning research previously funded by NSF in a
well-focused context of its societally important application. The proposed
innovation has the potential to revolutionize the investigative process in the
US at local, state, and federal levels. The vast amount of data online is
currently underutilized. This project seeks to remedy this for general benefit
of society. It would improve efficiency of law enforcement practice at all
levels (local, state, federal), facilitate cross-agency collaboration, as well
as enhance public policy studies. The proposed innovation will also have a
broader application in leveraging public sources of data for detection and
mapping of patterns of other illicit behaviors (e.g. sale of stolen and
counterfeit goods) and non-illicit behaviors (e.g. economic activity, job
seeking, lifestyle, and public health).