* 1414853
* EAPSI: Transitioning between solutions in computational problems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Eli Fox-Epstein, Fox-Epstein             Eli
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Problems as diverse as jaguar conservation, power grid management, Internet
backbone routing, and pen-and-paper puzzles can be abstracted and mathematically
formulated as computational 'reconfiguration problems'. As a concrete example,
consider establishing patrols for art gallery guards such that all the art is
always being observed and the guards transition between two desired
configurations. Techniques from theoretical computer science have been applied
to determine efficient ways to solve broad classes of these types of problems
and demonstrate that, in many instances, they cannot be solved efficiently. This
project aims to develop efficient algorithms for constrained cases that still
have potential real-world applicability. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Professor Ryuhei Uehara, a world expert on reconfiguration
problems, at the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.

Sliding Token is a well studied reconfiguration problem in which an instance is
a graph and two independent sets of the same size on that graph, and one is
tasked with deciding if there is a sequence of independent sets, each differing
from the next by removing one vertex and replacing it with a neighbor. Sliding
Token is PSPACE-complete on perfect graphs but was recently shown be efficiently
decidable for proper interval graphs, trivially perfect graphs, and
caterpillars. This research will focus on finding efficient algorithms or
hardness proofs for Sliding Token and similar reconfiguration problems on trees,
chordal graphs, interval graphs, and similar very structured graph families.
Progress on this line of research will hopefully lead to a characterization of
the graph properties that tend to make reconfiguration problems intractable.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.