* 1414609
* EAPSI: Investigating the effectiveness of intergroup apologies on reducing negative intergroup attitudes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Nicholas Alt, Alt                     Nicholas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Negative acts committed by individuals from other nations, such as the tragic
school shoot at Virginia Tech in 2007, often engender increased hostile and
negative evaluations towards people from that nation. To mitigate these negative
reactions, countries may issue an apology on behalf of the nation for the acts
committed by their citizens. These apologies are defined as intergroup
apologies, that is, apologies between two groups of individuals. The proposed
project will investigate the role of intergroup apologies on ameliorating
relationships and attitudes between groups. In addition, this study will advance
our understanding of how cultural differences in group entitativity, that is,
how strongly groups are viewed as cohesive, affect perceptions of intergroup
apologies. This study will be conducted under the hypothesis that higher group
entitativity will incite more of a need for group apologies as well as greater
expectation for an apology, subsequently leading to more negative evaluations if
no apology is given. This study will be carried out at Chungbuk National
University in South Korea in collaboration with Dr. Sanghee Park.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants from United States and South Korea will be
recruited. This study will employ a 2 (United States or South Korea) x 2
(Apology or No-Apology) factorial design with dependent measures being scale
items on outgroup attitudes and an Implicit Associations Test (IAT).
Participants will be presented with a scenario depicting a negative intergroup
event and then be randomly assigned to an apology or no apology condition.
Following the apology, questionnaires will be given to assess perceptions of the
apology, group entitativity, and outgroup attitudes. In addition, implicit
negative associations towards South Koreans and Americans with the IAT will be
assessed. Results from the IAT and explicit attitude measures will afford a test
of whether apologies reduced negative intergroup attitudes. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.