* 1414949
* EAPSI: Structure and mechanism of a mosquito larvicidal toxin secreted by entomopathogenic Xenorhabdus bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* ILHWAN KIM, KIM                     ILHWAN
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Disease prevention depends heavily on mosquito control since there are no
approved vaccines to mosquito-transmitted disease such as dengue and yellow
fever. However, conventional mosquito control programs use chemical and
synthetic pesticides which induce non-target effects against important insect
species and result in development of resistance in mosquitoes. Alternative
control method using bio-insecticide is needed. This project will characterize
the structure and mechanism of a newly discovered mosquito larvicidal peptide
produced by Xenorhabdus bacteria. The knowledge gained through this effort will
lead to a development of environmentally safe and mosquito-specific bio-
insecticide. The proposed research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Do-Young Kim, a noted expert on proteomics research, at Pohang Technopark-
Pohang Center for Evaluation of Biomaterials in South Korea. The expertise and
equipments provided by Dr. Kim in structural analysis and microscopy study will
play a pivotal role in the proposed research.

Structural analysis of toxin peptide will be conducted using a linear ion trap-
Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) mass spectrometer. Amino acid composition of toxin
peptide will be analyzed through an amino acid column connected to high pressure
liquid chromatography equipped with fluorescence detector (HPLC-FLD). The super-
resolution light microscope, N-SIM/N-STORM, will be used to examine how mosquito
larvicidal toxin peptide alters mosquito midgut morphology and disrupts midgut
epithelial cells. The successful outcome in this study will lead to the
introduction of a new bio-pesticide. Although mosquito-borne diseases have been
declared of being eradicated in the United States, it still affects millions of
lives throughout the world. By developing a cost-effective and environmentally-
friendly pesticide, this project aims to make a discovery that will improve
global population health. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the National Research Foundation of Korea.