* 1414963
* EAPSI: Detecting Earth-like exoplanets using the infrared doppler instrument on the Subaru telescope
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Steven Gilhool, Gilhool                 Steven
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The Doppler radial velocity technique is a method of detecting planets outside
of our solar system by measuring the slight wobble imparted on the host star by
the planet or planets that orbit it. It is one of the most powerful and
promising methods of exoplanet detection. Inferring the presence of a planet
using this technique, however, requires a very precise measurement of the star's
radial velocity. Improvements in the precision of radial velocity measurements
will lead to the detection of lower-mass planets, which are currently
underrepresented in the sample of known exoplanets. Detecting Earth-like
exoplanets is a critical step in the search for life outside of our solar
system. In collaboration with Professor Motohide Tamura, at the National
Observatory of Japan (NAOJ), this project goal is measuring precise radial
velocities of low-mass stars for exoplanet detection and characterization. The
NAOJ operates the Subaru Telescope, which will house the Infrared Doppler
Instrument (IRD), a state-of-the-art instrument designed to take high-resolution
spectra of low-mass stars. The IRD spectra will reveal a whole new population of
Earth-like planets. Another aim of this research project is the development of
software designed to measure radial velocities using telluric (atmospheric)
absorption lines as a wavelength reference. This method of wavelength
calibration is complementary to that employed by the IRD. This study aims to
improve the efficacy of both methods. In addition, the telluric line software
will be applicable to any ground-based spectrograph that operates in the
infrared or near infrared. In particular, the software could be used to improve
the precision of several new high-resolution instruments, which will see first
light in the next few years. The combination of high-resolution spectrographs
and accurate wavelength references in the infrared will result in the discovery
of a whole new population of Earth-like exoplanets in the next several years.
Further study of this population will advance our understanding of planet
formation, the origins of life in the universe, and other such long-standing
mysteries. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.