* 1414622
* EAPSI: Understanding disturbances that initiate typhoons in the North West Pacific Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Adam Rydbeck, Rydbeck                 Adam
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Several tropical cyclones develop over the globe each year, approximately a
third of which originate in the northwest Pacific Ocean. Tropical cyclones
always originate from precursor disturbances with sufficient vorticity
(rotation) and deep convection (thunderstorms). This study will investigate the
generation of precursor disturbances from particular atmospheric waves to help
improve forecasts of tropical cyclone formation. The research will be performed
in collaboration with Dr. Chung-Hsiung Sui, a highly regarded professor of
tropical meteorology at National Taiwan University in Taipei, Taiwan.

In particular this study will focus on the role of mixed Rossby-gravity (MRG)
waves. MRG waves are not able to serve as precursor disturbances without first
undergoing a transformation in which they are reduced in size, increased in
vorticity, and coupled to convection. If such a transformation occurs, the
transformed MRG waves are capable of initiating tropical cyclones. This study
will use an atmospheric model to determine the frequency of such
transformations. In the model, two simulations of the northwest Pacific
atmosphere will be performed. The first simulation will be used to determine how
well the model captures the features of MRG waves. In the second simulation, all
MRG waves will be removed from the model. If the number of precursor
disturbances is reduced in the second simulation compared to the first
simulation, the results would suggest that MRG waves are an important source of
precursor disturbances. If the number of precursor disturbances remains
unchanged, the results would suggest that MRG waves are of little importance to
the generation of precursor disturbances and thus tropical cyclones. In either
case, atmospheric scientists will have an improved understanding of the genesis
of tropical cyclones and the precursor disturbances responsible. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.