* 1414383
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A FIELDABLE SPECIATION-CAPABLE GREEN ANALYZER FOR ARSENIC
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Purnendu Dasgupta, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 277,676.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating NSF
sponsored fundamental research in arsenic determination and its chemical
speciation to fill the need for on-site real-time arsenic determination of
ground water to determine whether or not it is contaminated with toxic levels of
arsenic and to determine the type. The project will result in a portable, hand-
held, "green" field-ready arsenic analyzer prototype. This instrument has the
following unique features: (a) it can differentiate between the more toxic
arsenite from the less toxic and more easily removable arsenate (b) it can
measure both down to sub parts per billion levels, (c) it is a true green
analyzer that uses air, water and electricity, with a small amount of sulfuric
acid that can be recycled, and (d) it offers robust performance within a very
low form factor. These features provide the advantages of low cost and
portability, high sensitivity, low power consumption and very low cost of
consumables when compared to the electrochemical instruments for arsenic
currently available in this market space. This project addresses the technology
gap of converting the original bench-top proof-of-concept to an instrument with
a small, attractive form factor in a user-friendly form as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages Chipotle Business Group Inc. to augment their water analysis
capabilities, provide field testing environment for the device during
development, conduct a market study to identify customer segments, and develop
pathways to commercialization for the instrument in this technology translation
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This green analyzer for arsenic is important
because it bridges the gap between an academic analytical instrument and a low-
cost commercial device that will help humanity. This technology will help the
millions of people, especially from the developing countries across the world,
who are at the risk of being affected by arsenicosis, which is caused by chronic
arsenic exposure through drinking water. Arsenic is the 20th most abundant
element in the earth?s crust. Even in developed countries there are many areas
where groundwater arsenic concentration is high; this technology will be helpful
in implementing water quality control regulations and monitoring the efficacy of
arsenic removal efforts.