* 1414482
* EAGER: Functional Integration of Synthetic Kinases into Endogenous Signaling Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 06/30/2013,10/31/2015
* Casim Sarkar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 10/31/2015
* USD 156,650.00

Cells can acquire new genes by natural mechanisms (e.g. horizontal gene
transfer) or by artificial means (e.g. genetic engineering). We are beginning to
understand how newly-acquired genes are integrated into the host's genome, but
the evolutionary mechanisms by which the proteins produced by these genes become
functionally incorporated into the cell's regulatory networks remain largely
unknown. In this project, synthetic biology and directed evolution approaches
will be used to recreate and analyze in the laboratory this network rewiring
process. Using yeast that have been engineered with signaling modules taken from
the mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, evolutionary strategies
will be applied in the laboratory to reward individual yeast cells that acquire
mutations resulting in functional utilization of these introduced mammalian
proteins. During this selection process, genome sequencing will be performed to
characterize the mutations that occur and to reconstruct the evolutionary
processes that result in functional rewiring of the host's signaling networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The scientific principles underlying this
research will be used to train graduate and undergraduate students, including
those from underrepresented minorities. Modules on evolution in synthetic
biology will be added to an undergraduate course taught by the principal
investigator. Undergraduates will also have the opportunity to learn about
synthetic biology through the International Genetically Engineered Machine
(iGEM) competition. Additional outreach will be targeted to high school teachers
and high school students through summer training programs. The insights gained
from this project will have relevance for understanding the emergence of
antibiotic resistance in microbes, the cultivation and properties of genetically
modified crops, and the design of novel synthetic biology devices.