* 1414293
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Platform for Multi-Material Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2015
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on bringing to market a
low-cost, high-resolution and vertically integrated multi-material 3D printing
platform. The platform will enable engineers, hobbyists and prosumers to build
innovative multi-material objects and will help bring manufacturing to the US by
lowering the cost for short-runs. It will also serve as a powerful educational
tool for both universities and K-12 programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will result in a fully functional 3D printing prototype platform ready to be
productized by an upcoming startup. The prototype will consist of an innovative
low-cost multi-material 3D printer that can print with up to 12 materials
simultaneously. The result of the project will be a rich library of inexpensive
materials with a wide range of optical, mechanical, electrical and appearance
properties. A suite of powerful material design tools that will enable users to
fully leverage the capabilities of the underlying hardware and material library
will be completed. Current leading 3D platforms can print with one, two or three
materials simultaneously. In contrast, this platform will enable full-color 3D
printing, use of flexible, rigid, transparent and conductive materials
simultaneously and will enable a wide range of functional 3D prints. Existing
multi-material 3D printers cost $250,000 or higher. This low-cost solution will
target the $5,000 market segment which will make the platform available to a
much wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: 1) we will finish translating our first-generation printer into a
desktop-sized printer, 2) we will complete key modules that will dramatically
lower the manufacturing costs of the hardware, 3) we will further enrich our
library of materials and develop conductive inks and 4) we will integrate our
design tools into existing software pipelines and workflows to enable rapid
adoption of our platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-material 3D printing
platform is important because it will disrupt the 3D printing market. It will
dramatically lower acquisition and usage costs for multi-material printing and
enable new forms of multi-material design, functional prototyping and low-cost
short run manufacturing. In addition, the potential economic impact is expected
to be within the next 18 months, which will contribute to the US competitiveness
in 3D printing and manufacturing.