* 1414774
* EAPSI: Effects of UV disinfection on intracellular and extracellular distribution of antibiotic resistance genes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jacob Metch, Metch                   Jacob
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,301.00

Antibiotic resistant pathogens are a global human health threat, and there is
growing attention on the potential role of the aquatic environment as a
significant route by which antibiotic resistance may spread. Disinfection at
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) is designed to limit the pathogens that
enter rivers and streams. However this may not significantly reduce genes which
give bacteria the mechanisms by which they can defend against antibiotics, known
as antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs). This project will study the effect of UV
disinfection on the fate of ARGs in the effluent of the Xiamen, China WWTP,
focusing on the location of ARGs with respect to whether ARGs are inside or
outside of the cell. The location of ARGs impacts how the genes are acquired by
pathogens, and how they persist in the environment. In collaboration with
Professor Chang-Ping Yu at the Institute of Urban Environment the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, this research seeks to advance technologies for minimizing
the spread of antibiotic resistance.

Samples will be taken before and after disinfection at the WWTP and then
examined using a combination of methods to determine the shift in location of
ARGs. The methods used will quantify two representative ARGs (tetM and sulI) by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Propidium monoazide (PMA) qPCR
will be conducted to determine the intracellular portion of ARGs, and qPCR will
determine total ARGs. This will give information on the role UV disinfection on
whether these ARGs will be inside or outside the cell. This research will lead
to a better understanding of antibiotic resistance and therefor may lead to
better combatants to the spread of ARGs and increased public health. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.