* 1414518
* Archaeological Tree-Ring Dating in Western North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 179,217.00

To understand processes which are best understood over long time scales accurate
dating is necessary. Dendrochronology "tree ring dating" often permits events
which occurred thousands of years ago to an exact year. Tree rings are also
important because of the environmental information then contain. With such data
it is possible to examine a wide range of issues, including for example how
populations responded and adapted to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) at the
University of Arizona is the sole source of archaeological tree-ring dates in
western North America. With continuing National Science Foundation (NSF)
support, LTRR operates an analysis program for tree-ring samples collected by
LTRR and other archaeologists from Alaska to Peru and from the Pacific Ocean to
the Mississippi River. NSF support allows the program to keep pace with the ever
growing demand for archaeological tree-ring dating, information, and assistance
and to maintain high production levels and short turnaround times. On average,
more than 1,000 dates from 4,000+ archaeological tree-ring samples are produced
annually. These data are integrated into relevant archaeological contexts to
construct refined cultural sequences and examine important issues of past human
behavior that cannot be addressed without accurate, high resolution temporal
control. Among these topics are absolute site, locality, and regional
chronologies, social organization, intergroup interaction, and cultural
adaptation to physical and social environments. In addition, the program
promotes the expansion of archaeological tree-ring dating into new regions such
as the Southwestern deserts, Great Basin, Great Plains, Rocky Mountains, Alaska,
and Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has additional intellectual merits.
Exact dating and chronology building are crucial to understanding human
behavior, human-environment interactions, and processes of sociocultural
stability, variation, change, and evolution. Either directly or indirectly
(through tree-ring dated ceramics), tree-ring dating underlies the chronology of
Southwestern prehistory and many aspects of the documented history of the
region. The project also generates dendroclimatic reconstructions that are
combined with reconstructions produced by other paleoenvironmental disciplines
such as geology, pollen analysis, volcanology, and trace element studies. In
addition to illuminating past environmental processes, these integrated
reconstructions provide a solid empirical foundation for examining the
interrelationships between human behavior and environmental variability.
Finally, the project's efforts to expand research into areas previously thought
to be unsuitable for archaeological tree-ring provide absolutely dated "hinge
points" for archaeological chronologies in the Sonoran Desert, the Great Basin,
the western Great Plains, and northern Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has a wide range of broader impacts. Its findings are almost immediately
integrated into undergraduate and graduate classes in anthropology, geosciences,
and other disciplines at the University of Arizona and other academic
institutions. In addition, the project interacts with K-12 programs, provides
instruction for visiting scholars from around the world, and facilitates field
and laboratory training for governmental, private, and Native American programs.
The LTRR tree-ring sample collections and data archives are unparalleled, easily
accessed resources for archaeological research, and an under-construction
digital database will enhance the research value of these resources. Increased
understanding of long-term human adaptation to cultural and environmental
variability and enhanced knowledge of past environmental processes help develop
and implement environmental and social policy. Project personnel have
contributed directly to formulating policy for managing cultural and natural
resources by federal, local, and tribal land management agencies.