* 1414298
* SusChEM: Beyond Acylation: New Methodology and Mechanistic Studies of Anhydrides for Stereoselective Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Jared Shaw, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 512,122.00

With this project, Prof. Jared Shaw of the University of California, Davis,
funded under the Sustainable Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM)
initiative (Chemical Synthesis Program, Chemistry Division), seeks to develop
new strategies for assembling complex organic molecules in ways that maximize
sustainability. Laboratory experiments will take advantage of the predictive
power of computational chemistry in the design and development of new reactions.
This project will enable the synthesis of organic molecules that might
eventually become new medicines or other materials with useful properties while
minimizing the negative impacts on the environment associated with many current
techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on harnessing the
potential of anhydrides to act as nucleophiles and to enable the synthesis of
complex organic molecules with few byproducts. These transformations contribute
to sustainability by occurring under mild conditions either in the absence of
additional reagents or with the assistance of an organocatalyst, which serves as
a benign alternative to transition metal-based catalysts. The ability of these
new transformations to produce new organic architectures will be demonstrated in
the construction of natural products derived from the Gelsimium species of
plant. Natural products provide an over-riding theme for both research and
outreach in this project. In addition to being an end-goal of the research,
demonstrations of the properties of chemicals from plants as medicines enables
this research to connect with the general public on many levels. Natural
product-centered outreach includes an annual Science Café to engage the general
public, field trips for local high school students to the UC Davis Arboretum,
and participation in an annual Chemistry Camp for Blind and Visually Impaired
(BVI) junior high and high school students.