* 1414760
* EAPSI: Understanding the effect of temperature on graphene, as a potential material for next generation electronics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Zhengqing Qi, Qi                      Zhengqing      J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Continuing miniaturization and enhancing the performance of modern-day
electronics depend on the introduction of novel materials. Graphene is an
atomically thin sheet of carbon atoms that possesses electrical properties that
could enable faster, smaller, and more efficient electronics. However, little is
known about the effect of high temperatures on graphene. Specifically, if
graphene were used in modern-day electronics, a significant factor that may
limit device performance is the influence of thermal energy on graphene's atomic
structure, potentially mitigating its highly desirable electronic properties. To
this end, a quantitative understanding of how atomic structure is affected by
thermal stress is needed in order to assess graphene's viability for next
generation high performance electronics. This project will image the structure
of graphene (using an atomic-resolution microscope) while it's being heated to
quantized temperatures to understand the influence of heat. The knowledge gained
through these efforts, in collaboration with Dr. Jun Luo at Tsinghua University
in Beijing, will provide rational decision-making as to graphene's readiness for
future nanoelectronics.

An aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope (AC-TEM), necessary for
atomic-resolution imaging of graphene has been established at Tsinghua
University. This project aims to sculpt suspended monolayer graphene into
nanoribbon geometries within an AC-TEM. A heating sample holder will
systematically heat the graphene nanoribbon up to 1100 degrees C while atomic-
resolution images are simultaneously captured. This will allow for the
correlation of quantified temperatures to the atomic structure of graphene
nanoribbons. Ultimately, this project will seek to understand effects of
temperature on geometric factors (i.e. width, crystallographic orientation, edge
geometry) in graphene nanostructures. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.