* 1414786
* EAPSI: Cross-cultural differences in maximizing tendencies and well-being
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David Newman, Newman                  David
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,172.00

Maximizers employ a decision-making strategy in which they attempt to select the
optimal choice in a given set of options. In contrast, satisficers search
through a set of options and will select a choice that is deemed "good enough."
In many studies, the tendency to maximize has related negatively to life
satisfaction, optimism, and positive emotions and positively to regret and
negative emotions. However, researchers have not explored this tendency to
maximize in the domain of friendship selections. To explore this area, a
recently developed questionnaire to measure this tendency in American
undergraduates will be translated into Japanese and distributed to students at
the Hokkaido University in Japan. This research will be conducted at Hokkaido
University in collaboration with Professor Masaki Yuki, an expert in cross-
cultural psychology. The goal of this study is to improve our understanding of
how the tendency to maximize in selecting friends relates to well-being and how
this might vary across cultures.

The present proposal aims to expand on this area of research in two ways. One, a
new domain of maximizing will be examined, namely friendship selections. Two, a
particular aspect of the social ecology, namely relational mobility, will be
considered as a potential moderating variable. Relational mobility can be
defined as the ease in which one can move in and out of social relationships
within a particular society. Research has shown that relational mobility tends
to be higher in the United States than Japan. Thus, the tendency to maximize in
selecting friends would relate negatively to well-being in both the United
States and Japan, but this negative consequence of maximizing would be even more
detrimental to the well-being of individuals in societies of high relational
mobility in the United States. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.