* 1414593
* EAPSI: Groundwork for developing multiscale modeling studies of thermoelectric materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Izaak Williamson, Williamson              Izaak
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

The majority of energy produced through the combustion of gasoline in an
automobile is lost as waste heat. Through the use of thermoelectric materials,
effectively converting waste heat into electrical power, the lost energy can be
recovered. Optimizing and manufacturing thermoelectric materials poses a big
challenge due to the lack of knowledge of structural control and thermal-to-
electrical conversion efficiency. Computational modeling plays an important role
to explore the underlying science and ease this challenge. The project will
investigate how structural features and dopants affect thermoelectric properties
of thermoelectric materiala. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Prof. Jin Zhao and Prof. Jinlong Yang, the experts in first-principles
quantum mechanical method and thermoelectric materials, at the University of
Science and Technology of China in Hefei, China.

The project will study the structural features of thermoelectric materials,
specifically various filled skutterudite compounds-a promising candidate, and
determine structural effects on thermoelectric properties. Density functional
theory-based approaches will be used to perform the structural, electronic, and
phonon calculations. This research will lay the foundation for the development
of a multiscale modeling framework for characterizing and optimizing
thermoelectric materials. Based on the research results, two computational
modeling case studies will also be developed, which can be integrated into
materials science and engineering curriculum. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.