* 1414942
* EAPSI:Studying the Interplay between Localization and Categorical Algebra via Algebraic Topology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David White, White                   David
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Localization is a fundamental tool in mathematics which allows one to zoom in on
the pertinent information in a problem. In the context of category theory?a
mathematical theory which studies objects and their relationships?localization
is a way to view two different objects as equivalent. As humans we do this all
the time. For example, if two different driving routes take the same amount of
time we might view them as equivalent. It is often advantageous to study objects
which have additional algebraic structure, e.g. objects with a multiplication.
The research in this proposal studies the interplay between localization and
algebraic structure using tools from homotopy theory, which views two objects as
equivalent if one can be deformed into the other. Homotopy Theory is a subfield
of algebraic topology, a fundamental area of mathematics which blends algebra
and topology and uses tools from each to study the other. The applications of
this work will strengthen the developing bond between homotopy theory and
category theory, will allow tools from each area to be applied in the other, and
will lead to a better understanding of both fields. The generality of this
approach allows for applications in many different fields of mathematics,
physics, and computer science.

The setting of monoidal model categories guarantees the efficacy of the
localization procedure described above. In this setting there is a further
localization known as Bousfield localization, and algebraic structure is encoded
via vehicles for universal algebra known as operads. The Principal
Investigator?s recent work allows operad-algebras to be studied after Bousfield
localization has been applied to the underlying category. Recent work of Michael
Batanin?with whom this research will be jointly conducted at Macquarie
University?allows for Bousfield localization to be applied to the category of
operad-algebras. The project will attempt to link up these two approaches, to
relate their outputs, to pool the two proof strategies, and to reduce the
conditions required so that this work will apply to a wider class of model
categories. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.