* 1414778
* EAPSI: Improving the Production of Solar Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Vanessa Pogue, Pogue                   Vanessa        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Solar energy, as a renewable energy source, has become a large part of reducing
carbon pollution in order to begin to slow the effects of climate change and
leave behind a more stable environment for future generations worldwide. Silicon
(Si) is used in over 90 percent of solar cells and is the most important
material for solar cell production today. To produce solar cells, silicon must
be manufactured into thin wafers of approximately 200 micron thickness. As
silicon is a very brittle material, breakage during processing is a significant
issue leading to lower production yields and is attributable to a large
proportion of the overall solar cell manufacturing cost. This research aims to
study Silicon wafer microstructure as a result of the typical industry
manufacturing processes and by doing so, better understand the process variables
and mechanical properties that lead to increased fracture. Equipment at the
Facility for Analysis, Characterization, Testing, and Simulation of Nanyang
Technological University at Singapore will be employed for this study, in
collaboration with Dr. David Butler, whose expertise is in the areas of surface
characterization and abrasive mechanical processes.

Specifically, focus will be placed on understanding the manufacturing induced
microstructure mechanisms that are hypothesized to produce regions of very high
residual stress. Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction will be used to study
surface stresses at grain boundaries as well as at regions of high dislocations.
Samples from industry will be used to compare the effects of mono-crystalline
vs. multi-crystalline grown Si wafers as well as the effects of fixed abrasive
diamond wire sawing vs. loose abrasive slurry wire sawing used in the wafering
process. NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research
Foundation of Singapore.