* 1414250
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Technology for Sustainable Growth of Wireless Communication Capacity
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Molly Markley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 255,406.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
communication signal design algorithm, named "dual link algorithm," to fill the
need of sustainable growth of wireless communication capacity. The project will
result in prototypes on a software defined radio platform and an FPGA platform
of the dual link algorithm. The dual link algorithm has the following unique
features: near optimal interference management, it is suitable for distributed
implementation, it is scalable with the size of the networks, and it has fast
and provable convergence. These features provide the following advantages:
allows users to share frequency spectrum with asymptotic data rates that do not
diminish with the increased number of users, useful for large and small
networks, and able to accommodate faster channel time variation, as compared to
the leading competing technology in this market space: weighted sum-rate
maximization algorithms.

This project addresses the following technology gap as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The dual link algorithm was
designed under the assumption of centralized optimization and full channel
knowledge of the network, while in practice, distributed implementation is
desired and each node has only local channel knowledge through imperfect
estimation. To bridge the gap, the project will 1) implement the dual link
algorithm in distributed fashion with distributed channel and covariance matrix
estimation; 2) optimize performance under constraints of hardware resource and
power limits; 3) build a prototype on software defined radio platform; 4)
further develop a real-time hardware IP for FPGA-based platform.

The project engages Prof. Xinming Huang's research group at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute to perform hardware design and to prototype the algorithm
on FPGA platform in this technology translation effort from research discovery
toward commercial reality.

As the number of smart phone users increases, the current method of capacity
growth is not sustainable, which will ultimately result in a decrease in the
speed of data transfer for users. The successful prototype demonstration of the
dual link algorithm will offer a solution to accommodate the exponentially
growing data demand caused by the popularity of smart phones. The wireless
communication industry is facing a capacity crunch caused by interference from
more users and higher data rates and is in urgent need of such technologies
translated in this project. In addition, the potential economic impact is
expected to be significant for the upcoming 5G wireless networks in the next
five years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the sector of
wireless communication technology and service.