* 1414681
* High-Intensity Beam Transport Using Nonlinear Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Brian Beaudoin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 365,796.00

While the best-known application for particle accelerators is associated with
high-energy physics, other applications such as cancer treatment and materials
processing are becoming increasingly important. Since the pioneering
accelerators of the 1930s the maximum energy to which particles can be
accelerated, known as the energy frontier, has increased many orders of
magnitude. The intensity frontier, which refers to the number of particles that
can be simultaneously accelerated, has progressed much more slowly, despite the
importance of a number of applications that require an increased particle flux.
A major limitation to accelerating more intense beams is the inherently
nonlinear behavior that becomes relevant when particle beam currents are
increased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that linear focusing forces can
stably transport a charged particle beam. This has led to a strong reliance on
linear transport systems, albeit with weak nonlinear elements to correct for
various unavoidable beam nonlinearities. Recent theoretical work has resulted in
a fundamental rethinking of the conventional wisdom, which considered nonlinear
elements as inherently problematic, and opened the possibility of a significant
increase in the intensity frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the use of the unique capabilities of
the University of Maryland Electron Ring (UMER) to experimentally explore, in
concert with simulation, a practical demonstration of using a strongly nonlinear
lattice to stably transport intense beams. The research program will exploit the
UMER apparatus to fill the gap between theoretical conjecture and practical
realization. This will be accomplished by examining the many deviations from the
simplifying assumptions necessary in a tractable analytic treatment, which are
inevitable in a real experiment. In addition to the direct benefit of
facilitating stable operation of accelerators at new intensity levels, the
fundamental demonstration that strong nonlinearities can be beneficial, when
weaker nonlinearities degrade performance, could be an important intellectual
contribution to accelerator physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Operating accelerators at higher intensity levels will have a
substantial impact to areas such as materials processing, accelerator based
nuclear energy generation and transmutation of nuclear waste, as well as high-
energy physics. In addition to the direct research effort, this program will
carry out workforce training in accelerator-related careers, educating the next
generation of accelerator scientists. The outreach program carried out by the PI
also creates research opportunities for both local high school students and
undergraduates from across the country.