* 1414798
* EAPSI: Investigating the Evolution of Mimicry in Swallowtail Butterflies through the Lens of Predation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniela Palmer, Palmer                  Daniela        H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Understanding the evolutionary origins and maintenance of biodiversity are
leading questions in ecology and evolutionary biology. Batesian mimicry is a
phenomenon where harmless species (mimics) imitate the warning signals of
harmful species (models) to avoid predation. In response to predation, mimetic
species may evolve multiple forms imitating distinct models. The butterfly
Papilio polytes exhibits striking within-species diversity in its wing patterns
by mimicking multiple toxic Pachliopta butterflies. To understand how the wing
pattern diversity of P. polytes evolved in the context of avian predation, field
experiments will be conducted to test how often P. polytes are attacked by
predators relative to Pachliopta models. In addition, field surveys will be
conducted to quantify the relative abundances of these species. The results of
these studies will characterize the predation pressures are thought to favor
polymorphic mimicry. This work will be done in Singapore, which lies within the
natural ranges of both of these species, in collaboration with a leading
butterfly wing pattern evolutionary biologist, Dr. Ant√≥nia Monteiro.

Batesian mimicry favors the evolution of polymorphism (multiple distinct mimics)
within a species due to negative frequency-dependent selection. The butterfly P.
polytes is a polymorphic Batesian mimic that imitates the wing patterns of
distantly related Pachliopta butterflies. Despite many theories on how
polymorphic Batesian mimicry systems evolve, there exist few tests of relative
predation on mimics and models and few surveys of their relative abundances.
First relative predation on mimics and models by avian predators will be
assessed using lab-fabricated butterfly replicas with varying wing patterns
corresponding to P. polytes and Pachliopta morphology. Field surveys will be
conducted to determine relative abundances of P. polytes and Pachliopta. These
findings will provide new insights into the evolution of polymorphic Batesian
mimicry. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.