* 1414628
* EAPSI: Fundamental experimental materials physics for next generation electronics devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John Hellerstedt, Hellerstedt             John
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Moore's "law", describing the fantastic increase in performance of transistors,
the fundamental building block of computers, is approaching fundamental quantum
limits of scalability and performance. These hard limits of smallest size and
fastest speed coincide with the explosion of demand for electronics, from phones
to the data centers underpinning the internet, and the environmental
consequences of generating the electricity to power this infrastructure. One
possible solution is to develop an alternative transistor based on a completely
different physics: manipulation of the spin state of an electron in place of
conventional voltage modulation. Over the past decade, an exciting new field of
condensed matter physics, topological insulators, has theoretically postulated
and experimentally realized a class of materials possessing a non-trivial
relationship between electron spin and momentum. This crucial coupling between
the two properties could be the link between the existing paradigm of
electronics and future realizations of faster, vastly more energy efficient
devices. However the current materials in which these properties are realized
remain far from robust in the environmental conditions required to be more than
a scientific curiosity. To better understand these existing materials
limitations, this project takes advantage of an experimental technique available
at Professor Yukio Hasegawa's laboratory at the Institute of Solid State
Physics, University of Tokyo, called spin-polarized scanning tunneling
microscopy (SP-STM), capable of measuring the spin states of electrons with
atomic scale spatial resolution.

SP-STM is a particularly well-suited experimental technique within this context;
being surface sensitive and atomically resolved allows for the direct
observation of how the theoretically predicted topological protection manifests
itself in scattering at defect sites. Bismuth selenide, the most promising
topological insulator to date, has a crystal structure and mechanical properties
making surface preparation of samples for STM relatively facile. Measuring the
out of plane spin polarization of electrons at scattering sites will clarify the
existing theoretical framework used to understand topological insulators, and
inform how to utilize the surface states in spin electronic heterostructures.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.