* 1414947
* EAPSI: A Novel Control Scheme for Human Operation of Large-Scale Robot Teams
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Shelly Bagchi, Bagchi                  Shelly
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Multi-agent robotics is increasingly important as society moves toward greater
automation. Because they are more inexpensive than more complex robots and can
cover a greater area, teams of simple robots (also known as swarm robots) can be
very useful for applications such as mapping, search-and-rescue, or precision
agriculture. In many situations, human control of a robot swarm is necessary;
however, the method in which this happens is difficult to define. The question
about how the operator should control the swarm (individual vs controlling the
leader) remains unanswered. If the operator controls the leader, it becomes
difficult to understand how the operator could also control other factors, such
as the formation of the swarm. Solutions to this problem will be situation-
dependent, and the problem becomes more difficult as the number of robots in the
team increases. This project will explore control strategies for large-scale
multi-agent robot teams and analyze the corresponding effect on the
controllability of the system. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Jun-Ichi Imura of the Tokyo Institute of Technology, an expert in
large-scale networked control systems who has developed novel model reduction
techniques that will be used in this project.

When working with a complex networked system, ideally the system should be
reduced to a more manageable model in order to assist human comprehension and
facilitate interactions with the system. However, when standard methods are used
for this process, the input-output relationship is approximated and the internal
network topology is lost; this would be detrimental for applications of multi-
agent systems such as formations or mapping in which the network structure is
very important. Thus, clustered model reduction methods were developed,
resulting in a nested network model which is more easily understood while still
retaining the underlying network topology. The project will apply clustered
model reduction to large-scale robot teams for ease of control by a human
operator. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.