* 1414345
* Flavor Phenomenology with Third Generation Quarks and Leptons
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Alakabha Datta, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 105,000.00

The award funds the research activities of Alakabha Datta at the University of
Mississippi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that there are six quarks and six
leptons forming the fundamental particles in Nature. The quarks are composed of
three "flavors" with charge +2/3 (up, charm, top) and three with charge -1/3
(down, strange, bottom). These particles all mix together in the weak
interaction - for example, the particle that interacts weakly with the up quark
is a combination of down, strange and bottom quarks. The mixing angles and
masses have all been measured precisely, but the values of the masses and mixing
are completely mysterious. This is called the "flavor puzzle". Precision studies
of some quarks and leptons, the bottom and top quark, and the tau lepton, are
very, very sensitive to new physics beyond the standard model. So very precise
studies of the interactions of these objects can lead to understanding new
physics. That in turn can lead to expected signatures at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC). The proposed project will be to explore clean ways to look for
physics beyond the Standard Model in the flavor sector and to find the structure
of the new physics. With the historic discovery of a new particle, the Higgs
boson, by the LHC it is expected that many new particles will be found at the
LHC in the near future. Information on the couplings and other properties of
these particles can be obtained from measurements in the flavor sector. It is
also likely that many new particles may be beyond the reach of the LHC in which
case information on these particles can be indirectly obtained from flavor
physics. The educational activities will involve training of graduate students.
An effort will be made to inform the general public and underrepresented groups
in science about the relevance and importance of quantum mechanics and particle
physics research via talks. There will be efforts to involve undergraduate and
high school students in mini projects connected to the PI's
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project will be to look for new
physics in various flavor sectors that include the b quark sector, the top quark
sector and the tau neutrino and tau lepton sectors. The proposed research
activities of the project will focus on the decays of the b quark that offer
excellent probes of new physics that may or may not be within reach of the LHC.
In particular b decays may offer clues to possible flavor changing interactions
of the newly discovered Higgs boson at the LHC. The project will study the
properties of new physics in b decays with special emphasis on B --&gt; VV
decays where V is a vector meson, in decays mediated by the quark level
transition b --&gt; s l^+l^- where l is a charged lepton and in the semileptonic
decays b --&gt; c({u})tau nu_tau decays.The project will probe the effects of
new physics in top production and decays via CP violating observables. Finally,
this project plans to look for new physics in the third generation lepton
sector. The proposal will explore methods for finding and constraining non
standard neutrino interactions (NSI) from neutrino oscillation and neutrino
scattering data, specially involving the nu_tau and tau leptons. An important
input in this investigation will be to properly take into account hadronic
effects in obtaining bounds on NSI interactions. This is a theory project and
various tools employed by theoretical particle physicists will be used in the
project, such as mathematical calculations, numerical analysis, numerical
simulation, and data fitting.