* 1414728
* EAPSI: Understanding how people incorporate others' preferences into personal choices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Steven Tompson, Tompson                 Steven         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

People are constantly bombarded with choices in their everyday lives. Often
these choices are made, not in a vacuum, but rather in a complex social
environment. The current project aims to examine how people make effective
choices and how they incorporate others' thoughts and feelings into their
decision-making process. This project will directly compare choice strategies of
people from the United States (an individualistic culture that values expressing
one's personal preferences) and people from Japan (a collectivistic cultures
that values being sensitive to others' thoughts and opinions). This work will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yukiko Uchida at Kyoto University, a noted
expert in the field of Cultural Psychology. By understanding the dynamic
interplay between personal information (e.g., personal preferences), objective
information (e.g., product specifications), and social information (e.g.,
others' preferences), this research can ultimately help people make better
choices which lead to better long-term physical health, mental health, and life
satisfaction.

Both psychological and economic theories of choice have almost exclusively
focused on the role of personal preferences in choice, and therefore this
research expands upon this literature by investigating the role of others'
preferences in the choice process. The majority of peer-reviewed studies
examining decision-making processes have examined choice in a Western,
industrialized context, and thus less is known about whether the same choice
strategies may be used elsewhere. In the current project both American and
Japanese participants will complete hypothetical and real choices and the degree
to which these individuals rely on personal information, objective information,
and social information to make choices will be measured. The project will also
examine the degree to which reliance on these different types of information
influence self-reported post-choice satisfaction, confidence, and regret. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.