* 1414687
* EAPSI: Bright coloration and the startle response: an experimental test of a possible anti-predator mechanism
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Beth Reinke, Reinke                  Beth
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Freshwater turtle species worldwide are declining due to habitat destruction,
harvesting, and high mortality early in life. Hatchlings of many species have
brightly colored plastrons (ventral shell) that fade over the course of
development, but very little is known about the function of this coloration.
Because hatchlings experience high predation rates while overwintering in or
emerging from the nest, the bright coloration of hatchling plastrons may have an
anti-predatory function to increase the likelihood of survival during the first
year of life. This project will investigate the function of turtle hatchling
plastron coloration by 1) using visual modeling to determine the conspicuousness
of painted turtle (Chrysemys picta) and diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys
terrapin) plastrons against substrates as viewed by common predators and 2)
quantifying the startle response and re-engagement time of predators to
differently colored replicas of turtle hatchlings to estimate the likelihood of
escape from a predator. This work will be done in collaboration with Dr. Devi
Stuart-Fox at University of Melbourne in Australia, an expert in visual modeling
and signal coloration. The combination of visual modeling and behavioral
experimentation will provide novel information on visual signaling in turtles in
general, and may contribute to the conservation of freshwater turtles.

Irradiance at the nest site and reflectance measurements will be obtained from
hatchling C.picta and M.terrapin plastrons and from undisturbed ground near the
nest to obtain background reflectance measurements. These measurements allow
chromatic and achromatic contrasts to be calculated with visual models that
include spectral sensitivities of predators to determine conspicuousness.
Hatchling righting responses will be measured by flipping each individual on its
carapace (dorsal shell) and measuring the average time it takes to right itself.
By comparing the individual hatchling righting time to the conspicuousness of
the hatchling against its background and the startle response and re-engagement
time of each predator, this project will determine if bright plastron coloration
has an anti-predatory function. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Australian Academy of Science.