* 1414106
* CNH-RCN: Bridging Communities and Scales Through a Global Transdisciplinary Mountain Sustainability Network
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Anne Nolin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2020
* USD 469,980.00

Mountains provide an important and distinctive type of coupling between natural
and human systems. First, mountains themselves have especially diverse and
intricate arrangements of habitats for both wildlife and people. Second,
mountains are prone to natural catastrophes such as landslides and earthquakes
and vulnerable to human-caused erosion and shifts in habitats due to climate
change. Third, the interactions between natural montane systems and human
systems extend considerable distances into lowlands, through use of such
resources as water and timber. Fourth, different mountain ranges often differ in
species and cultures and so provide comparative examples of how coupling between
nature and humans works. This research coordination network will advance basic
understanding of how natural and human systems affect one another by
synthesizing data from the many individual studies of natural and human
processes in mountains around the world. Results will inform management of
forests and water supplies and protection of biodiversity and human livelihoods
and culture in the U.S. and elsewhere. Through the Rocky Mountain Sustainability
and Science Academy, researchers and stakeholders will receive professional
training to enhance career opportunities and support collective action. The
project will also train graduate students and promote international scientific
cooperation.

Using an innovative global-framework approach, the network will identify
commonalities and differences in present-day dynamics and explore alternative
future trajectories of montane coupled natural and human systems worldwide.
Researchers, stakeholders, and policy-makers will develop and test mountain
system typologies and trajectories using dynamic models. The network will engage
in exercises with simple models to build common understandings and co-production
of knowledge with a range of stakeholders. The modeling work and analytical
discussions will promote learning, conceptualization, and comparative analysis
of coupled processes and changes in mountains. The network will provide novel
opportunities for sharing knowledge, experience, and data through face-to-face
and virtual interaction.