* 1414620
* EAPSI: Analyzing cultural differences about how children make moral judgments under social pressure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Elizabeth Kim, Kim                     Elizabeth      B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Recent research has found that in the face of conflicting visual evidence,
children as young as 4 years old conform to their inaccurate peers. Moreover,
Asian American children conform at higher rates than Caucasian American
children, suggesting that cultural differences in parenting style might account
for some of these differences. The present study will explore how cultural norms
impact children's ability to make visual, moral, and social-conventional
judgments under social pressure. Understanding why Singaporean preschool
children might be sensitive to their peers as a key social reference group can
help us to prevent poor social learning and peer pressure issues in primary
school. Singapore's unique educational emphasis and societal control over moral
responsibility makes it an opportune culture for researchers to examine moral
conformity. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Catherine Wan, a noted Asian Social Psychology expert, at Nanyang Technological
University in Singapore.

Using modified versions of a classic conformity task, the structure of the study
will include video clips followed by interviews. During the study, 3-5 year old
children will be asked to perform basic perceptual tasks (i.e. determining line
length), moral judgment tasks (i.e. determining whether it is acceptable to
shove another child), and social-conventional tasks (i.e. determining whether it
is acceptable to wear a bathing suit to school). The rate at which children
either choose to go with their own judgment or agree with what the inaccurate
groups in the videos say will be measured. Surveys will also be distributed to
the parents to examine the influence of child's temperament and parenting styles
on conformity. Examining how Singaporean children make decisions has larger
implications for other collectivist societies and minority groups that share
group-oriented tendencies. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the National Research Foundation of Singapore.