* 1414317
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Scalable NIL-membranes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Yifu Ding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 249,007.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
discovery of nanolithographically, surface-patterned, liquid separations
membranes (NIL-membranes) to fill the need for high performance, industrial
separations. The project will result in a proof-of-concept for the manufacturing
scalability of NIL-membranes. A NIL-membrane has the unique feature of regular,
submicron surface patterns, which are mechanically embossed on existing
commercial membranes, while retaining the original membranes' permselective
separation properties. These features provide the advantages of higher energy
efficiency, lower operating costs, and no chemical waste generation when
compared to the leading competing approach of chemically modifying the
membrane's surface. This project addresses the scale-up technology gap(s)
required to translate the research discovery toward commercial application. In
particular, the fabrication and use of flexible, low cost, polymeric patterning
molds for manufacturing NIL-membranes?using continuous, pressure and temperature
application required for industrial manufacturing equipment?has never been
studied or demonstrated. The project will conduct proof-of-concept research and
development (on a 6" pilot scale) to fabricate flexible patterning films; use
those films in a pinch roll embossing process to fabricate larger-sized NIL-
membranes; and evaluate these prototype membranes for specific industrial
applications.

The project partners with the Innovation Center of the Rockies and Water Think
Tank, LLC to guide commercialization aspects. Additionally, a number of other
food and membrane companies have been actively engaged with the research as
stakeholders to augment testing the larger membranes to be produced in this
technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.

The NIL-membrane platform is important because synthetic membranes are broadly
used in water, food, biopharma, petrochemical, fossil and renewable energy,
microelectronics, medical, and other consumer-oriented industries to perform
"filtration" with varying degrees of "fineness" and complexity. Productivity
enhancements from the NIL-membranes will lower costs, save energy, and lessen
environmental impacts, thus accelerating the benefits of membrane-based
processes across areas such as, water supply and reuse, food and energy
production, and biomedicine manufacture. In addition, the potential economic
impact is expected to be $40M/y in the next 5 years (and grow 7-8%/y
thereafter), which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the global
membrane supply market space.