* 1414131
* CNH:   Competing Demands and Future Vulnerability of Groundwater: Drinking Water Quality and Food Security in Arsenic-Impacted South and Southeast Asia
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2020
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,456,710.00

Hundreds of millions of people worldwide are exposed to dangerous arsenic (As)
levels by drinking untreated groundwater. As contamination causes a variety of
severe health problems in humans, including several forms of cancer and
increased infant mortality Recent field evidence shows how human activities can
elevate As concentrations and suggests many more people could be affected in the
coming decades. Massive groundwater pumping for the supply of both megacities
and rice irrigation could contaminate deep aquifers that currently have low
levels of As, by drawing in groundwater that is high in As. Furthermore,
irrigation with high-As groundwater markedly reduces the yield of rice crops,
threatening food security. The extent of groundwater contamination in affected
areas is determined by a combination of individual farmers' practices and the
decisions made by large municipalities. In order to study these interactions,
the researchers will model how human decisions affect As levels in aquifers
across three river basins that have experienced differing degrees of
development. The study will identify effective measures to reduce the amounts of
As in groundwater and rice crops, leading to safer food and water supplies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquifer vulnerability will be assessed by tracking the
penetration of the radioisotopes of hydrogen in water and carbon released to the
atmosphere between 1950 and 1970 relative to As in groundwater. Several hundred
wells distributed along three 30 km transects, some affected by municipal and
irrigation pumping and others not, will be sampled for these and additional
tracers. These measurements will be combined with modeling of groundwater flow
and As transport to determine whether irrigation pumping or municipal pumping
poses a more serious threat. Farmer behavior will be assessed through a
randomized controlled trial by providing field-kits for measuring As in
irrigation water and paddy soil in some villages and not in others. Currently
all rice farmers in the study area use some fertilizer to boost yields, but
almost no farmer removes the most contaminated topsoil to reduce As before
adding fertilizer and increase yields for years to come. The researchers will
examine the tradeoff between a short-term gain and a long-term gain where the
one-time investment cost is paired with varying patterns of future benefits. The
observations are expected to establish that soil removal and lowering of As in
irrigation water will increase rice yields and protect deep low-As groundwater
for drinking. More broadly, the research is expected to provide evidence for
policy makers that scaling up the adoption of simple alternative approaches can
protect groundwater aquifers.