* 1414338
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Graphenated-Carbon Nanotube (G-CNT) Composites for a Miniature, Optical Fiber-Integrated Spectroscopy Light Source
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Jeffrey Glass, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2015
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on integrating and
translating two new innovations in materials science to fill the need for a more
efficient and adaptable broad-spectrum light source. The project will result in
a proof-of-concept, optical-fiber-based light source for spectroscopy
applications. This miniature light source has the following unique features: the
device is fabricated directly on an optical fiber; the material system is highly
efficient; and the light spectrum of the system can be tuned to a desirable
output. These features provide advantages of smaller size, lower power
consumption and less heat generation when compared to the leading competing
spectroscopy light sources in this market space. This project addresses
important technology gaps in the translation from research discovery toward
commercial application. These gaps include: the demonstration that newly
discovered carbon nanotube-based materials can significantly improve lighting
efficiency in an electroluminescent device structure; that the new device
structure can be integrated directly onto optical fiber; and that the resulting
device meets the requirements of a light source for battery-powered
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Duke University, Wake
Forest University and Zenalux Biomedical, Inc. to build the devices and carry
out application-specific testing in this effort to translate a new technology
from research discovery toward commercial reality. This new miniature light
source is important due to the need for light sources in numerous medical
diagnostic applications such as the detection of cancer cells. In addition, it
is ultimately expected to have even broader impact because all the requirements
being addressed in the project are directly applicable to developing cheaper,
more efficient and more adaptable lighting for everyday household needs.