* 1414342
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Connections Between Economics Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Pietro Ortoleva, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 98,540.00

This award funds research in behavioral economics that will analyze the possible
relationships between economic behaviors using new data and new modeling
methods.

Over the past thirty years, behavioral and experimental economists have made
great strides in identifying behaviors that are hard to explain using the
classic model of economic decision making: these include violations of expected
utility theory such as the Allais paradox, ambiguity aversion, present bias,
loss aversion and the endowment effect. All of these behaviors have been shown
to affect important economic decisions, and have been the subject of enormous
amounts of attention by researchers. However, far less attention has been paid
to the links between these behaviors. This project examines these links both
empirically and theoretically.

The first part of the project employs a laboratory experiment to measure a long
list of well-known behavioral phenomena, including the ones listed above, in a
single group of subjects, allowing the researchers to estimate the empirical
relationship between them. Using these data they are then able to test the
predictions of existing models about these relationships, and can use these
results to guide their theoretical model. The second project develops part of
that model, through a link between two particular behavioral biases: the Allais
paradox in choice over risky prospects (i.e. where the probabilities of
different outcomes are known) and the Ellsberg paradox in choice over uncertain
prospects (i.e. where the probabilities of different outcomes are not known).
Both behaviors can be explained by a unique behavioral axiom -- a generalized
preference for hedging. This model will potentially be helpful in understanding
behavior in environments that have both risk and uncertainty (such as financial
decision making) and to capture more precisely the agent's attitude towards each
of them. The third project extends the empirical work from project 1 by
repeating the same experiment with a different subject pool, focusing on: (1) a
representative sample of the US population; (2) subjects who suffer from anxiety
and depression; (3) subjects primed into various emotional states.

Because the economic behaviors studied in this project are so ubiquitous, this
grant could have a wide impact in many areas of the social sciences. For
macroeconomists, who have long understood the impact of these biases on economic
performance, understanding the relationship between them is necessary for
understanding the distribution of economic outcomes. For policy makers, an
understanding of any common cause to these biases could prove to be very helpful
for any attempt to rectify them. For neuroeconomists and psychologists, such an
understanding could aid the search for the biological bases of economic
behavior.