* 1414642
* EAPSI: Measuring Differential Gene Expression in Viruses from Hot Spring Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Eric Iverson, Iverson                 Eric
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Hot spring environments such as Yellow Stone National Park harbor a tremendous
amount of microbial and viral diversity from the eukaryotic, bacterial and
archaeal domains of life. The ability of some organisms to not only survive but
thrive in these extreme conditions is remarkable and may prove to be a window
into the origins of life on Earth and other planets. Archaeal microbes from the
genus Sulfolobus are commonly found in hot springs worldwide and are routinely
found to be infected by spindle-shaped viruses (SSVs). Archaeal viruses, like
the SSVs, are poorly understood compared to their eukaryotic and bacterial
counterparts. What is occurring throughout the course of infection by the SSVs
is not completely understood. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Li Huang at the Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Microbiology
located in Beijing. Dr. Huang has worked with Sulfolobus and its viruses for
many years and is an expert in the techniques needed in this research.

Gene expression in very few hyperthermophilic archaeal viruses has been examined
and almost none have been examined during synchronous virus infection. Viral and
host gene expression will be measured in the hyperthermophilic archaeon
Sulfolobus solfataricus upon infection with the virus SSV1 and mutants of SSV1
at a high multiplicity of infection (MOI > 5) using cDNA microarrays. No data
regarding viral or host gene expression upon infection with SSV1 or mutants of
SSV1 has been published. The results of this research will provide insights into
a general host response to viral infections within the Archaea and will also
reveal conserved or strain-specific transcription patterns in the
Fuselloviridae. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.