* 1414766
* EAPSI: Studying the surface chemistry of nanoplastics using super resolution microscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Colleen ONeil, ONeil                   Colleen        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The ability to sequence the entire human genome has the potential to lead
researchers and physicians to a better understanding of the implications of
personal genetic differences in various diseases. This research aims to generate
fundamental knowledge on the use plastic nanochannels with dimensions smaller
than a human hair for the sequencing of DNA. The use of these devices for
sequencing would lower the cost of sequencing, but very little is known about
the surface chemistry of plastics on this scale. This research will be conducted
in collaboration with Dr. Yoon-Kyoung Cho and Dr. Sang-Hee Shim at Ulsan
National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). The unprecedented use of
super-resolution microscopy instruments, available at UNIST, will allow for the
first ever demonstration of surface characterization within plastic.

To determine surface charge uniformity on the nanoscale, nanochannels will be
modified with fluorescent tags. These modifications are facilitated through
oxygen plasma activation to generate surface carboxylic acids and coupling to
primary amines through EDC/NHS chemistry. Although modifications are possible,
visualization of these modifications has yet to be achieved. Detection of the
attachment of fluorescent molecules to indicate the uniformity of these
modifications is not possible with conventional fluorescence microscopy due to
the diffraction limit greater than nanoscale dimensions. Super resolution
microscopy, such as Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM), can
break these diffractions barriers and provide resolution as high as 20 nm. This
research will utilize STORM to analyze the uniformity of surface modifications
within various plastics various dimensions and various modification chemistries
to compare with conventional fluorescence imagining. This research will be an
unprecedented application of STORM for nanochannel research and will be
essential for applications in nanochannel electrophoresis and next generation
single molecule DNA sequencing. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Korea.