* 1414643
* EAPSI: Understanding the Interactions Between Precipitation and Pastureland Management Strategies in Contributing to Locust Outbreaks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Colin Brown, Brown                   Colin          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Locust swarms affect the livelihoods of many people worldwide, across more than
60 different countries. Recent research suggests locust swarms can be triggered
in response to low nitrogen in their host plants. Intensive grazing is known to
trigger these low-nitrogen conditions. Similarly, past evidence supports that
increased precipitation may increase the rate at which soil nitrogen stocks are
depleted, leading to favorable conditions for locust outbreaks. These
interactions are particularly important to understand given increased worldwide
demand for animal products and expectations for increased rainfall in the
region, which unmanaged could increase the frequency and intensity of locust
outbreaks. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Le Kang at
the Inner Mongolia Grassland Ecosystem Research Station (IMGERS) in Inner
Mongolia, China. IMGERS has several parcels under long-term management utilizing
different grazing systems, and is an area of intensive research on the Mongolian
locust, Oedaleus asiaticus.

This study will utilize a paired plot design, sampling from 1m circular plots on
continuously grazed parcels at 1.5 and 9 sheep/ha stocking rates. Each plot will
receive either an ambient (1x) or supplemented (2x) precipitation treatment.
Soil NO3- and NH4+ will serve as response variables, collected using partially
enclosed ion-exchange resin membranes over two week intervals on each plot.
Grass nitrogen and carbon content will be measured to assess plant nutrient
uptake across treatments, and confined, field-captured locust nymphs will be
used to assess the optimality of host plants as a food source in response to
treatment type. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.