* 1414078
* From Clarity to Efficiency for Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2020
* Yanhong Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,300,000.00

Title: From Clarity to Efficiency for Distributed
Algorithms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed algorithms are at the core of
distributed systems, which are increasingly indispensable in daily lives. From
search engines to social networks, and from cloud computing to mobile computing,
the ability to develop high-assurance high-performance distributed applications
at low cost is the key to the success and growth of virtually all computer
applications. Yet, developing efficient implementations of distributed
algorithms with rigorous correctness guarantees remains a challenging, recurring
task. This project develops significantly advanced methods and tools for high-
level specifications and efficient implementations of distributed algorithms
with formally and rigorously verified correctness guarantees. The project also
applies the results to the most important and difficult distributed algorithms
and uses the results in developing teaching materials. The broader impacts are
significant improvements to the development of efficient, reliable, and robust
distributed systems, and to the teaching of languages and algorithms for
distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To express and to reason about
distributed algorithms easily and clearly, the project develops the language
DistAlgo, which combines high-level non-deterministic control with high-level
message-history queries for specifying synchronization conditions. The method
for obtaining efficient implementations generates efficient message handlers
from both general non-deterministic control and from quantifications over
message histories, by systematically transforming expensive queries into
efficient incremental computations. The method for correctness guarantees first
translates DistAlgo to TLA+; next, to make the challenging verification tasks
feasible, it uses appropriate formal verification tools like TLA Toolbox, to
exploit high-level constructs in the specifications. The intellectual merits are
a powerful and rigorous language that combines advantages of pseudocode
languages, formal specification languages, and programming languages for
distributed algorithms; advancement of a principled method for program
optimization by incrementalization, the discrete counterpart of differentiation
in calculus; and new technologies for formal verification of distributed
algorithms.