* 1414772
* EAPSI: Investigating methods for improving the alignment of augmented reality in see-through head-mounted displays
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kenneth Moser, Moser                   Kenneth        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Augmented Reality (AR) refers to the use of computer-generated content to
enhance a person's view of the surrounding environment. Transparent head-mounted
displays increase the effectiveness of these applications by providing the user
a hands-free experience, while maintaining an unobstructed view of the world in
front of them. An essential aspect of AR using a head-mounted display is proper
alignment between the computer-generated elements and visible features in the
world. This project will investigate the current methods used to correct
misalignment in AR for see-through displays, and work toward reducing error and
improving the accuracy of these techniques. This study will be conducted at the
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST) in Japan in collaboration with
Dr. Christian Sandor, a leading researcher in AR and Virtual Reality
development. Results will aid AR developers seeking to use transparent display
technologies for services ranging from the indication of bombs located around a
soldier on the battlefield to overlaying MRI data onto a patient during an
operation in order to help surgeons locate tumors. Augmented Reality systems
typically employ one of two approaches to combine computer graphics with a real
world view. Video See-Through AR, commonly employed on mobile devices,
superimposes computer generated images over a camera feed. The second approach
uses semi-transparent displays to overlay computer images directly onto a user's
view of the world. Systems utilizing this see-through technology cannot directly
access the view from the user's eye and therefore must use other methods to
calibrate the placement of onscreen computed geometry. Common calibration
procedures for these displays rely on user feedback to estimate the corrections
needed. These methods, however, are prone to inaccuracies from system and
environmental sources, such as tracking, human, and screen alignment error. This
work will seek to measure the error contribution from individual sources and
work toward the formulation of a general model for predicting and correcting
misalignment errors automatically. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.