* 1414660
* EAPSI: Observing seasonal changes in sea ice microstructure with electric property measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Megan O'Sadnick, O'Sadnick               Megan          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Sea ice plays many roles in Polar Regions including providing habitat for
microorganisms at the base of marine food webs; playing an integral part in the
lives and cultures of polar communities; and impacting natural resources
exploration in the polar oceans. The microstructure of sea ice is constantly
evolving from formation in the fall through melt in the summer. Fundamental
challenges exist however, in observing this seasonal evolution and its effect on
the interaction between sea ice and the surrounding environment. Any removal of
ice cores to obtain data on ice properties, results in the immediate loss of
brine and alterations of microstructure. The remoteness of field sites also
limits observations. Methods to monitor sea ice microstructure continuously and
non-destructively are therefore being explored. This project will study the
potential for the electric properties of sea ice, highly sensitive to the brine
distribution within to ice, to act as a proxy for microstructure. This research
will be conducted at Victoria University of Wellington (VUW) in collaboration
with Dr. Malcolm Ingham, a leading researcher on the electric properties of sea
ice.

This project aims to link one particular property, complex dielectric
permittivity, to the seasonal evolution of sea ice microstructure. Throughout
the Spring of 2013, measurements of low frequency complex dielectric
permittivity in the range of 10Hz to 95kHz were made off the coast of Barrow,
Alaska. Additionally, temperature and salinity measurements and ice samples were
collected for further ice microstructure characterization. A similar set of
measurements is planned for 2014 creating a robust dataset, the first of its
kind, linking low frequency complex permittivity measurements to the seasonal
evolution of key sea ice properties and microstructure. Analysis of this data
set while at VUW will enable the creation of an improved microstructural model
of sea ice and lead to further development of techniques to monitor ice
conditions throughout the year. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Royal Society of New Zealand.