* 1414448
* EAPSI: Biomechanical analysis of the thumb motion for the prevention of thumb injuries
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Ki Seok Sung, Sung                    Kiseok
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,252.00

The mechanical pipette is one of the most commonly used hand tools in the
laboratory. Since laboratory workers perform repetitive pipetting which requires
careful and precise control, it can cause discomfort, pain, or other
musculoskeletal injuries. This research will investigate the mechanics of thumb
movement when using a pipette to better understand, and ultimately prevent,
laboratory worker injuries. Specifically this project will focus on better
understanding control and measurement equipment for experiments on thumb
movement mechanics and on developing a cadaver hand simulator and Thumb Finger
Force Measurement system. The cadaver hand simulator will be developed in
collaboration with Dr. Yong-Ku Kong, a noted expert on biomechanical hand models
and cadaver experiments, at Sungkyunkwan University in Suwon, Korea. This study
will help in designing a efficient hand grip that will reduce the risk of
injuries while holding tools. There are two objectives in this research. First,
the biomechanics in the thumb for a pipetting will be observed through cadaver
experiments in order to see how the ratio of tendon forces connected to the
thumb impacts external thumb motion and force. Second, a biomechanical thumb
model will be developed to evaluate grips when using hand tools and provide a
practical guideline for designing them. The result of this study is expected to
benefit society in two ways. First, it will contribute to improving the wellness
of individuals. The prevention of occupational injuries is investigated and
findings are expected to contribute to improved worker safety and health.
Second, the study could help strengthen the economic competitiveness of the
United States. Since workplace injuries result in economic losses to a company,
this study is expected to increase the competitiveness of the manufacturing
industry by reducing these economic losses. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.