* 1414899
* EAPSI: Evaluation of new nanomaterials as sensing agents using a charge-based separation technique
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Leona Sirkisoon, Sirkisoon               Leona          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The recent discovery of nanomaterials - chemical materials smaller than bacteria
- has sparked new research on their varied properties and potential
applications. This study will compare the utility of two nanomaterials - gold
nanoparticles and graphene quantum dots- as sensing agents for proteins.
Improved detection of proteins implicated in a variety of human health issues is
increasingly important as new threats to wellness emerge. New methods employing
these nanomaterials, in conjunction with a high resolution separation technique,
will be developed to provide the selective and sensitive detection of target
molecules. Currently, nanomaterials used for biomolecular labeling include
inorganic quantum dots and gold nanoparticles, which can be toxic or too
expensive for routine use. The goals of this research are to develop and better
understand the properties and applications of safer and more economical
nanomaterial alternatives as probes for molecular sensing. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Saito, a noted expert in applied
separations, at Saitama University in Japan.

Graphene-based quantum dots are new nanomaterials with the potential to
circumvent the toxicity and expense of currently utilized nanomaterials. These
nanomaterials, when used as chemical modifiers in capillary electrophoresis, or
CE, promise to provide faster and easier detection of proteins like calmodulin
(CaM) - a small, ubiquitous calcium-sensing protein that is diagnostic of
calcium related diseases. The sensing capabilities of the nanomaterials will be
evaluated by CE methods, which will rely on enhanced detection sensitivity
afforded by changes in the fluorescence response of the nanomaterials upon
interaction with the free and calcium-bound forms of the CaM. These
nanomaterials are expected to serve as sensitive molecular probes for enhanced
detection, and as effective separation modifiers, improving the resolution of
bioanalytes in complex mixtures. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.