* 1414752
* EAPSI: Reconstructing gene regulatory networks using the neighborhood sampler
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Thanh Van Tran, Tran                    Thanh          V
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Genetic regulatory networks (GRNs) are crucial to understanding how genes,
proteins and other DNA components interact to carry out cellular processes.
Successful reconstruction of GRNs allows prediction of cellular behavior in
response to external stimuli such as stress and carcinogens. Additionally,
identification of influential genes in the network can illuminate the
development of certain diseases and inform the design of targeted therapy.
Therefore, good models that accurately reflect the workings of a GRN are
important for health research. The aim of this project is to build GRNs that
faithfully capture real network behavior. Collaboration with Drs. Sarah Boyd and
Jonathan Keith- experts in the field of molecular biology and computational
biology- at Monash University in Australia will provide for a new technique to
build networks and data for testing the validity of the method.

Although there are different ways to model GRNs, Boolean networks are simple to
implement and provide a qualitative interpretation of genetic interactions.
Because genetic data often contain noise and error, a Bayesian approach to
network inference accommodates both data and model uncertainty. However,
Bayesian inference is little developed in Boolean network reconstruction. The
Neighborhood Sampler is a new Bayesian technique that uses Monte Carlo Markov
Chain (MCMC) sampling in discrete model spaces. Because the sampler is efficient
and easy to implement, it will be used to learn GRNs. The results of the model
fit are estimates of the existence and type of regulatory relationships (up
regulation or down regulation) in the network. The performance of the Boolean
network model and the Neighborhood Sampler will be assessed with data and
network simulations. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Australian Academy of Science.