* 1414975
* EAPSI: Investigating the behavioral and physical responses of the lemon damselfish to ocean acidification
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* B. Wren Patton, Patton                  Britta         W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Approximately one quarter of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) enters the ocean
each year, reacting with water to cause ocean acidification. It has been shown
that resulting increases in CO2 levels dramatically affect fish behavior and
physiology, suggesting potentially dire consequences for ecosystem structure and
human socioeconomic systems dependent on marine fisheries. Under the influence
of elevated CO2, fish become attracted to predators instead of aversive of them,
and homing behavior is disrupted among other effects. This project will
investigate the capacity for fish to cope with increasing ocean acidification
associated with climate change. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Phillip Munday, one of the first researchers to investigate the impacts
of increasing ocean acidity on fish at James Cook University in Australia. The
data will be collected at the Lizard Island Research Station on the Great
Barrier Reef.

While the results from these experiments are striking, it remains unknown
whether fish have an adaptive capacity to contend with a gradual rate of ocean
acidification; critical knowledge for developing management and mitigation
strategies. This research will determine whether a slow increase in acidity over
a six week period will induce a within-generation coping response to changing pH
in the lemon damselfish, (Pomacentrus moluccensis). A combination of cognitive
and morphological responses will be measured. First, cognitive impacts will be
determined by means of a spatial learning task under different CO2 conditions.
This will be complemented by physiological measures the gill. As gills are the
direct interface between a fish and its environment, and are known to show
plastic response to stress and acid conditions in freshwater, they are likely to
be one of the first places a plastic phenotypic response to acidifying waters
may occur. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.