* 1414842
* EAPSI: Exploring the mysterious behavior of nitrogen cycling in seagrass ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kateri Salk, Salk                    Kateri         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Coastal environments today are receiving unprecedented amounts of nitrogen, an
important nutrient that, in excess, results in nuisance algal blooms, oxygen
deficiency, and fisheries collapse. Mitigation efforts will depend on an
understanding of the natural pathways by which nitrogen is removed. This
research will examine the environmental conditions that control two microbial
nitrogen removal processes, denitrification and anammox. There are still many
uncertainties concerning the environmental factors that control these processes
in coastal ecosystems, as the anammox process has only recently been discovered
and hypothesized to rival denitrification in its removal of nitrogen. These
uncertainties will be addressed through a series of environmental monitoring and
tracer experiments conducted in seagrass sediments in Australia. This work will
be accomplished in collaboration with Dr. Dirk Erler, an expert in the field of
coastal nitrogen cycling with access to unique analytical equipment and field
sites at Southern Cross University.

In particular, this research will investigate (a) the environmental conditions
conducive for the production of the greenhouse gas, nitrous oxide, in systems
where denitrification and anammox co-occur and (b) the role of organic carbon in
determining the contributions of anammox and denitrification to nitrogen
removal. Chambers will be installed on sediments in seagrass beds to enable in
situ monitoring of denitrification, anammox, and nitrous oxide production rates.
Isotopic tracers will be added to the incubations to track the formation of end
products of nitrogen cycling processes by mass spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry. These sediments will also be analyzed for a suite of environmental
parameters that can be examined as possible controlling factors. Very little
nitrogen cycling research has been conducted in seagrass ecosystems, so this
study will provide novel insights into nitrogen removal processes and greenhouse
gas production in this environment. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.