* 1414179
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Novel Reactive Separation Process for the Clean-up of Landfill Gas and Other Gaseous Renewable Fuels
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,176.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating novel
catalytic oxidation technology based on the "pore-flow reactor" (PoFR) concept
together with an ultra-violet (UV)-photodecomposition-based (PhoR) technology
for the removal of siloxanes, a particularly problematic class of impurities
found in biogas and landfill gas (LFG). This technology addresses the need for
the development of a novel clean-up method to remove toxic contaminants from
these important renewable fuels. The project will result in the completion and
the validation of the proof-of-concept both at the lab-scale and the field-scale
of this landfill gas and biogas clean-up technology. This LFG and biogas clean-
up system has the following unique features: (i) it completely destroys the
toxic contaminates rather than transfer them into a different medium; (ii) it
does not require the use of adsorption media and their regeneration or the
flaring of desorbed contaminants; (iii) it is a continuous process. These
features provide process performance, reliability, safety, environmental and
cost savings advantages when compared to the leading competing
adsorption/absorption technologies in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The preliminary results, so far, with the LFG/biogas
clean-up technology are promising. This project addresses technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application, specifically:
(i) gaining a better insight about the characteristics of each individual
technology subsystem (PoFR and PhoR), but also how they potentially function
together as an integrated technology; (ii) acquiring a better understanding of
the reaction/transport processes that occur during contaminant destruction;
(iii) developing an effective process model to be able to optimize performance
without the need of extensive and costly experimentation; (iv) field-testing of
the technology to validate its ability to function with real LFG and biogas; (v)
process modeling to demonstrate process feasibility &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages three principal partners, the University of Southern California
(USC) and two small US companies, Media and Process Technology, Inc. of
Pittsburgh, PA (M&amp;PT), and GC Environmental, Inc. of Anaheim, CA (GCE)
working as a team to develop this novel cost-effective clean-up method to remove
toxic contaminants from LFG and biogas. The project will engage three additional
broader-context partners, namely the EISGTTP Program at San Diego State
University (guiding commercialization aspects), and a small business (BENA) and
Southern California Gas Company (SoCalGas), both providing test environments,
all working together towards a common goal of the translation of this technology
from research discovery toward commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
novel clean-up technology is important because it will allow LFG and biogas to
gain their full potential as renewable fuels; it also shows promise for
widespread application, beyond the LFG/biogas market, for volatile organic
compounds (VOC) destruction in contaminated gas streams, encountered in many
energy and industrial applications. This technology will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the renewable energy and environmental fields by providing
superior treatment capability allowing engines, combustion and process equipment
to experience longer life with less maintenance.