* 1414053
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Variable Displacement Linkage Pump Functional Demonstration
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Michael Gust, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2016
* USD 243,355.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a variable
displacement adjustable linkage pump to commercial application to fill the need
for a hydraulic pump with high efficiency at low volumetric displacement. The
project will result in a functional prototype of a multi-cylinder variable
displacement linkage pump. This adjustable linkage pump has the following novel
features: 1) it uses low friction pin joints, 2) it can reach true zero
displacement, 3) the piston reaches the same top dead center position regardless
of the displacement, and 4) it can pump corrosive fluids. These features improve
efficiency and allow the pump to be used in a wide range of applications and
environments, when compared to market leading variable displacement hydraulic
pumps. This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates
from research discovery toward commercial application: constructing a dynamic
model of the pump, constructing a framework for multi-domain multi-objective
optimization of machines with mechanisms and applying the method to optimize the
pump for water pumping applications, and designing and testing a multi-cylinder
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages CAT Pumps, a leader in
fixed displacement linkage pump manufacturing, to aid in the design for
manufacturing and prototyping process. They will give guidance on customer
requirements in this technology translation effort from research discovery
towards commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variable displacement
linkage pump is a disruptive technology for fluid power and fluid conveyance
markets by providing a broadly applicable highly efficient variable displacement
pump. The energy savings from the use of the highly efficient pump directly
result in a reduction in fossil fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.
In addition, the pump can easily operate with water, which enables the fluid
power industry to transition to environmentally friendly water hydraulics,
eliminating damaging oil leaks and spills. In addition, there is a projected
$15-30M in revenue over the next four years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the fluid power and fluid conveyance markets.