* 1414000
* TWC: Frontier: Collaborative: CORE: Center for Encrypted Functionalities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,06/30/2021
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2021
* USD 999,992.00

The Center for Encrypted Functionalities (CORE) tackles the deep and far-
reaching problem of general-purpose "program obfuscation," which aims to enhance
cybersecurity by making an arbitrary computer program unintelligible while
preserving its functionality. This can in turn enable a host of applications,
such as hiding from potential adversaries the existence of vulnerabilities that
may have been introduced through human error in the design/development process,
thereby preventing tampering or deterring reverse engineering, or hiding
cryptographic keys within software, thereby strengthening encryption and
information transfer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the heart of the Center's
research activities is the development of new and rigorous mathematical
techniques to build faster and more secure general-purpose mechanisms enabling
such software. In pursuit of this goal, the CORE team tackles many technical
questions: Can secure general-purpose mechanisms avoid the inefficiency overhead
that arises from Barrington's Theorem? Can the security of these mechanisms be
proven to hold against idealized adversaries, or be based on natural non-
interactive hardness assumptions? Can these approaches be securely leveraged to
protect data from rogue insiders, who must be able to access some data in the
clear? Finally, can these mechanisms be used to reduce the level of interaction
required to accomplish secure communication and computation tasks? In addition
to its direct research program, the Center organizes retreats and workshops to
bring together researchers to carry out the Center's mission. The Center also
engages in high-impact outreach efforts, such as the development of free Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs).