* 1414812
* EAPSI: Investigating the role of prediction in Korean English learners
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Adrienne Johnson, Johnson                 Adrienne
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

While many adults struggle to learn a second language, children have the ability
to learn multiple languages very quickly and easily. This project will
investigate why some adults may be better at learning languages than others.
This project will also address the on-going debate as to whether adult second
language (L2) learners truly process language in the same way as native
speakers, even according to precise online, or real-time, measurements. These
questions are particularly relevant to Korean learners of English because Korean
and English have very different language structures. Understanding if adult
Korean speakers are able to become fully native-like in their online processing
of English sentences can help to inform research-based pedagogical practices and
policy decisions in language education. This project will be completed in
collaboration with Dr. Yo-An Lee at Sogang University in South Korea.

Native speakers of a language do not wait until the end of the sentence to try
to understand it or predict upcoming words. However, little is known about
whether L2 learners are also predictive processors. The current study tests two
competing hypotheses regarding the use of prediction in L2 processing. Whereas
one proposal predicts that advanced L2 learners will be able to use prediction
similarly to native speakers, a more recent proposal suggests that such native-
like processing is not possible even at advanced proficiency levels.
Specifically, this project examines pre-verbal gap-filling in wh-dependencies
using a moving window, non-cumulative self-paced reading paradigm. In
particular, this project will investigate whether manipulating the linguistic
distance between the filler and possible gap mediates whether native or
nonnative speakers are able to demonstrate subject filled-gap effects. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of
Korea.