* 1414236
* PFI:AIR - TT:  One-Step Process for High Efficiency Textured Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Marcie Black, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 255,703.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a research
discovery on the use of aluminum for silicon surface texturing to fill the need
for lower cost fabrication methods for silicon solar cells. The project will
result in a prototype of a nanotextured silicon solar cell based on a one-step
fabrication process. The one-step fabrication process is important because it
addresses the need to develop sustainable, low cost solar manufacturing
technology while maintaining high energy conversion efficiency. It has the
following unique features: it uses aluminum in a dual role to form a p-n
junction in crystalline silicon while simultaneously texturizing the silicon
surface to reduce reflective losses; it reduces the number of processing steps
required for solar cell fabrication, and it is based on earth abundant
materials. These features provide several advantages including reduced process
complexity, improved sustainability, and reduced cost when compared to the
leading competing process which uses gold and silver to etch the silicon surface
to fabricate nanotextured solar cells in this market space. The project engages
Bandgap Engineering Inc., a leading developer of silicon nanowire solar cells,
to provide device testing and evaluation capabilities, assist with cost model
development and guide commercialization aspects in this technology translation
effort from research discovery toward commercial reality. This project addresses
the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. It will investigate the use of an aluminum thin film to
simultaneously serve as the p-type diffusion source for junction formation and
as a catalyst to mediate nanotexturing to form an anti-reflection layer on the
surface. The effect of texturing morphology, i.e. nanowire versus nanocone, on
the optical and photovoltaic properties of the devices will be studied. Methods
to passivate the nanotextured surface will be developed to reduce efficiency
losses resulting from surface recombination. A comprehensive cost model of the
process will be developed to guide commercialization plans. The overall goal of
the project is the development of a prototype solar cell based on the one-step
process that exhibits a power conversion efficiency comparable to or higher than
state-of-the-art nanotextured solar cells fabricated using gold/silver-induced
etching. The potential economic impact is expected to be a reduction in the cost
per Watt of crystalline silicon solar cells over the next decade, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in renewable energy.