* 1414852
* EAPSI: Enhancing spatial perceptual sensitivity on a simulated real-world complex visual search task
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Brian Falcone, Falcone                 Brian          L
* Fellowship Award
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Visual search for specific objects, people, or activities is an important
requirement in many occupational tasks, including reconnaissance and search and
rescue operations. Increasing deployment of unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) has
further added to the need for human operators to search for targets in still and
video images provided by sensors on such vehicles. Developing expertise in such
tasks typically takes extensive practice and training. The purpose of this
research is to investigate the feasibility and benefits of using non-invasive
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to accelerate learning on a
complex visual search task simulating UAV operations. This work will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Daniel Callan, an expert in the field of
aviation research, at the Center for Information and Neural Networks (CiNET) in
Osaka, Japan.

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) will be used to identify specific
regions of activation in frontoparietal cortical networks during task
performance. These areas will then be targeted for stimulation using tDCS.
Electroencephalography (EEG) data will also be collected during task performance
before and after tDCS training in order to observe the effects of tDCS on neural
responses related to complex visual search. The results of this study will
advance theoretical knowledge of the neurocognitive mechanisms of complex visual
search and identify methods for improving skill acquisition in such tasks. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.