* 1414711
* EAPSI:Developing periodic life cycles through interspecies competition
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Emily Meissen, Meissen                 Emily          P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Population cycles occur in many plants and animals; however the causes of these
cycles are usually unknown. For example, although there are 13- and 17-year
cicadas in the United States which exhibit periodic outbreaks in their
populations every 13 or 17 years, cicadas in Japan are prevalent every summer
and lack such periodicity. The understanding of population cycles is important
to managing fisheries and crops, protecting endangered species, and dealing with
species invasions and the spread of epidemics. In this research, the causes of
periodic life cycles will be investigated through a model of two competing
populations. When isolated, the populations do not exhibit periodic outbreaks;
however, when together, the interactions between them cause both to develop
periodic outbreaks similar to those of the famous 13- and 17-year cicadas found
in the eastern United States. This research will be done at the University of
Miyazaki in Japan with Professor Ryusuke Kon, a leading researcher of
periodicity in population dynamics.

The equilibria and cycles of the discrete-time matrix model and their
stabilities will be determined, first through numerical exploration and then
analytically. A bifurcation analysis of the system will also be done to
determine dynamics' dependence on the model parameters. In addition to a basic
linear stability analysis, some specific methods of analysis may include using
Lyapunov functions, the Lyapunov-Schmidt reduction, and/or center-manifold
theory. The dynamics of the model, particularly the stable equilibria which
correspond to phenomena likely to be found in nature, will then be related to
existing organisms. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.