* 1414339
* Molecular Mechanisms of CO2 Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Julian Schroeder, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Plants have many small openings or pores (termed stomata) on the surface of
their leaves, by means of which plants control the exchange of gases with the
atmosphere. It is through the stomata that plants also lose water vapor; over
95% of plant water loss occurs by transpiration from stomatal pores. Stomatal
pores are formed by a pair of guard cells that (by changing shape) control the
size of the pore and thereby simultaneously control the rate of water loss from
the leaf and the diffusion into the leaf of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
needed for photosynthesis and ultimately growth. There are large changes in the
levels of carbon dioxide in the leaves of plants during the day, caused by
photosynthesis and respiration. In the longer term, atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels are increasing; presently they are 40% higher than before the industrial
revolution and are predicted to double during this century. This project will
identify and characterize the mechanisms by which plants sense the level of
carbon dioxide and use this 1) to regulate the size of the stomatal apertures
and 2) to control the number of stomatal pores that form during leaf
development. The role of the stomatal pores in simultaneously controlling carbon
dioxide exchange and the loss of water from the plant place them in a role
central to the response of plants to the continuing increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide and changing patterns of temperature, drought and their
associated stresses. However, relatively little is known about the cellular,
molecular, genetic and biophysical signaling mechanisms that mediate carbon
dioxide control of stomatal function. Identification of the molecular network
that controls stomatal aperture and development and understanding physiological
function will help predict the effects of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels on plants and can contribute to future engineering of crop plants to help
avoid heat stress of leaves and enhance their efficiency of water use. In
addition to training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, the project
will provide opportunities for public outreach and research experiences for
students from disadvantaged groups underrepresented in science and technology
from the Preuss Charter School in San Diego. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A network of
signal transduction mechanisms sense and transduce changes in carbon dioxide
concentrations to regulate both stomatal movements and stomatal development in
plants, thereby optimizing carbon dioxide influx, water loss, heat avoidance and
plant growth under stress. Achieving a mechanistic molecular biophysical
understanding of how the carbon dioxide stimulus is transmitted into the
stomatal conductance regulation network is the long-term goal of this research.
Robust carbon dioxide signaling mutants have been identified and their
mechanisms of action characterized. However, the predicted intracellular
bicarbonate sensors remain unknown. Furthermore, recent advances in this project
have shown a key role of carbonic anhydrases in the repression of stomatal
development by elevated carbon dioxide levels, leading to a model for carbon
dioxide input into the stomatal development machinery. This project will
investigate new working hypotheses by identifying bicarbonate sensing and
signaling mechanisms in guard cells that function in carbon dioxide-induced
stomatal closing. Functional multi-component reconstitution of carbon
dioxide/bicarbonate signaling using heterologous expression systems will be used
to identify the bicarbonate-activated proteins that mediate the carbon
dioxide/bicarbonate response. The project will address the function of
photosynthesis in guard cells for carbon dioxide control of stomatal movements
and the functions of guard/mesophyll cell starch metabolism in carbon dioxide
control of stomatal movements. The functions of the newly identified CRSP
protease and CRSP homologs identified in a systems level cell wall proteome
analysis will be characterized, and a mathematical model and model-driven
experiments will be used to identify new mechanisms that function in carbon
dioxide regulation of stomatal development. The carbon dioxide regulation of
stomatal conductance will also be investigated using a genomic scale new
artificial microRNA library recently developed in the laboratory.