* 1414932
* EAPSI: Stable nitrogen isotopes as indicators of pollution sources in the Yinchuan Plain, China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Stephani Michelsen-Correa, Michelsen-Correa        Stephani
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Over the past 150 years, human activities have doubled the concentration of
reactive nitrogen (Nr) entering the terrestrial nitrogen cycle. Excess nitrogen
in the environment is detrimental to human health and has been linked to soil
acidification, eutrophication, and decreases in biodiversity. China's rapid
economic development in the last 30 years has made it the world's largest
emitter of Nr. As a result, China is currently experiencing some of the worst
pollution problems on Earth. Since Nr affects the soil, water, and air, a better
understanding of how nitrogen moves between point sources and ecosystem
components is necessary in order to develop strong models for predicting the
outcomes of mitigation efforts. This project will investigate the feasibility of
using the nitrogen isotope signatures of tree rings, foliage, and soil as
indicators of changes in pollution sources and nitrogen uptake of plants in the
Yinchuan Plain, China. Due to high pollution levels within the study area, the
research will serve as a good case study for testing these methods then
potentially applying them elsewhere, including the United States, which also
experiences the harmful effects of high reactive nitrogen emissions. The
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hui Qian at Chang'an
University in Xi'an, China. Differences in the delta15N signature of tree rings,
foliage, and soil have been used to infer changes in the cycling of N in the
surrounding ecosystem. Tree ring 15N can indicate changes in the source of N
deposition. Additionally, stable isotopes of carbon (delta13C) and oxygen
(delta18O) as well as dendrochronological methods will be used to determine if
there are changes in the physiological functioning and growth rates of forests
in the Yinchuan Plain due to increases in Nr emissions within the valley. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology.