* 1414940
* EAPSI: Developing a new theory of discrete angle-preserving surface maps
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Edward Chien, Chien                   Edward         D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,263.00

The study of complex functions is central to modern mathematics, and may be
roughly described as the study of angle-preserving maps between surfaces. A
recent application of these maps is their use in the processing of data on two-
dimensional surfaces in three dimensions, such as data from medical imaging or
3D facial scans. The maps provide a way to obtain standardized coordinates on
such surfaces, to aid data comparison. This project will aim to develop a new
finite approximation of these surface maps by proving the Riemann mapping
theorem, a foundational theorem in the study of complex functions. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Drs. Jian Sun, David Gu, and Feng Luo,
noted experts on computational and low-dimensional geometry and topology, at
Tsinghua University in Beijing, China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a piecewise
flat metric on a compact surface, we may construct it as a gluing of Euclidean
triangles, resulting in a geometric triangulation with a finite number of cone
points. This research considers a notion of discrete conformality for such
metrics that allows for scaling of edge lengths by conformal factors at the cone
points, up to Delaunay conditions; and edge flips to transition between Delaunay
triangulations. In recent work, a uniformization result was proven, which
demonstrated that any such metric is discrete conformal to a metric with equal
angle defect (curvature) at each cone point. Furthermore, a discrete Ricci flow
realizes this uniformization, and numerous computations of this flow suggest
that the resulting piecewise linear maps converge to holomorphic maps as the
triangulations become finer. For the case of the disc, attempts will be made to
prove this convergence to obtain the classic Riemann mapping theorem. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.