* 1414894
* EAPSI: Geometry and mechanics of origami surface structures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Levi Dudte, Dudte                   Levi           H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

A class of origami structures called origami tessellations is formed by taking
small, simple 'tiles' of folds and arranging these into design patterns. These
patterns can then fold into surface structures which - thanks to their tiled
design - exhibit exotic geometric and mechanical behaviors. For example, the
Miura Ori pattern is a simple tessellation that, when folded into a surface
structure, can only deform to surfaces shaped like saddles. This particular
pattern was used to send a deployable solar panel into space. More complicated
patterns can deform into surfaces shaped like spheres, saddles and other
combinations. This research will investigate the geometric and mechanical
behavior of surface structures designed by origami folds. This research will be
done in collaboration with Dr. Yasushi Yamaguchi and Dr. Tomohiro Tachi at the
University of Tokyo in Japan. Dr. Yamaguchi leads a computer graphics lab with
on-going projects in computational origami and Dr. Tachi is a leading researcher
in the field of computational origami and origami tessellations.

This project will focus on developing analytic and computational models of the
kinematics and mechanics of tessellated origami structures. These methods will
be used to to simulate the 3D flexibility and to compute the mechanical
properties of tessellated structures. Additionally, this project will develop
techniques to design modified tessellated patterns that, when folded, form
structures that approximate a surface with arbitrary curvature. The project's
ultimate goal is to encourage the application of these structures to problems in
design and architecture, soft robotic systems, and deployable space-bound
payloads. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.