* 1414599
* Ocean Acidification: Collaborative Research: Development of a Compact  Instrument for Field Measurements of pH, Total Dissolved Inorganic Carbon and Total Alkalinity
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Robert Short, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2018
* USD 617,951.00

Ocean acidification, most generally described as resulting from the uptake of
atmospheric carbon dioxide by surface ocean waters, has importance consequences
for ocean chemistry and for marine organisms. Understanding these changes and
their consequences requires an understanding of the complex chemistry of the
dissolved carbon dioxide (or carbonate) system in seawater, and the ability to
accurately and precisely measure small changes in carbonate system parameters.
Such measurements require specialized training and are beyond the specific
expertise of many investigators who would like to pursue research related to
ocean acidification. This project will support the development of a portable,
automated instrument that will enable investigators with limited backgrounds in
chemistry to collect high-quality carbon-system data, providing essential
quantitative context for their ocean acidification research. The sensor will be
a compact, relatively low-cost, robust instrument designed to collect pH, total
dissolved inorganic carbon, and total alkalinity data from discrete samples,
shore-based stations, and a variety of surface platforms.

The specific objective of this proposal is to develop a third-generation "Multi-
parameter Inorganic Carbon Analyzer" (MICA III), which will enable
straightforward measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), total
alkalinity (TA), and pH in the field. This multi-parameter sensor will be easy
to operate and highly portable, with virtually no supporting infrastructure
requirements. The underlying carbon system measurement protocols were previously
demonstrated in the field using MICA I. DIC and pH will constitute the
fundamental pairing from which other parameters (the partial pressure of CO2,
TA, and carbonate ion concentration) will be calculated. An additional directly
measured parameter (TA) will allow assessments of internal thermodynamic
consistency among our calculated and measured properties. To enable TA
measurements within a compact instrument, the investigators will use a novel
equilibration design as an alternative to the standard titration methods. With
this approach, they plan to substantially simplify the instrument, eliminating
requirements for highly precise acid metering. State-of-the-art optical,
mechanical, and electrical design software will be employed in conjunction with
laboratory and field tests, using an iterative approach to develop and refine
the design of MICA III over a three-year period. One of the intended impacts of
this project - generating awareness of ocean acidification - will be realized in
three ways. First, by developing a technology to substantially facilitate
carbon-system measurements, this project will enable researchers with diverse
objectives to collect and disseminate observations of the carbon system on a
much larger scale. Since the proposed technology is fully consistent with best-
practice protocols, results from different investigations will be directly
comparable in terms of their chemical context. In turn, this will reduce
uncertainties surrounding observations and interpretations. Second, the proposed
activities include development of an ocean acidification discussion and
technology demonstration. This discussion will be presented to students at the
new Cousteau Center for Marine Studies at the Canterbury School and at the St.
Petersburg Science Festival, both in St. Petersburg, Florida. The Science
Festival is a locally sponsored event for the general public with attendance of
about 12,000-15,000 residents. Finally, the results of this project will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at national meetings. Field
data and associated metadata collected during this effort will be submitted to
the Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office, which will also
archive the data in the appropriate national archive facility.