* 1414633
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Interactions Among Species Selected for Assisted Colonization as a New Conservation Strategy for Chinese Orchids
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jason Downing, Downing                 Jason          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The moving of species beyond their natural ranges in response to a changing
climate, also known as "assisted colonization", is a newly-emerged and
controversial conservation measure. As a rare example of such an effort, dozens
of species of wild orchids in southwestern China were moved to higher elevation
sites in anticipation of the completion of the Longtan reservoir near the
Yachang National Orchid Reserve in Guangxi Province. One important factor to
consider when undertaking such actions is to understand the interaction of the
moved species with other species in their new ranges. This project will examine
the beneficial fungi associated with the roots of selected orchid species in
both the current and new ranges. This project will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Gao Jiangyun, orchid ecologist and faculty at the Xishuangbanna
Tropical Botanical Garden (XTBG) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The results
will not only provide valuable insights into this debatable conservation
strategy but will help promote research and science-based conservation of
Chinese orchids.

Under the context of climate change, understanding how range expansions can
influence biotic relationships becomes more urgent since global changes may have
the most impact on taxa that are heavily dependent on other taxa. Mycorrhizal
fungi and plant interactions are among the most important of these vulnerable
relationships. Using modern microbiological and DNA sequencing techniques, this
project will identify the mycorrhiza associated with orchids that are part of
the ongoing assisted colonization experiments at Yachang Reserve. After
isolating and identifying the fungi in the root tissues, substrate samples will
be collected to determine the distribution and abundance of compatible fungi in
both the donor and recipient sites. The results of this project will be used to
develop better protocols for this long-term project and will provide a critical
evaluation on the role of biotic factors in the success of assisted
colonization's. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.