* 1414416
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Technology Translation: Air coupled transducer for acoustically assisted magnetic recording
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Albrecht Jander, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 255,912.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the research
discovery of acoustically assisted magnetic recording (AAMR) towards application
in magnetic hard disk drives for greater data storage densities. AAMR exploits
strain effected by surface acoustic waves to temporarily reduce the magnetic
field required to write on the disk and enable higher data density. The project
will establish proof-of-concept of a non-contact transducer for generating
focused surface acoustic waves in the storage medium for selectively addressing
individual data bits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In comparison to other competing
strategies presently being considered, namely bit-patterned media recording,
heat-assisted magnetic recording and microwave-assisted magnetic recording, AAMR
(1) does not require expensive patterning of the storage media, (2) precludes
thermal loading and cycling issues, and (3) provides the possibility of simpler
sub-system integration. The basic principles of AAMR have been proven in
previous work. The technology gap to be addressed in this project is the
demonstration of an acoustic transducer suitable for integration with a
commercial recording head, an important and necessary step towards establishing
the technical feasibility and commercial reality of
AAMR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic hard disk drives have long been the mainstay
for data storage, and, despite threat from solid-state memory technologies, are
expected to continue to dominate the market due to their cost-competitiveness
($0.05-$0.10 per gigabyte versus solid-state storage at $1.20-$2.00 per
gigabyte). Currently hard disk drives constitute a $40 billion industry with
nearly 90% of the market share held by two U.S. companies. Demand for storage is
further predicted to grow exponentially, spurred by the needs of big data, cloud
and supercomputing technologies. These statistics underscore the likely
significant economic impact and pay-off of successfully translating AAMR to the
marketplace.