* 1414465
* EAPSI: Direct Measurement and Identification of Individual Oxidized Mercury Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Crystal McClure, McClure                 Crystal        D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Mercury is a neurotoxin and global pollutant that is currently not well
understood. Specifically, identifying the individual compounds of gaseous
oxidized mercury (GOM) is important for understanding the global chemical
mercury cycle. Thus far, the measurement of specific atmospheric GOM compounds
has not been possible. A large portion of mercury emissions comes from coal-
fired power plants (CFPPs) where GOM compounds are emitted. This project is
designed to identify individual GOM compounds that are typically found in
Chinese CFPPs. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Shuxiao
Wang at Tsinghua University, China's leader in mercury/CFPP research, on methods
of analyzing and identifying mercury compounds. Conducting this project in China
is vital for understanding how much and what kind of mercury compounds are
emitted because those compounds both enter our food supply (via predatory fish)
and are transported across the Pacific to the United States.

GOM can be captured and analyzed from the effluent flue gas created by the drop-
tube furnace. A drop-tube furnace will be used to simulate the emissions from a
CFPP. During this project, gas samples will be taken off of the drop-tube
furnace and analyzed for individual GOM compounds. Different forms of coal will
be burned in the drop-tube furnace over the course of the study to get a better
understanding of which GOM compounds are emitted. Samples taken from the drop-
tube furnace will then be analyzed with a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer to
identify the principle GOM compounds for each coal type. Samples will also be
taken from the flue gas of an existing CFPP outside Beijing to provide real-
world verification. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.