* 1414896
* EAPSI: Design of augmentative and alternative communication devices for Japanese children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kathryn Ringland, Ringland                Kathryn        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder, who have difficulty communicating with
others, use augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices. While
these devices can be found in the United States in abundance, they are more
difficult to find in Japan. The goal of this research project is to work with
community members involved in the support and care of children with Autism
Spectrum Disorder in Japan to design and test an AAC device that is tailored to
their needs. This work will be conducted at Hiroshima University in Japan under
the sponsorship of Dr. Norimune Kawai, a speech language pathologist who works
with Japanese children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. AAC systems aid
individuals to communicate via approaches such as paper-based tools, mobile
applications, and stand-alone devices. This project will design a culturally
appropriate AAC system for use by Japanese children through participatory design
workshops with stakeholders (e.g., parents, therapists, graduate students, and
the children). Participatory design workshops are a method used to engage the
community in the creation of useful, accessible tools. Through workshops and
one-on-one interviews, prototypes of AAC systems will be created, which will
lead to a final design of an AAC system for Japanese children with Autism
Spectrum Disorder. A working version of the system based on the final prototype
will be created and it will be tested by Japanese children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder. This project will highlight the process of designing assistive
technology as it occurs between local stakeholders in Japan and American
researchers, enhancing our understanding of this cross-cultural process. In
doing so, it will help develop frameworks that can facilitate assistive
technology design work across cultures. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.