* 1414803
* EAPSI: Insect mouthparts as indicators of excessive fine sediment in streams
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Patrick Edwards, Edwards                 Patrick        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Excessive fine-sediment in streams is the leading cause of surface water
degradation in the United States and across the world. Fine-sediment transport
and deposition on the stream bottom is a natural process; however, human
activities can result in excessive amounts of sediment delivery to streams where
it harms reproductive habitat for fish and other stream biota. Fine sediment is
hard to measure directly in the stream thus this research seeks to develop
insect-based indicators as proxies for monitoring fine-sediment conditions on
the stream bottom. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Beixin Wang at Nanjing Agricultural University. Using the agricultural streams
of southeast China as study sites will allow extension of the sediment gradient
used in statistical models. For environmental managers in the United States and
across the world, the findings of this research are of potential value in
assisting with the identification of biologically-relevant changes in stream
fine sediment conditions and support efforts to balance economic needs while
protecting critical stream habitat. By using the mouthpart characteristics of
stream insect grazers, this research represents a novel approach to the
development of sediment indicators. This method will not only identify trait-
based indicators, but may also reveal causal mechanisms associated with
macroinvertebrate sensitivity to inorganic fine sediment. Stream insects will be
collected across a wide gradient of fine sediment conditions and examined using
a Scanning Electron Microscope. Mouthpart structure and wear will be quantified
and used to categorize insect tolerance. The hypothesis of this research is to
show that the structure of insect mouthparts and corresponding wear on their
mandibles are a useful biologic indicator of excessive inorganic fine sediment
conditions on the bottom of streams. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.