* 1414965
* EAPSI: Insights into the growth of continents from an innovative method of simultaneously determining uranium-lead age, hafnium isotopes, and trace elements in zircon
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Graham Hagen-Peter, Hagen-Peter             Graham         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Continental arcs are tectonic plate boundaries where an oceanic plate descends
into the mantle beneath a continent. Magmas sourced from recycled continental
crust, the underlying mantle, and the descending oceanic plate are emplaced in
the crust as large granitic bodies and erupted at volcanoes. Magmas sourced from
the mantle that crystallize in the crust of the overriding plate are new
additions of continental crust, whereas magmas sourced from remelting of the
overriding plate recycle and "distill" previously existing continental material.
Both processes probably act in continental arcs, but the extent of each is
currently debated. The granitic roots of the Ross orogen, a ~3500 km-long
continental arc that was active around 500 million years ago, are exposed in
Antarctica. Determining whether these huge tracts of granitic rocks were sourced
from the mantle or from recycled crust has important implications for the role
of continental arcs in generating large volumes of continental crust. Advanced
analytical facilities housed at the National Taiwan University will be used to
measure the isotope and trace element composition of the mineral zircon, which
records important information about the source of the igneous rocks in which the
minerals form. This research will be done in collaboration with Dr. Sun-Lin
Chung at the National Taiwan University.

This project will employ uranium-lead geochronology coupled with the hafnium
isotope and trace element compositions of the mineral zircon to study the age
and source of arc granites from the Ross orogen. A routine for the simultaneous
measurement of trace elements, U-Pb, and Hf isotopes in zircons by laser-
ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry will be developed. This
research will employ an innovative method to explore the role of continental arc
magmatism as a mechanism of crustal growth. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.