* 1414594
* EAPSI: Learning word representations containing foreign sounds may be easier when learning from multiple talkers
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrea Davis, Davis, Andrea K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Learning a second language is crucial to interacting in today's global world.
Much of the difficulty in acquiring a second language is in learning its sound
system. Failure to learn the sound system can lead to incorrect word
representations, word representations being made up of smaller sound units: for
example, the sounds d, ah, g make the word dog. Understanding what can make
words containing foreign sounds easier to learn is important for developing
better methods of teaching a second language. Many studies suggest that hearing
words produced by multiple talkers helps infants and young children to develop
more robust word representations. Multiple talkers may also help second language
learners, who are likewise inexperienced with the language's sound system.
However, second language learners may not benefit from multiple talkers in all
circumstances. In collaboration with Dr. Jane Tsay at National Chung Chen
University in Taiwan, this project will explore the circumstances in which
multiple talkers are beneficial for second language learners.

Results from a behavioral experiment at the Psycholinguistic Lab at Chung Cheng
National University will shed light on the question of why multiple talkers are
helpful for forming a robust word representation. It will also speak to the
long-standing question: to what extent is perceiving speech related to producing
speech? Based on the PI's previous studies, it is hypothesized that when
perceiving new words, experienced learners will not benefit from multiple
talkers, while inexperienced learners will. In contrast, it is hypothesized that
even experienced learners will continue to benefit from multiple talkers when
producing new words, although they will cease to benefit when perceiving new
words. Such a result would suggest that speakers use different word
representations for perceiving vs. producing words. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.