* 1414739
* EAPSI: Designing Tailorable Bioplastics for Biomedical Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Alex Levine, Levine                  Alex           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are biodegradable and biocompatible plastics that
are natively produced by bacteria as an energy storage material. These plastics
have physical properties similar to petroleum based plastics, with existing
applications ranging from bulk commodity goods to tissue engineering materials.
The biodegradable aspect of PHAs leads toward environmentally sustainable
applications, such as biodegradable shopping bags, whereas the biocompatibility
of PHAs allows for the pursuit of medical applications such as wound dressings
and tissue scaffolds. In collaboration with Dr. Keiji Numata, a leading expert
in biopolymers at the RIKEN institute in Japan, this study aims to develop
cutting edge PHA plastics with enhanced physical properties. This research will
result in a novel PHA with a high degree of cross-linking, which is hypothesized
to increase flexibility in stiff and brittle PHAs, and incorporate shape-memory
features into soft and elastic PHAs. Stronger and flexible PHAs may find uses as
bone scaffolds to promote rapid healing, or as stents for patients suffering
from collapsed arteries. Softer PHAs could be used as artificial tissue, such as
heart valves or nerve grafts for repairing damaged neurons.

To achieve this goal, unsaturated PHAs will be chemically modified by thiolene
click chemistry. Using a polythiol linker, the PHA side-chain alkene functional
groups will be cross-linked using UV light. It is anticipated that controlling
the extent of the modification will result in plastics with tailorable physical
properties, tunable as required for specific applications. In addition to
physical properties, PHAs will be tested for biocompatibility to ensure they
maintain relevant for medical uses. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.