* 1414862
* EAPSI: Integrating mechanical and biochemical cues in wound healing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sarah Schrier, Schrier                 Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

A fundamental question in biology is how cells can maintain their cell-cell
contacts and move together in two-dimensional and three-dimensional space. This
process is important in functions including tissue development, wound healing,
and invasion of tumor cells. While there is considerable knowledge about how
single cells migrate, little is known about how groups of cells migrate
together. Many researchers have looked into individual molecules that contribute
to the ability of cells to migrate collectively, but investigations into the
role of the mechanical properties of the environment are still in early stages.
In collaboration with Dr. Paul Matsudaira, of the National University of
Singapore, this study will use substrates with different mechanical properties
to investigate how these mechanical cues mimicking physiological environments,
for example stiffness, effect collective cell migration. The Mechanobiology
Institute at the National University of Singapore has state of the art
instrumentation and expertise that will enable the completion of this study.

More specifically, this project will use a tunable viscoelastic substrate to
investigate how mechanical cues from the environment affect collective cell
migration. The balance between cell-matrix adhesions and cell-cell adhesion will
be studied by looking into the biochemical properties that mediate substrate
induced collective cell migration. Single-cell confocal and fluorescence imaging
will be employed, along with development of automated image-processing tools, to
quantitatively assess cell-junctions in real time migration experiments.
Modulating biochemical factors known to be important in collective cell
migration (including focal adhesion kinase, proteases, and cadherins) will be
used to uncover mechanisms that differ between stiff and viscous substrate
migration to develop a more complete model of how epithelial cells make
collective decisions in response to their environment. The successful completion
of this project will result in a more concrete understanding of tissue migration
and dynamics in physiological environments. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.