* 1414705
* EAPSI: Development of an artificial electric organ using smart materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Paul Phamduy, Phamduy                 Paul           T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Populations of electric eel or weakly electric fish may often face man-made
dangers or natural disasters like water pollution, tropical cyclones, or oil
spills. The use of electrical impulses using stationary devices has been shown
to be an effective method to influence their behavior. An alternative approach
to steer live electric eels away from danger may involve self-controlled
biologically-inspired robots signaling electrical impulses. This project will
focus on understanding the feasibility of such an approach. This research
project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Il-Kwon Oh at the Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, who specializes in the areas of
smart materials, artificial muscles, and biomimetic devices.

Specifically, this project will explore artificial electric organs based on
smart materials. Ionic polymer metal composites (IPMC) and high-power graphene
micro-supercapacitors will be investigated. This research seeks to utilize such
smart materials to replicate the high voltage pulses seen in electric eels. As
an electromechanical analogy to the function of ion pumps in stacked
electrocytes, the IPMC sheets stacked in parallel charged using a battery can
simulate the buildup of electrical potential. Alternatively, a graphene micro-
supercapacitor sandwiching an electrolytic gel between graphene-coated planar
structures may also pull the ions apart when charged. Further, electrical
characterization tests on electric eels will be conducted for comparison. A
custom data-acquisition device will record the electrical discharges of an
electric eel to obtain a high-resolution reference for the artificial electric
organ. This project will contribute to build a biomimetic robotic eel for the
application in animal behavior research on electric eels. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.