* 1414888
* EAPSI: Characterization and molecular modification of semiconductor nano-devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Timothy Keiper, Keiper                  Timothy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Semiconductors are playing an interesting role in the development of new medical
technologies. Design of nano-devices capable of real-time, on-site medical
diagnostics for the improvement of patient care requires understanding of the
synthesis, physical properties and effects of molecular modification of the
surface of these materials, which change characteristics in specific
environments. These so-called field effect transistors (FETs) respond to the
electric field or electric charge of surface-bound species. Putting molecules on
the surface may increase the FET's performance while specific functionalization
of the surface for desired biomolecules is required for medical implications.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jianhua Zhao at the
Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Dr. Zhao's expertise
in growth and characterization of nanostructures will facilitate production of
single crystalline, high purity nanostructures utilizing a state-of-the-art
molecular beam epitaxy growth environment as well as ample fabrication and
measurement instruments.

Synthesis and structural and electrical characterization of sub-100 nanometer
scale semiconductor materials is essential for application of nano-electronic
devices. The project will focus on electrical transport measurements to evaluate
the efficacy of these materials in FETs: two and four probe current-voltage
relationship, electrical response to applied back-gate potentials, and
resistance vs. temperature. The materials to be studied, gallium arsenide (GaAs)
and indium arsenide (InAs), both exhibit electrical characteristics determined
exclusively by the material due to the presence of Ohmic contacts. GaAs also
offers the opportunity to study the effects of highly resistive Schottky barrier
contacts. As a necessary step in the utilization of the nano-FETs for biosensing
applications, the project will explore selective molecular functionalization of
the nanowires via amine-terminated thiol molecules and passivation of the
substrate by hydrophobic molecules, improving device functionalities. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.