* 1414799
* EAPSI: Understanding cyberinfrastructure in international scientific research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andy Echenique, Echenique               Andy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Computing resources and communication technologies have become the technological
backbone promoting innovation in cutting-edge international scientific research.
As they evolve, so do the social structures that make collaboration and
communication possible. These 'socio-technical systems' - or cyberinfrastructure
- have enduring effects on the scientific community and provide the framework
for advances in a wide array of important scientific projects. This research
will investigate how cyberinfrastructure mediates work and knowledge practices
between Japanese research laboratories and their international collaborators.
This research will provide a foundational understanding of which current
technological systems assist international collaboration and researchers'
methods of utilizing and integrating shared information. This involves
understanding methods of data transfer, data analysis, and integrating distance
work, as well as the systems that mediate and manage these modes of
collaboration. This research will be conducted at the National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) at their Tsukuba headquarters,
providing access to the AIST's Joint Robotics Laboratory, a cutting-edge
robotics laboratory advancing the capabilities of autonomous, humanoid robots
and with deep international collaborations. This research will be performed in
collaboration with Dr. Hideaki Kuzuoka at the University of Tsukuba in Japan.
Our findings will extend current research in cyberinfrastructure by providing a
method of understanding the effects of temporal rhythms within large, socio-
technical systems. Temporal rhythms denote the ways in which work is structured
by time, with examples ranging from applications used (calendars, meeting
planners) to conflicts in publication and career rhythms. Results from this
research will thus demonstrate how temporal rhythms shape interactions within
larger socio-technical systems. This research will enable the design of future
cyberinfrastructure to take into account these temporal rhythms, thus enhancing
future international collaborations in areas vital to the public good. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.