* 1414171
* CNH: Sound as an Element in Coupled Natural and Human Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Jesse Barber, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Recent scientific research has demonstrated that human-generated sound can have
a significant impact on the functioning and character of natural ecosystems and
on human well-being. This interdisciplinary research project will study the
interactions between natural and human systems as they are influenced by human-
generated sound through analyses of the role of acoustics in affecting the
number and diversity of birds and related human activity. The project will
enhance basic understanding of the interactive effects that noise has on bird
diversity and on the perceptions and actions of people. The project will provide
a test of the hypothesis that as bird diversity declines when human-made noise
fills the soundscape, individual and group valuation of wildlife and the
acoustic environment decline, thereby reducing support for nature conservation,
which ratchets declines in bird diversity further downward. The project also
will test the corollary hypothesis that when natural sounds are a dominant input
to the acoustic environment, the natural sounds have positive effects though the
maintenance of biodiversity and more positive human perceptions of the natural
world and the overall human experience with nature. Because the research will be
conducted by an interdisciplinary team of researchers drawn from a diverse set
of fields, including ecology, zoology, economics, resource management, human-
environmental interactions, engineering, and education, it will advance the
integration of social and ecological sciences to better assess and explore
varied management approaches to contribute to the effective management of
natural areas. The investigators will further the project's impact by actively
employing citizen scientists in the collection of data, thereby increasing
knowledge, awareness, and understanding of scientific concepts and techniques
among those involved in the research effort. The project also will provide
special interdisciplinary education and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students and for post-doctoral researchers. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct this project at
both local and regional scales. At the local-scale, they will conduct playback
experiments of the natural and human-related components of acoustic environments
to examine sensory awareness gauged through changes in bird diversity, the use
of space by people, and human well-being. They will experimentally examine the
relationship between background sound level and urban biodiversity as well as
its coupled relationship with human experience in nature. They will manipulate
the soundscape of local natural areas using arrays of speakers. In one set of
experiments, they will artificially elevate noise levels in natural areas by
adding additional traffic noise to assess its impact on bird biodiversity and
human perceptions. They also will experiment with the playback of bird choruses
containing varying numbers of bird species but the same acoustic power in
laboratory and city park settings, coupling data from these experiments with
data from surveys and biomarkers to measure the psychological benefits and
physiological response to different sound stimuli. At the regional scale, the
investigators will evaluate how sound-management strategies affect space use by
birds and people in Grand Teton National Park, and they will assess the human
valuation of their experiences under different strategies.