* 1414737
* EAPSI: Nanoparticle design for controlled and efficient delivery of anti-cancer therapeutics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sarah Decato, Decato                  Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Cancer remains a leading cause of death worldwide. Chemotherapy is a potent
treatment method; however, the efficient delivery of anti-cancer drugs remains a
major barrier to successful treatment. Improvements have been achieved using
nano-scale self-assembling particles, which can encase the drug to lessen side
effects and to target cancerous tissue. The functionality of the nanoparticles
is dictated by the design of the individual molecules comprising the assembly.
In this research, fluorine-containing molecules have been designed to
efficiently deliver anti-cancer drugs and to simultaneously enable magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), which can visualize nanoparticle behavior. The proposed
molecules will be synthesized and evaluated at the University of Tokyo in Japan
in collaboration with Dr. Kazunori Kataoka, whose expertise and equipment will
greatly facilitate and strengthen this research project.

Multifunctional polymers have been synthesized to address the challenge of
targeted drug delivery towards improved chemotherapy. These polymers self-
assemble into nanometer-sized micelles that can encapsulate anti-cancer agents,
providing enhanced solubility and reduced systemic toxicity. This is achieved
via a strategic polymer design including a symmetrical fluorinated segment to
increase the stability of the assembly and to provide simultaneous 19F MRI
capability. These dually functional particles can be applied to disease
diagnosis and in vivo bioavailability analysis. In this research, targeting
peptide ligands will be appended to the surface of the nanoparticles to
facilitate penetration into cancer cells. Additionally, the behavior of the drug
carriers in vitro (via cell toxicity and cell uptake assays) and in vivo (via
intravital real-time confocal laser microscopy measurements) will be
investigated. These experiments will elucidate key self-assembly interactions,
which can then be leveraged to design more efficient and environmentally benign
nanoparticles. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.