* 1414645
* EAPSI: Synthesis and Characterization of Metal-Based Imaging and Therapeutic Agents
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Christopher Lemon, Lemon                   Christopher    M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Metal ions, particularly iron and platinum, have an important role as both
diagnostic and therapeutic agents in the field of medicine. The majority of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) agents feature a metal ion. Some radioactive
metals are used for diagnostic imaging, while others can be used for
chemotherapy, delivering localized radiation to a tumor and minimizing damage to
healthy tissue. In order to exploit these metals for medical applications, a
molecule with flexible arms capable of wrapping around a metal ion will be
prepared. These experiments will be carried out at the University of Auckland in
New Zealand in collaboration with Dr. Penelope Brothers, an expert in the field
of metal-based medicine. The potential of these compounds as photosensitizers
for photodynamic therapy (PDT) and contrast agents for MRI will be studied at
the University of Auckland Photon Factory laser laboratory and the Centre for
Advanced MRI, respectively. With the development of new compounds, therapeutics
with greater efficacy, or imaging agents with better sensitivity, will improve
patient outcomes across the globe.

This project will exploit novel picket-fence corrole ligands that are amenable
to the coordination of biologically relevant metal ions for a variety of
applications: PDT, alpha-radiotherapy, Beta-radiotherapy, and MRI. In this
motif, the corrole macrocycle will be appended with flexible arms that can
rapidly and tightly coordinate a metal center. The coordination chemistry of
these compounds will be studied with a variety of metals for which corrole
complexes are rare or nonexistent, including bismuth, rhenium, gadolinium, and
other lanthanides. Finally, the stability of the metal complexes will be
evaluated when exposed to conditions, such as reducing thiols, which mimic a
biological environment. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Royal Society of New Zealand.