* 1414041
* CNH: Forest Governance and Climate Change in Driving Native Insect Outbreaks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Christopher Bone, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,360,000.00

Outbreaks of native insects periodically strip forests in many parts of the
U.S., and understanding the natural forces that lead to outbreaks has been a
long-standing scientific goal. Much less studied has been how human activities
may interact with natural processes to promote or inhibit outbreaks. This
project will investigate how the governance of forests at local to federal
levels, human-caused climate change, fire frequency, and forest composition
together determine outbreaks of the mountain pine beetle in western North
America. This native insect has recently expanded its range and abundance and
killed millions of hectares of trees. Results are expected to provide a
scientific basis for the crafting of new policies that can better prevent or
mitigate outbreaks of this and other insects and the substantial economic losses
they cause. A modeling tool for managers and researchers will be made publicly
available, and the project will collaborate with the U.S. Forest Service to
support control of outbreaks. The research will also train graduate students
from groups underrepresented in science and reach out to K-12 and undergraduate
students through local events and an open, online
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance understanding of
coupled natural and human systems that are governed by feedbacks between
government policies, ecological processes and climate change. The study will
develop an agent-based, computational model with submodels for social and
ecological components that interact to produce emergent, large-scale patterns of
forest change under a variety of climate change scenarios. Researchers will
employ high-performance, parallel computing that strategically distributes
climate, insect, and human decision-making to provide a multitude of simulations
representing the space of potential future landscape patterns. Uncertainty
analysis will provide insight into how various human and natural processes
interact over time to influence the location and timing of outbreaks.