* 1414430
* EAPSI: Lake-Effect Precipitation Processes Over Hokkaido Island, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Leah Campbell, Campbell                Leah           S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Lake-, sea-, and ocean-effect (hereafter referred to as lake-effect) snowstorms
occur downstream of large bodies of water, such as the Great Lakes of North
America and the Sea of Japan. These highly localized storms can bring heavy
snowfall to urban and rural areas, impacting local transportation, utilities,
education, and commerce. Weather forecasters and weather prediction models
currently struggle with accurately predicting the magnitude, timing, and spatial
distribution of this heavy snowfall. An improved understanding of precipitation
processes in lake-effect storms is imperative to improving forecast skill during
these events. This study will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yasushi
Fujiyoshi, a noted expert on lake-effect snowfall, at the Institute for Low
Temperature Science at Hokkaido University. The island of Hokkaido receives much
of its annual snowfall from lake-effect events, and this study will involve the
analysis of a lake-effect event that impacted Hokkaido Island during winter
2013-2014 using both observational data and simulations of the storm.

The magnitude, timing, and spatial distribution of lake-effect snowfall is
strongly influenced& by the spatial and temporal patterns of observed
hydrometeor types and the degree of riming within the storm. Using observational
data such as atmospheric soundings, surface snow crystal observations, dual-
polarization radar, and satellite imagery, as well as numerical model
simulations, this research will examine the precipitation structures and
hydrometeor-type distributions within a lake-effect storm affecting Hokkaido
Island and will explore how these factors affect the intensity, timing, and
distribution of lake-effect precipitation over the Sea of Japan. Analysis of
lake-effect events from Lake Ontario, New York, and the Great Salt Lake, Utah,
which are smaller bodies of water, will also be incorporated into a comparison
of the relevant microphysical processes in order to advance our understanding of
this phenomenon across many scales and geographical locations. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.