* 1414879
* EAPSI: An examination of relationships between mindfulness, personality traits, and levels of anxiety and depression in American and Japanese populations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Melissa Stiksma, Stiksma                 Melissa        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Mindfulness is described as nonjudgmental awareness on the present moment.
Grounded in Eastern religions, mindfulness has gained recent attention in
psychological research due to its association with positive well-being.
Mindfulness-based therapies are associated with decreased stress and anxiety as
well as increased social emotion and behavior. In contrast, certain personality
traits, can serve as risk factors for higher levels of depression and anxiety.
Overall, the current proposal investigates whether levels of mindfulness mediate
the relationship between personality traits and levels of anxiety and depression
in nonclinical populations in Japan and America. This study will be conducted at
the University of Tsukuba under Dr. Shintaro Yukuwa, a current researcher of
mindfulness and emotion. Expecting differing levels of the proposed variables
due to culture and religion, it is essential that the proposed study be
conducted in an East Asian country to bridge the literature gap between Western-
conceived mindfulness and Eastern religious mindfulness. This research aims to
advance the scientific literature on personality traits, clinically-relevant
symptoms (e.g., depression and anxiety), and facets of mindfulness through
comparing data between populations. Of more clinical interest, correlation and
mediation analyses will allow us to see how mindfulness occurs in individuals
and how it relates to pertinent variables. Also of significant interest is
exposure to natural disasters and degree of religiosity. By better understanding
the multifaceted relationship of mindfulness, personality and clinical measures,
psychologists can better help those suffering from mental conditions and create
preventative methods for those at risk of developing clinical problems. Mental
illness can often be greatly reduced in severity: understanding risk factors,
such as personality traits, and ameliorating variables, such as mindfulness, can
have a significant impact in psychology and international society in general.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.