* 1414767
* EAPSI: Understanding How to Breach the Cell Membrane to Enhance Therapeutic Design
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Coralie Backlund, Backlund                Coralie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Biotherapeutics, such as proteins and DNA, are an emerging field in the
treatment of cancer and debilitating genetic disorders. They are currently
limited to targets outside the cell because the cell membrane is a highly
selective barrier. By facilitating the delivery of biotherapeutics across the
cell membrane, the quantities of drug needed, and the resulting side effects on
healthy tissues can be significantly reduced. Cell penetrating peptides allow
the delivery of biotherapeutics and other biologically active materials across
the cell membrane. The mechanism of cellular entry of these cell penetrating
peptides remains a topic of debate. This proposal will focus on quantifying the
relationship between molecular structure and uptake mechanisms for novel
polymer-based cell-penetrating peptides with Dr. Futaki at Kyoto University in
Japan. The Futaki lab has a long history of researching uptake mechanisms of
CPPs and their synthetic counterparts to develop novel, efficient, and effective
means for drug delivery. A fundamental understanding of these mechanisms is
paramount to further development and optimization of these delivery agents.

Specifically, this project will use a ring-opening metathesis polymerization-
based synthetic platform to correlate molecular architecture to membrane
translocation. Given the robust protein delivery of our polymer series, this
research will investigate the predominant method of cellular entry for these CPP
mimics. By varying the ratio of guanadinium and hydrophobic moieties in the
block copolymer CPP mimics, the predominant mode of translocation based on
molecular structure will be evaluated. This research will provide fundamental
insight in design parameters that promote robust uptake and efficient
biotherapeutic delivery. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science.