* 1414404
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Games Programming Assessments for Personalized Mathematics Instruction
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Erin Shaw, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating digital
games programming assessment technology to fill the need for improving K-12
mathematics education. The project will result in a prototype of an online
mathematics curriculum wherein students apply learned math concepts to create
digital games as an authentic transfer of learning. This game-making-based
instructional innovation, GameMath, has the following unique features: a) It is
game-activity driven, i.e., math concepts necessary to achieve gaming effects
are taught/applied together, b) it incorporates diagnostic/prescriptive software
so that it addresses even deeply At-Risk students, and c) it collects/analyzes
student programming interactions within the game-making context for the purpose
of assessing a student?s ability to transfer principles of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;These features provide the following advantages: They
encourage practice/application of STEM skills mandated in new Common Core State
Standards (CCSS) and Next Generation Science Standards, they engage students
with the creative process and introduce game coding, and they address the unique
needs of At-Risk students to help them recover to grade level proficiency and
encourage them to continue studies in the STEM disciplines. When compared to the
leading competing technologies in this market space, including games that teach
math, math tutoring systems, and hands-on engineering activities, GameMath
encourages production, as opposed to consumption, of games and promises to be
less expensive and easier to assess than robotics and other engineering based
approaches to mathematics instruction.&lt;br/&gt;The GameMath prototype is
important because the focus of the product will be to promote academic
achievement in secondary mathematics. As fully envisioned, the system will
support a wide range of pre-algebra and algebra lesson plans based on the Common
Core State Standards. Student exploration and manipulation of math concepts
within a computer-games-programming environment has the potential to lead to
greater interest in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;The project engages computer
science researchers at the University of Southern California (USC), CA, and
education product specialists at N C Learning (NCL), NJ, who will collaborate to
combine two technologies, both of which have been shown to improve mathematics
learning for At-Risk students, to demonstrate and evaluate a prototype in this
technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: 1) Custom CCSS
Grade Level Lesson Paths that Support GameMath activities, 2) Creation of game
programming activities that apply CCSS grade level mathematics concepts, 3)
Games programming assessments to evaluate activity-based learning , 4) Custom
reporting that incorporates GameMath assessments into existing diagnostics, and
5) Run-time architecture-level integration. These gaps will be bridged via a new
advance==&gt;apply ==&gt;assess concept pipeline that combines USC and NCL
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;The potential economic impact is expected to be greater
student preparedness for and interest in pursuing careers in technology and
engineering in the next 5 to 10 years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in engineering and technology based industries.