* 1414742
* EAPSI: Improving the identification of Japanese individuals in forensic contexts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sean Tallman, Tallman                 Sean           D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Subsequent to deaths resulting from natural disasters, armed conflicts, and
homicides, the identification of decedents is paramount and depends on the
accuracy of the scientific methods employed in the biological profile (sex, age,
ancestry, and stature of skeletonized remains). However, most biological profile
methods were developed in North America on individuals of African and European
descent, and it is unlikely that such methods can generate accurate biological
profiles for Asian individuals. Moreover, Native Americans historically served
as biological proxies for Asians due to their shared genetic history, resulting
in the largely untested assumption that Native Americans and Asians share
nonmetric skeletal features. The continued reliance on methods developed from
non-Asian populations is especially problematic in forensic contexts where Asian
remains are likely to be recovered (i.e., large U.S. cities and international
humanitarian settings). This project will statistically test and refine the
nonmetric methods used in sex and ancestry assessment for adults in the Chiba
University skeletal collection, curated by Dr. Yoshiharu Mastuno, which
represents one of the few documented anatomical collections in Asia. The
proposed research will contribute to the development of more quantifiable and
replicable methods necessary to increase the accuracy of biological profiles and
identifications for an understudied East Asian population.

As sex is reliably determined from the presence or shape of traits on the skull,
clavicle, humerus, and pelvis, these traits will be assessed and assigned an
ordinal score based on their robust or gracile expression. The scores and
documented sexes will be analyzed statistically to identify the traits that best
indicate male or female, and to compare the sexual dimorphism observed in
Japanese individuals to North American populations. Additionally, nonmetric
cranial traits commonly used to identify Native Americans will be assigned an
ordinal scored to test the hypothesis that Japanese individuals differ from
Native Americans in their trait expressions and frequencies. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.