* 1414827
* EAPSI: Development of paired uranium-thorium and radiocarbon ocean ventilation records using deep-sea corals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Mackenzie Schoemann, Schoemann               Mackenzie      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The ecology and biology of deep-sea coral ecosystems has seen increased research
efforts in part because of human-induced impacts, including fishing activities.
The importance of conservation efforts of deep-sea corals has amplified due to
increased awareness of deep-sea corals as habitat-forming organisms for
commercial and noncommercial fish species, their extremely long lifespans, and
their potential as a climate archive. Developing independent means of
determining the life-span and growth rate of deep-sea corals is important to
assess their vulnerability and recovery rates from natural and human-induced
disturbances. Equally important is the development of high-resolution age models
of deep-sea coral archives. This project aims to examine the paleo-ecology of
deep-sea corals by developing proxies in both the proteinaceous and carbonate
skeletons of deep-sea corals in collaboration with Dr. Steward Fallon at the
Australia National University in Canberra, Australia. Access to the laboratory,
equipment, and dating methods provided at ANU, will create an opportunity to
expand knowledge and understanding of deep-sea corals.

Development of paleoceanographic proxy measurements in deep-sea corals has moved
beyond the range of potential promise in terms of reconstructing ocean
ventilation rates. Records of ocean ventilation are used to determine how ocean
chemistry has changed throughout geologic time, helping predict future climate
change. This project will apply a novel uranium-thorium (U/Th) dating method
paired with radiocarbon dates to develop age and growth rate records of black
corals, Leiopathes sp. and cup corals, Desmophyllum sp. Pairing independent
chronometers, such as U/Th dating with radiocarbon dating, allows for the
reconstruction of ocean ventilation rates dating back to the Last Glacial
Maximum (~20,000 years). The project will take a multiple proxy approach;
pairing U/Th, radiocarbon, and neodymium isotopic measurement to reconstruct
changes in surface, intermediate, and deep-water circulation patterns. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.