* 1414457
* CONFERENCE: Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting to be held March 14-16, 2014 at Vanderbilt University
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2015
* Todd Graham, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2015
* USD 4,800.00

Intellectual Merit: This award provides support for undergraduate and graduate
student attendance and participation in the 21st Annual Southeastern Regional
Yeast Meeting (SERYM) to be held on the campus of Vanderbilt University from
March 14-16, 2014. This annual meeting provides a unique opportunity for yeast
researchers from states in the Southeastern region of the U.S. to come together
to share their preliminary research findings and discuss new research tools and
emerging technologies. As model organisms, yeasts are ideal for the study of
complex molecular, cellular, and biochemical processes. Researchers studying
these simple eukaryotes have made significant contributions in areas as diverse
as fungal evolution, DNA damage/repair, RNA processing, cell cycle progression,
chromosome segregation, prion propagation, autophagy and organelle biogenesis/
maintenance. This meeting, which is expected to attract between 100 and 125
participants, is the ideal venue for the inclusion of student presentations with
the ultimate goal of facilitating interactions and discussions between students
and senior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This award will
have broad educational impact for undergraduate and graduate student
participants, by providing funds to defray travel expenses. Particular emphasis
will be placed on increasing participation of individuals underrepresented in
the sciences through the recruitment of both women and minorities. A key
strength of this meeting is the opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate
students to present their research in platform and/or poster formats. The
regional nature of this meeting provides opportunities for students to discuss
their research work with leading scientists, laying the foundation for future
scientific development and collaborations.