* 1414535
* BRIGE: Second Generation Sustainability: Pyrolysis and Combustion of Locally-Sourced Biomass-Coal Blends
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jillian Goldfarb, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,314.00

PI: Goldfarb, Jillian L. Proposal Number: 1125754

Shifting our dependence from fossil fuels to carbon-neutral sources is a gradual
process. Co-combustion of biomass in existing coal-fired power plants is an
attractive option to increase the share of renewable fuels in the energy market.
Designing equipment for these blends requires knowledge of pyrolysis and
combustion characteristics to maximize energy output, reduce emissions and
optimize fuel ratios. The objectives of this research are to: obtain thermal
evolution profiles (kinetics and devolatilized compounds) of region-specific
coal-biomass blends and probe the effect of heating rate, particle size, and
coal to biomass blend ratios on pyrolysis and combustion behavior. A systematic
study on locally available second generation feedstocks (agricultural wastes -
woods, wheat and corn stalks, and local manufacturing wastes - cocoa shells,
barley, hops, fruit pits) blended with coal used by regional power plants will
provide knowledge for the incorporation of locally-sourced organic refuse into
power generation, and a broader understanding of optimizing such blends for
energy generation. The proposed work aims to bridge the gap between fossil fuel
dependency and a green energy future while expanding opportunities for students
from underrepresented groups to ensure our future engineering workforce is as
diverse as the population it serves. Intellectual Merit: Given infrastructure
already in place for coal, the most likely avenue in the immediate future for
biomass utilization is as a blended feedstock in coal-fired power plants. Coal-
biomass blending has the potential to limit the overall cost of fuel for a power
plant, assuming the costs to process the biomass (transportation, drying,
milling, etc.) are lower than the coal while lowering the carbon footprint of
energy production. This proposal explores the thermodynamics and kinetics behind
coal-biomass blend combustion to maximize process efficiency, while
simultaneously monitoring devolatilized compounds to ensure the co-combustion of
biomass and coal represents an improvement in the emissions profile. The
knowledge garnered from this work is immediately applicable to state air
resource permitting agencies, and directly addresses the EPA's debate over the
next three years on how to regulate biomass emissions. The proposed work also
provides fundamental data on the behavior of U.S.-specific biomass-coal blends
to assist in the transition from fossil fuels to alternative energy sources; the
design of an effective thermochemical conversion unit requires knowledge of the
chemical composition, thermal behavior, and reactivity of the fuel in question.
Broader Impacts: Altering our workforce to more accurately mirror the
composition of our society is a gradual process, requiring strong mentors and
role models. If we are broadly inclusive -seeking out contributions from all
perspectives - we can solve issues surrounding energy and the environment for
future generations. The potential benefits of the proposed project to society
are twofold: first, by investigating the blending of biomass with coal we can
potentially lower greenhouse gas emissions while maintaining current energy
production. Second, by actively seeking students (graduate and undergraduate)
from traditionally underrepresented groups, we better leverage our human capital
to facilitate a diverse, competitive and globally engaged workforce. As many UNH
students choose to remain in New England after graduation, a project that
specifically addresses local energy needs prepares them to understand regional
issues when competing on the job market. To engage the public and industry, the
students and PI will present findings from this research at academic conferences
and in peer-reviewed publications, and in technical reports to assist in policy-
making and industrial energy production schemes. As part of her Broadening
Participation Plan, the PI proposes to implement a seminar series called
"Engaging Your Future" to the science and engineering community at UNH to work
with students on overcoming challenges they face as underrepresented groups,
building a resume, and identifying career opportunities. As a woman with a
disability, the PI is in a unique position to mentor students from traditionally
underrepresented groups through building a research agenda with direct
applicability today?s challenges in energy and the environment.