* 1414903
* EAPSI: Quantifying the effect of centralization on the resilience of the regional healthcare system in the 2010-11 Canterbury earthquake sequence
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Caitlin Jacques, Jacques                 Caitlin        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Healthcare systems have been identified worldwide as critical infrastructure
that must remain functional for communities to effectively respond to disasters
such as earthquakes. Much disaster resilience research has assumed that system-
wide functionality can be predicted from the performance of independent
hospitals. Healthcare, however, functions as a networked system of providers and
facilities, rather than a set of independent entities. Therefore, to better
understand healthcare delivery after a disaster, it is important to capture the
contributions and interactions of all parts of the system. This study will apply
engineering techniques for analyzing complex systems to a resilience-based
framework in order to characterize healthcare at a system level. This framework
will be used to determine the effect of centralization on overall healthcare
system performance following seismic events. The Canterbury region, which
sustained severe damage in the 2010-2011 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence,
provides a unique opportunity to study a highly centralized healthcare system
recovering from a series of devastating earthquakes. This work will be performed
in collaboration with Dr. Sonia Giovinazzi and the University of Canterbury in
New Zealand.

The healthcare system will be characterized through interviews with
administrators, engineers, and healthcare providers. Emphasis will be placed on
how organizations within the system allocate resources needed to create surge
capacity, such as space (including infrastructure), staff, and supplies. This
study will also examine how resource allocation changed after the earthquakes.
Fault-tree analysis will be applied to connect the high-level functionality of
the healthcare system (e.g., ability to provide surgery) with base-level
performance of resources (e.g. loss of sewage) under four conditions:
decentralized pre-earthquake, centralized pre-earthquake, decentralized post-
earthquake, and centralized post-earthquake. Resilience under each condition
will be calculated for scenario events using functions-based resilience metrics
developed for this study. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Royal Society of New Zealand.