* 1414735
* EAPSI: Construction progress: Monitoring and quality control using smartphones
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kook (Kevin) Han, Han                     Kook           I
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Construction monitoring provides construction practitioners -owners,
contractors, subcontractors, and tradesmen- with the information need for
project control decisions. These decisions directly impact the overall
efficiency of a construction project. Given that global construction spending is
trillions of dollars, even small gains in efficiency could lead to enormous cost
savings to the world. The goal of this project is to reduce both construction
cost and delivery time with new progress monitoring and quality control. This
information will be gathered from a large set of images and video streams that
will be provided by consumer-level smart devices, such as smartphones and
tablets. This research will be conducted at Seoul National University in South
Korea in collaboration with Dr. Moonseo Park, an expert researcher in large-
scale construction. The goal of the proposed project is to automate the process
of large-scale building construction monitoring through advances in computer
vision and construction management.

This research will enhance and simplify current progress monitoring and quality
control tasks on construction sites by providing automated 3D as-built models
that can be used in conjunction with Building Information Models for analyzing
progress and quality. Using inexpensive consumer-level smart devices,
construction managers can easily collect data and quickly submit inputs to the
server and visualize outcomes with interfaces that enable effective project
control decisions. This will be achieved by addressing fundamental underlying
research challenges in computer vision and construction management including
improving the efficiency and reliability of image-based 3D reconstruction method
through GPU-based architecture for structure-from-motion; recognizing material
properties as well as geometry from 2D images; and establishing a grammar in
augmented reality visualization for field reporting. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with National Research Foundation of Korea.