* 1414394
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Hybrid Tri-pyramid Robot: A Novel Type of Double-Sided Incremental Forming Machine
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Michael Peshkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 247,318.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
innovative dieless forming technology to fill the need for rapidly producing
three-dimensional sheet products either for prototyping or for real-
applications. The project will result in a desktop prototype machine ? hybrid
tri-pyramid robot - for the double sided micro-incremental forming process. This
tri-pyramid robot has the following unique features: the ability to manipulate
an object by generating three orthogonal translational output motions in space
and the ability to provide an adaptive clamping mechanism on the workpiece
material. These features provide the following advantages: a machine with higher
load/weight ratio, stiffness and accuracy when compared to the leading competing
technologies; and a flexible forming center that does not require geometric
specific tooling, which has not existed in this market space. This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery
toward commercial application: a novel translational parallel manipulator, an
integrated model of combined meso-micro positioning system, and an adaptive
clamping mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Scimplicity LLC to
perform technology demonstration using commercial products that are currently
made with the traditional deep drawing or stamping process in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid tri-pyramid robot is important because
it will be able to rapidly produce products with micro-complex-precision
features such as fuel cell bipolar plates, membranes, heat exchanger plates,
spray nozzle heads, etc. The ability to create such features/products will find
applications in aerospace, medical instruments, electronics, fiber optics,
precision laboratory equipment, etc. In addition, the potential economic impact
is expected to be expanded to areas of high precision milling, positioning
stages, high speed manipulation for pick-place operations, and general robotic
assembly operations in the next 3-10 years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in manufacturing.