* 1414393
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Self-X Smart Battery
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Jifeng Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 245,937.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
innovative self-X smart battery technology to fill the need for renewable
energy, electric transportation and electric grid applications. Battery units
are composed of individual cells connected together to provide the overall
energy storage capacity of the battery. The self-X smart battery can
automatically configure itself to self-balance from individual cell state
variations, self-heal from failures of individual cells, and self-optimize to
achieve optimal energy conversion efficiency. These features prolong battery
operating time and lifespan while ensuring the overall safety of the system. An
improved battery system is important because it will provide a cost-effective,
highly efficient, flexible, reliable, scalable, and ubiquitously deployable
energy storage solution to address national needs in the fields of renewable
energy and transportation electrification.

The project will result in a prototype of a self-X smart battery the uses a
power electronics-based switching circuit to demonstrate self-balancing from
cell state variations, self-healing from failures of cells, and self-
optimization to achieve the optimal energy conversion efficiency through self-
configuration of cell connections. As compared to the leading battery design and
management technology, these features provide the advantages of improved energy
conversion efficiency and reliability, longer operating time and lifespan, and
reduced operation and maintenance costs.

This project addresses the following limitations in existing solutions as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: 1) the state-
of-the-art switching circuit is separated from the battery pack without
considering system integration and packaging issues; 2) the state-of-the-art
individual power switch in the switching circuit has limited condition
monitoring and control functions and needs an appropriate electrical insulation
and grounding design for real-world applications; 3) the state-of-the-art online
state of charge estimation method is an open-loop method subject to problems of
wrong initial state of charge and accumulating estimation errors; and 4) the
state-of-the-art solution does not offer an efficient online state of health
estimation method. These limitations will be addressed in this project by
designing 1) a power electronics-based switching circuit as an integrated part
of the metal connector grid of the battery cells/modules in a battery pack; 2) a
low-cost, high-efficiency power switch with integrated condition monitoring and
control functions, an optocoupling-based electrical insulation, and a proper
grounding design; 3) an closed-loop online state of charge estimation algorithm;
and 4) a maximum capacity degradation estimation-based online state of charge
estimation algorithm. In addition, the graduate students involved in this
project will receive technology translation experiences through the development
of the self-X smart battery prototype.