* 1414391
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Establishing Manufacturing and Large-Scale Casting Process and Structural Design Criteria for Ultra-High Performance Fiber-Reinforced Concrete (UHP-FRC)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Shih-Ho Chao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,174.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating concrete
material science research to fill the need for advanced next-generation
construction materials. These next generation materials will enhance the
sustainability of infrastructure, buildings, and bridges when subjected to
environmental loadings. The project will result in a large-scale cast-in-place
mixing procedure and high energy input mixers, as well as design recommendations
and analytical models for the design and analysis of structural members of
ultra-high-performance fiber-reinforced concrete (UHP-FRC). The UHP-FRC is
important because the major problem of concrete is the considerable
deterioration and consequent repair work needed due to its brittleness and
limited durability. The consequence of concrete deterioration and short service
life requires frequent repair and eventual replacement, which consumes more
natural resources. Using UHP-FRC will introduce significant enhancement in the
sustainability of concrete structures due to its damage-tolerance
characteristics. These characteristics can reduce significantly the amount of
repair-rehabilitation-maintenance work and give infrastructure longer service
life, all of which will eventually lower the environmental liability of concrete
use and lead to enhanced sustainability, safety, performance, and economy of our
future infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;UHP-FRC has the following unique features:
high compressive strength, up to 25 to 30 ksi, excellent compressive and tensile
ductility beyond first cracking, and high flowability. The new mixing procedure
requires no special treatments such as heat, pressure, and vacuum, thereby
avoiding any major changes to current concrete production practice. This makes
the conversion seamless and cost effective. In addition, the use of UHP-FRC is
expected to provide greater durability, high damage tolerance, life-cycle cost
savings, simplified construction, and structural efficiency when compared to the
leading competing high-performance concrete that is either proprietary or
requires a unique mixing procedure. &lt;br/&gt; The project engages a small
business partner, Bailey Tools Manufacturing (BTM), to develop the large-
capacity high-shear mixers and high-performance fibers, as well as the Texas
Manufacturing Assistance Center (TMAC), to guide commercialization aspects, in
this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.&lt;br/&gt; This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: 1) to develop
a large-scale cast-in-place mixing design procedure and high energy input
mixers; 2) to formulate design recommendations and analytical models for the
design and analysis of UHP-FRC structural members. Experimental results will be
used to formulate the major design aspects for UHP-FRC structural members. Once
representative relationships are developed, systematic parametric evaluations
will be carried out with particular attention paid to the flexural and shear
design recommendations of UHP-FRC structural members.&lt;br/&gt; The potential
economic impact is expected to be transformational, creating a more durable
product with cost savings that will be clearly evident in the next 10 years.
Implementation of the new equipment and technology will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the next-generation construction market and will reduce state
funded concrete installation and repair costs by at least 25%.