* 1414613
* EAPSI: Exploring the chemical contents of living plant cells to discover new and useful compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,03/31/2020
* Amanda Martin, Martin                  Amanda         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2020
* USD 70.00

Plants chemically synthesize structurally complex molecules to interact with
their environment. Some plant chemicals are ingredients in products including
cosmetics and botanical supplements. The most common plant chemicals have been
discovered and rediscovered leaving only those present at very low
concentrations to be found. Chemicals structures can change when living tissue
is harvest and those concentrated in specific plant parts may be diluted in
complex plant extracts. A method capable of detecting tissue and cell specific
compounds from live, intact plant material would be very useful. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Tsutomu Masujima at the RIKEN
Quantitative Biology Center in Osaka, Japan. Dr. Masujima has developed a
technique of live single cell mass spectrometry (LiveSC/MS). LiveSC/MS is
capable of detecting hundreds of compounds in a non-destructive manner from
individual cells in living plant tissue. Using LiveSC/MS to probe single plant
cells may lead to the discovery of new compounds present at low concentrations
that often are not detected by standard mass spectrometry methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LiveSC/MS will be applied to medicinal plants to compare
chemical profiles of intact live cells to those of a bulk extracts. The degree
of cell heterogeneity and the distribution of specific chemicals among plant
cells will be established. To increase the concentrations of novel compounds
plants will be exposed to methyl jasmonate, a plant hormone that induces plant
defense mechanisms including the synthesis of certain chemicals. Using LiveSC/MS
to evaluate intact plant material may facilitate the discovery of novel
compounds present at high levels in individual cells that are not detectable in
homogenized bulk extractions. Development of LiveSC/MS using highly tractable
plant cells will be applicable to other biological systems to better understand
molecular biology on a cell specific level. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.