* 1414902
* EAPSI: The role of freshwater-marine migratory behaviors on dispersal in Pacific Oceanic Islands fishes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Joel Corush, Corush                  Joel           B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Many fishes are limited to marine or freshwater environments, but about 250 of
30,000 ray-finned fishes are diadromous, or migrate between fresh and saltwater,
usually for reproduction purposes, e.g., Salmon and eel. This behavior is
important because many small streams on oceanic islands are subject to
variation. Storms, droughts, volcanic activity and pollution can often make
small insular streams become uninhabitable for periods of time and can lead to
local extinction of a completely freshwater species. Over time, the inability to
colonize neighboring streams can lead to a species' extinction. While diadromy
limits opportunities for dispersal ability to a specific life stage, many
diadromous species have geographic distributions which span multiple oceans. To
address these issues, this research aims to understand how variations in
migration pattern affect the flow of genes across fish populations. To determine
migratory behvior, otolith microchemistry techniques will be used, in
collaboration with Dr. Jen-Chieh Shiao, a prominent expert in this technique at
the National Taiwan University. Levels of genetic information moving between
populations can then be compared to varying migration strategies.

Species will be collected from multiple streams around Taiwan (in addition to
Guam and Palau). Otolith microchemistry, a technique that identifies chemical
compounds in a fish's environment over the course of their life, will be used to
classify fishes as diadromous, marine, or freshwater. To understand the
importance of these different life-history patterns on dispersal, genetic
markers will be used to infer gene flow and population structure of insular
oceanic fishes. Variation in DNA sequences will be compared to understand
patterns of movement between streams and islands. This project will help bridge
the lingering gap between the ecological importance of variation in life history
and evolutionary significance of gene flow. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with National Science Council of Taiwan.