* 1414656
* EAPSI: Studying the potential impacts of ocean warming and acidification on the immune response of sea urchins
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Cecilia Brothers, Brothers                Cecilia        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Climate-induced changes in oceanic temperature and pH are occurring rapidly
around the world, and are primarily attributed to increasing levels of
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). As atmospheric CO2 levels rise, it is
predicted that surface seawater temperatures will increase while pH will
decrease. A number of recent studies have suggested that in these near-future
ocean conditions, marine organisms will become more vulnerable to infectious
diseases. However, no studies to date have examined the effects of both warming
and acidification on the immune response of sea urchins, which are both
ecologically and economically important. The intertidal sea urchin, Heliocidaris
erythrogramma is commonly found in eastern Australian waters, a region that is
experiencing rapid climate-induced environmental impacts. This project will
investigate the prospective effects of warming and acidification on various
immune system parameters of Heliocidaris erythrogramma. This research will be
conducted at the University of Sydney, Australia in collaboration with Dr. Maria
Byrne, an internationally-known expert on the impacts of ocean warming and
acidification on marine invertebrates.

Sea urchins will be exposed to treatments at current and near-future seawater
temperature and pH and following three different exposure periods (1 day, 2
weeks and 4 weeks), a variety of immune parameters will be measured. These
parameters will include coelomocyte (cells associated with sea urchin innate
immunity) number, spreading, and adhesion, as well as the ability of
coelomocytes to phagocytosis and respond to a common marine pathogen.
Collectively, these measures will provide an evaluation of the ability of
Heliocidaris erythrogramma to respond to immune challenges in a rapidly warming
and acidifying marine environment. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.