* 1414479
* RUI: Beyond Leading Order: Using Computation to Constrain Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,08/31/2017
* John Giblin, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research of Associate Professor John T. Giblin, Jr. at
Kenyon College.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent observational and experimental
results have shed new light on the nature of high-energy particle physics and
models of the early Universe. It is clearer now than ever that the Universe is
the only laboratory in which we can study fundamental physics at energies above
those achievable in accelerators. The theories that describe physics at these
energies are highly non-linear, complex dynamical systems. Professor Giblin's
research will use employ cutting-edge numerical techniques as well as analytic
methods to predict the observational consequences of many models of high-energy
physics. These results will help understand how current and future observations
can constrain models of beyond-the-standard model physics. This research also
addresses the pressing need to cultivate interest in science among young
students and college undergraduates. Approximately two hundred fifty middle
school students will be brought to Kenyon College for a "Science Saturday"
program that will engage them with hands on science activities. Students will
also get to work with scientists throughout the day offering them a positive,
interactive model of scientific inquiry. This funding will also support
undergraduate research and collaboration. Meaningful undergraduate research is a
critical component of supporting and cultivating the next generation of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The numerical methods studied under this award
will allow for the study of non-linear and derivatively coupled field theories
as they relate to Inflation, Gauge theories and Gravitation. The software
developed here, Grid and Bubble Evolver (GABE), will discover how abelian and
non-abelian gauge fields modify inflation and post-inflationary process and
probe the effects of field theories with non-minimal kinetic terms. Further, it
will be used to predict observable signatures, primordial power spectra and
gravitational radiation, of these models. These studies will help to understand
whether or not realistic models of inflation are viable and consistent with
observations, and explore the non-minimal nature of particles as a possible
explanation of the nature of Dark Energy. In addition, this award will support
investigations of nonlinear gravitational interactions during phase transitions
in the post-inflationary epoch and relevant numerical. As we prepare for the
next generation of gravitational wave observatories, precise predictions of
gravitational wave spectra could have drastic consequences on the design and
cost of these experiments.