* 1414936
* EAPSI: Material property character mapping of shape memory alloy to improve actuation frequency output
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jamie Kennedy, Kennedy                 Jamie          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

A shape memory alloy (SMA) is a material that consists of two or more metals
with the property of an elastic-reversible response to an applied stress or
temperature change. SMAs have two main phases, a high temperature and low
temperature phase, austenite and martenite, respectively. These phases create a
one-way thermal and mechanical transformation called the shape memory effect
(SME). SMAs have a high power to weight ratio, which makes them effective for
actuation applications. However, this transformation is non-linear and has a
temperature-dependent hysteresis. Additionally, SMAs have a very low working
frequency, < 40 Hz, with a declining work output as frequency increases. This is
the largest drawback for SMAs in actuation. This research will give insight to
the best possible shape memory alloy structural and element combination for
achieving a higher frequency output with a smaller thermal hysteresis. This
research will be conducted at Dr. Miyazaki's lab at the University of Tsukuba,
who specializes in studying the different combinations of SMAs for
biocompatibility and tensile characteristics.

A characterization map of specific element combinations (NiTi, NiTiNb, and
NiTiZr) with defining properties of displacement vs. force, frequency vs. work
output, and weight vs. power density will be developed. The alloys, in the form
of rods and thin sheets, will be tested for material properties while applying
polymer-cooling methods in a vacuum chamber. An outline of the different SMA
structures (wire, thin sheet, tube) that determine the relations of surface area
vs. cooling time, force vs. displacement, and frequency vs. work output for
actuation will be developed as well. This study is looking to completely
understanding the material properties of the SMAs and therefore possible to
determine the best element combination to achieve the overall goal of low
hysteresis and improved bandwidth. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.