* 1414603
* EAPSI: Determining resource allocation trade-offs of an alpine invasive plant in Daisetsuzan National Park, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniel Winkler, Winkler                 Daniel         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Understanding what allows for invasive species success is a current challenge in
ecology. This is especially true in alpine regions, where ecosystems may be
highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This project will elucidate
resource allocation strategies of the invasive bamboo Sasa kurilensis along
elevation and moisture gradients in Daisetsuzan National Park, Japan to
understand how species invade alpine habitat under current and future climatic
conditions. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Gaku Kudo,
a noted alpine ecologist at Hokkaido University. Results from this research will
provide an empirical understanding of species invasions in alpine ecosystems and
connect this understanding to how environmental changes may facilitate or
prevent future invasions. Understanding the changes these regions will undergo
is vital to helping federal agencies protect and manage lands. Furthermore,
linking resource allocation strategies and their responses to environmental
variation can assist in producing a mechanistically-based predictive framework
for ecologists and climate change scientists.

Climate change is expected to enhance or hinder the threat of biological
invasions. The invasive species S. kurilensis has already had pronounced effects
on snow-meadow plant communities, including the loss of over a third of native
species in some areas. This project will employ a comparative approach of
resource allocation patterns in historical and recently expanded ranges.
Specifically, how shifts in biomass allocation facilitate invasive species range
expansions in alpine systems will be evaluated. Elevation and moisture gradients
within ranges will be examined to understand how morphological and physiological
plasticity will affect the species' distribution. This research will result is
an integrative model of species invasion in a changing climate. This project
will enable predictions on how future climate condition will affect the spread
of the invasive species, and provide insight into how climate change will alter
alpine ecosystems. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.