* 1414734
* EAPSI: The Implications of Firm Ownership on Innovation and the Environment in the Chinese Automotive Industry
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John Helveston, Helveston               John           P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,291.00

China has the largest passenger car market in the world. Cars now consume
approximately half of all crude oil used in China and also contribute to over
half of all harmful pollutants in China. Although the majority of vehicle sales
are captured by foreign brands, foreign automakers are not permitted to
independently manufacture and sell vehicles in China. Instead they are required
to create separate "joint venture" (JV) firms with local Chinese automakers.
This requirement has directly affected both the success of different automakers
as well as the technologies they sell. In particular, more advanced fuel-saving
technologies such as hybrid and electric vehicles have not yet been developed in
mass production by any automakers in China, including those with ties to foreign
automakers who sell these technologies in other countries. This research will
investigate the links between firm ownership, experience in China, and the
development of innovative new technologies in China's automotive sector. This
work will be conducted with Dr. Xunmin Ou at Tsinghua University in China, and
it aims to inform both automakers and policy makers on barriers to the transfer
of advanced fuel-saving technologies to China.

This research builds on previous work on learning through international joint
ventures in China by including information from major Chinese automakers,
including those without joint venture partnerships. This research will use a
mixture of quantitative and qualitative data, including automotive statistical
yearbooks and a series of in-depth interviews with automotive managers and
engineers, government officials, and other potential information holders such as
researchers, journalists, and consultants. Results of this study will shed
insights into the potential effects of informal and formal institutions in China
on technology trajectories and the environment not only in China but also
globally. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.