* 1414439
* EAPSI: Determining the Atomic Structure of Proteins that Form Brain Connections
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kevin Gray, Gray                    Kevin          T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The brain communicates and forms memories through a specialized group of cells
called neurons. These cells form connections through extensions called neurites.
Neurites are formed when neurons alter their protein skeleton to reach for other
cells. Disruptions to the cellular skeleton can harm memory formation.
Tropomodulins (Tmods) are a family of proteins that contribute to the formation
of the cellular skeleton in neurons. During seizures, strokes, and
methamphetamine exposure and also in Down syndrome and epilepsy, the amounts of
Tmods in the brain have been shown to be vastly altered. Understanding the role
of Tmods in brain development will elucidate these conditions and may lead to
treatments. Previous studies have shown that variation in Tmods' roles in
neurite formation correlates with structural differences. The goal of this
project is to determine the atomic structure (determinant in protein function)
of Tmod2 for comparison with the known structure of Tmod1. This project will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Fadel Samatey, an expert in protein
structure at the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology in Japan. A solved
structure for Tmod2 will uncover details about Tmods' finely tuned role in brain
development and disruption in disease states.

Crystallization and X-ray Diffraction are techniques that will be used to
determine protein structure. This project aims to screen for and optimize
crystallization conditions for the leucine rich repeat (LRR) domain of Tmod2 and
then determine its structure by X-ray Diffraction. This domain is important for
localization of Tmods in muscle cells, thymosin binding and Tmod's actin
nucleation ability. Comparison of Tmod structures will lead to residues for
mutagenesis that will connect the structure of these proteins to their roles in
neurite formation. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.