* 1414671
* EAPSI: Achieving seismic resilience by understanding liquefaction effects in Christchurch, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Christine Beyzaei, Beyzaei                 Christine      Z
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Earthquakes are natural hazards that occur throughout the world, causing ground
shaking and the potential for significant damage. During ground shaking, water
pressure in the surrounding soil increases. When the water pressure exceeds a
certain threshold, the soil collapses, becoming fluid and flowing up through the
ground surface. This phenomenon, called liquefaction, causes ground settlements
that affect both above- and below-ground structures. During the 2010-2011
Canterbury Earthquake Sequence, several large earthquakes took place over a 16
month period near Christchurch in New Zealand. Liquefaction damage from these
earthquakes affected a significant large area around Christchurch, damaging
buildings, infrastructure networks, and critical lifeline systems. This degree
of extensive repeated liquefaction was virtually unprecedented in a modern urban
setting. Through field sampling in Christchurch and a geotechnical laboratory
testing program, this research will contribute to the current understanding of
liquefaction. This research will be conducted at the University of Canterbury,
in collaboration with Dr. Misko Cubrinovski.

During the post-earthquake engineering investigation in Christchurch, an
important observation was made: state-of-practice methods incorrectly predicted
the occurrence and severity of liquefaction for many sites with fine-grained
(silty) soils. State-of-practice methods for assessing liquefaction potential
are largely based on clean sands; there remains considerable debate as to
whether fine-grained soils will liquefy and the appropriate assessment procedure
to employ. This research aims to advance the state of knowledge on liquefaction
of fine-grained soils, while evaluating the level of conservatism in current
state-of-practice liquefaction assessment methods. Hydraulic fixed-piston soil
samples will be obtained from sites throughout Christchurch and cyclic stress
ratio (CSR) curves will be developed through cyclic triaxial testing. Laboratory
results will be compared with post-earthquake field observations and established
liquefaction assessment procedures to evaluate the nature of liquefaction in
fine-grained soils. The implications of these results will advance seismic
resilience for cities faced with similar liquefaction hazards. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.