* 1414525
* SBIR Phase I:  An online experiential learning platform to instruct participants on the leading practices for innovation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Patrick O'Brien, MineLight Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project's broader/commercial impact includes the ability for
individuals or organizations, across all geographies, industries and sectors, to
benefit from an educational platform that helps them better understand which set
of practices, consistently applied, can lead to breakthrough innovations. The
ability to successfully innovate is critical. Whether one is looking to develop
a new social media platform in Silicon Valley or eradicate disease in a 3rd
world country, the leading practices of innovation can serve as a series of
guideposts to answer critical questions. These critical questions include; How
to determine where to invest limited human and capital resources' How to
properly balance high risk/ high reward innovation pursuits with incremental
improvements which carry less risk? How to determine criteria that will be used
to determine which ideas to pursue and which to pivot away from?. Once the
cloud-based version of this product is fully commercialized, it will allow
participants to "move the dial" in order to simulate (and eventually overcome)
cultural impediments that are preventing meaningful innovation within their
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project intends to prove
that an experiential learning method is superior to traditional forms of
instruction for communicating the leading practices of innovation. To date,
leading practices for innovation have been conveyed using traditional forms of
instruction such as lecture, case study, and white papers. While experiential
forms of instruction have proven useful in many areas of study including
accounting, international business and strategy, they have not been use to
convey innovation's leading practices. The proposed research will demonstrate
that a well-designed experiential game, academically anchored and drawing from
existing literature focusing on innovation, will provide participants a richer
educational experience resulting in greater learning and retention.