* 1414466
* The Center for Chemistry at the Space-Time Limit (CaSTL)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2020
* Vartkess Apkarian, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 20,000,000.00

The Center for Chemistry at the Space-Time Limit (CaSTL) focuses on the
development of novel science that can be used to observe and record motions of
molecules at the atomic and chemical bond level. This set of new tools,
collectively known as the chemiscope, will reveal new insights by visualizing
the motions of atoms within molecules as they vibrate, form new bonds or
catalyze chemical reactions. The investigators are paying special attention to
the details of the process by which solar energy is converted to chemical forms
of energy, hoping to catch this crucial energy conversion event in the act, in
real time. The work is having a broader impact through the development of new
technologies for visualizing chemical events on a very fine scale, and also
through the dissemination of their results in a variety of public media. The
work is furthering innovation through the invention of new scientific tools that
are being moved toward commercial development. In addition to directly
contributing to the educational development of students involved in the center's
research, CaSTL organizes and participates in a variety of formal and informal
science education activities, targeting audiences with varying educational
backgrounds. Examples include summer schools for the broader chemistry
community, the California State Summer School for Math and Science (COSMOS)
aimed at high school students, and a variety of informal science education
activities, such as an afterschool program at the Boys and Girls
Club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this funding period, CaSTL will continue
development of an all-optical version of a working chemiscope, along with
versions that combine optics with scan probe microscopes, and the ultimate
observation of molecular motions and transformations on a femtosecond-Angstrom
spatiotemporal scale. The group is moving toward application of this tool to
specific chemical problems, in particular plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis. The
excitation of collective electrons, the formation of hot electrons, their
thermalization and scattering on interfaces, injection of electrons or holes
into catalytic molecular centers and the subsequent breaking and making of bonds
are targeted for capturing in space-time. Through time-resolved photoelectron
emission microscopy (tr-PEEM) and 2-photon photoemission (tr-2PP) on catalytic
metal clusters and hetero-structures, they are working to fully characterize the
space-time dynamics initiated on the metal side upon excitation of plasmons. The
complete time course of the photocatalyzed molecular transformation on the
surface side is made possible using space-time-resolved surface-enhanced
nonlinear coherent spectroscopy. Theoretical investigations are being used to
guide the development and refinement of capabilities of this unique toolset. A
complete understanding of photo-physics and chemistry ranging from small
molecules implicated in catalysis to engineered mesoscale structures for devices
is envisioned as a result of the center's work.