* 1414153
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Automated Out-of-Core Execution of Parallel Message-Passing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Andrew Morrow, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 01/31/2017
* USD 206,034.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a software
technology to fill the need for executing parallel applications on architectures
with limited physical memory. This software technology, called BDMPI (Big Data
Message Passing Interface), is important because it will allow approaches that
rely on computational modeling and simulation to efficiently and economically
solve very large problems on existing and upcoming computer systems, many of
which are optimized for low power. This capability will positively impact many
science &amp; engineering disciplines, government, defense, commercial
companies, and non-profit organizations. The project will result in a software
prototype of BDMPI. The advantages of BDMPI over competing approaches are that
(i) it allows existing parallel programs written in MPI (Message Passing
Interface) to automatically switch to an efficient disk-based execution with no
software re-engineering efforts, and (ii) it provides a flexible framework for
developing disk-based distributed programs that can achieve levels of
performance that are higher than leading competing approaches (e.g.,
Hadoop).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application.
It will expand BDMPI to support a large subset of MPI's standard API
(Application Programming Interface), it will optimize its runtime system so that
to reduce the overheads associated with disk-based execution, it will implement
fault tolerance features, and it will optimize its runtime system for solid-
state disks. In addition, the personnel involved in this project (graduate and
undergraduate students), will receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and
technology commercialization experiences through the Step-It-Up program that
places students in part-time roles of supporting and performing
commercialization efforts, their participation in an "Innovation Training"
workshop, and by interacting with attorneys during patent application drafting.