* 1414755
* EAPSI: Using geochemistry to unravel the history of an East Antarctic ice shelf system
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Michelle Guitard, Guitard                 Michelle       E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Antarctica and the Southern Ocean play a central role in Earth's climate. To
improve the climate models that predict changes in ice volume and sea level, it
is important to understand factors affecting Antarctic ice mass balance. The
geochemistry of three East Antarctic sediment cores may reveal how Antarctica's
ice sheets fluctuated in the past. This research will be supervised by Dr.
Yusuke Yokoyama, at the University of Tokyo. Necessary instruments and
facilities, as well as Dr. Yokoyama's expertise in geochemistry make this an
ideal research opportunity site.

Reductions in Antarctic ice mass often co-occur with the presence of warm
oceanic waters on the continental shelf, suggesting that ice shelf systems are
sensitive to ocean temperatures. Identifying the sensitivity of ice shelves to
ocean heat is critical for understanding ice sheet stability. Late Quaternary
(125 ka-present) marine sediments collected in Prydz Bay, East Antarctica
preserve evidence of ice shelf fluctuations. Three cores from Prydz Bay reveal
at least four siliceous mud and ooze units interbedded with glacial marine
units, representing open-marine conditions (ice-free) and glacial conditions
(ice-covered), respectively. Alternating open-marine and glacial conditions
suggest the Amery Ice Shelf system (AIS) in Prydz Bay has fluctuated through
time. This research will examine this variation by measuring the relative
abundance the isotope, beryllium 10 (10Be) in three Prydz Bay sediment cores.
Relative abundance of 10Be is an indirect measurement of depositional
environment; a higher abundance of 10Be indicates open-marine conditions.
Establishing the depositional environment in Prydz Bay is essential to
generating a more reliable late Quaternary AIS history. Unveiling the history of
the largest outlet glacier in East Antarctica is relevant to concerns that
climate change is destabilizing Antarctic ice sheets, with implications for
future sea level rise. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.