* 1414631
* EAPSI: Understanding How Coral Reefs in the Ryukyu Islands, Western Pacific Adapted to Changes in the Past Using Paleoecological Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Christopher Kovalik, Kovalik                 Christopher    M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

With the increasing impacts of global climate change, coral reefs are among the
most sensitive ecosystems on the planet. Providing endless goods and services,
coral reefs are an integral part of marine ecosystems. Most studies focus on
predicting how climate will affect corals in the future. This project will look
to the past for insight on how corals handled historic changes in climate by
taking coral cores in the Ryukyu Islands of Japan. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hironobu Kan at Kyushu University. Dr. Kan
will provide necessary equipment for analyses as well as access to the field
where cores will be extracted. These 4-m sections of the Holocene reef framework
will give a multi-millennial record of reef development in the Western Pacific.

The focus of this project will be the window from 4-2 thousand years before
present, when a hiatus in reef accretion occurred in others areas of the
Pacific. Using a simple, open-barrel, hand-operated coring method, 4-meter cores
will be extracted from unconsolidated reefs and further divided into 5 cm
intervals. These intervals will be analyzed by species and taphonomic condition
to determine the ecological changes on the reef through time. Using a
combination of paleoecological and geochemical techniques, a reconstruction of
Holocene sea temperature, salinity, coral accretion, and changes in species
dominance on the reefs of the Ryukyu Islands during the Holocene will be
created. These data will be compared to data collected from cores extracted off
Pacific Panama and Kiritimati Island of the Line Islands. This comparison will
provide a much clearer understanding of coral growth across the Pacific during
the Holocene. Furthermore, this detailed coral-based geochemical reconstruction
from the Ryukyu Islands will give insights into how climatic and oceanographic
conditions varied through time at this location and how corals have reacted to
those changes. These reactions may help estimate how corals will respond to the
current global climate changes. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.