* 1414266
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Photo-type II-VI quantum well-based unipolar mid-infrared photodetectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Joseph Montemarano, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2017
* USD 204,011.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating recent
research accomplishments in II-VI material-based Quantum Well Infrared
Photodetectors into the market place to fill the need for robust, cooler-free,
high-speed, mid-infrared light detectors for applications in environment,
health, and security. The project will result in a prototype of a photodetector
based on the novel II-VI quantum well-based unipolar light detection concept.
This detector at its best has the following unique features: it will detect
light over a much wider mid-infrared wavelength range than prior detectors, it
will be robust, compact, cooler-free, and operate at high speed; all features
that are enabled by the use of the novel II-VI material system. These features
provide system advantages of compactness, broad usability, performance, and
cost-savings when compared to the leading competing semiconductor mid-infrared
photodetectors in this market space. This project addresses the following
technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: (i) device and package lay-out will be newly designed so that the
basic detector chips can be packaged for market-ready, robust, cooler-free, and
high-speed performance; (ii) new quantum designs of the detectors will lead to
cooler-free detectors at long mid-infrared wavelengths, and especially broad-
wavelength coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint project between Princeton
University and City College of New York engages small business partner Boston
Electronics Corp., a leading distributor of single pixel mid-infrared photo-
detectors to provide insights to customer and market needs and to guide
commercialization aspects in this technology translation
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The II-VI material-based Quantum Well Infrared
Photodetector is important because mid-infrared detectors are widely used in
many commercial, medical, security, and environmental systems and applications,
especially point-sensing of chemicals and thermal imaging; with improved
detectors, these systems and applications benefit, and so will their users, the
everyday consumers. Furthermore, the introduction of a potentially disruptive
detector technology into the somewhat staid mid-IR detector market will
beneficially drive cost and performance competition, again leading to more
favorable outcomes for users. A diverse group of students working on and
alongside this project will first-hand experience prototype development and
showcasing, gaining valuable experience in technology translation from the
academic research lab into the market place. The potential economic impact is
expected to be significant in the next decade and beyond, which will contribute
to the U.S. competitiveness in this mid-infrared single-pixel light detector and
imaging technology space.