* 1414830
* EAPSI: Investigating the production of stress-induced proteins following nitrite exposure in the commonly farmed shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jason Wang, Wang                    Jason
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Farmed shrimp comprises a significant portion of global food production, and
most of shrimp production comes from Pacific countries such as Taiwan.
Aquaculture facilities commonly stock shrimp in unnaturally high densities and
produce excessive organic wastes. Shrimp excrete ammonia waste, which is
converted to nitrite by microbes. Nitrite accumulates inside the shrimp, causing
damage to proteins and cells. In many animals, a common response to stress is
the production of a class of proteins called heat shock proteins (HSP). These
proteins preserve the shape and function of damaged proteins. However, little is
understood about the role of HSPs in aquacultured shrimp. This study aims to
quantify the production of HSPs in several shrimp tissues following nitrite
stress exposures. This study will be conducted in Taiwan in collaboration with
Dr. Cheng-Hao Tang (Institute of Marine Biotechnology, National Dong Hwa
University), an expert in stress responses of aquacultured animals.
Understanding how HSPs alleviate stress in shrimp will elucidate the effects
that aquaculture conditions have on commercially important organisms and their
surrounding environments.

Nitrite is an important stressor because it is a common byproduct of microbial
metabolism in marine systems, and also a reactive oxidative species. In
aquaculture ponds, nitrite can reach an excess of 20 mg mL-1, easily entering
the shrimp's system through the gills. This study will quantify production of
four different HSP mRNA transcripts and proteins using quantitative PCR and
Western Blots. Quantification of HSP transcripts and proteins will be done in
the gills and the hepatopancreas where enzymes are produced. Nitrite is one of
many stressors that may induce HSP production, and this work will further the
framework for examining diverse stress responses using HSPs. The NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.