* 1414661
* EAPSI: Investigation of bacteria-inspired robotic swimmers
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jamel Ali, Ali                     Jamel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Currently there is a great deal of interest in microscale robotics for many
applications, such as drug delivery. From literature, it is clear that the main
reasons why microrobototics has not yet been developed for clinical use is the
lack of sufficient energy and propulsion systems, as well as a lack of control
systems needed for precise manipulation of these devices. Although material
synthesis and processing have been rapidly advancing, no man-made material
exhibits the diverse array of robustness and function inherent in many
biological systems. A possible resource for such active materials exists within
many microorganisms, namely bacterial flagella. One potential application of
flagella is the use of these biomaterials as mechanical motors in robotic
microswimmers. This research aims to fabricate and control bacterial-inspired
robotic microswimmers. Dr.Jinseok Kim, at the Center of Bionics at Korea
Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) is currently investigating the use of
such microrobots for minimally invasive surgery and targeted drug delivery. The
researchers at KIST have expertise in studying microswimming behavior as well as
capability to control microswimmers though various stimulations such as
magnetotaxis.

Flagella are an ideal system to use for a variety of microbiorobotic systems
because they can convert rotational motion into translation motion. Also, as
mechanical devices, flagella have extraordinary properties, allowing them to act
as mechanical transducers. Furthermore, billions of flagella are readily
available through inexpensive cell culturing techniques. Expertise and
equipment, along with equipment to record, track, and analyze bacterial behavior
is also present at KIST. Using KIST's equipment for high resolution fluorescence
imaging of micro size objects, flagellated artificial bacteria will be developed
and investigated for their ability to swim at low Reyonds number. In addition,
the ability of these robotic swimmers to navigate controllably in biologically
realistic fluids will also be investigated. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.