* 1414512
* Social Organization And The Development Of Capitalist Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Douglas Armstrong, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 142,323.00

The underlying goal of this research is to understand how changing global scale
economic patterns affect social organization, especially in small scale
developing societies. In situations where there is close proximity between
"managers" and "workers" what are the interpersonal rearrangements which occur?.
Archaeological research such as that described below has the potential to trace
out such interactions over extended periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
National Science Foundation award Douglas V. Armstrong (Syracuse University) to
examine a revolutionary change in agricultural and labor systems in Barbados.
This research is being organized as a cooperative international effort between
archaeologists at Syracuse University and the Barbados Museum and Historical
Society. The study will focus on the scientific investigation of cultural
deposits at the newly rediscovered pioneer English settlement at Trents
Plantation, a founding settlement originally known as Charles Fort. The site,
rediscovered through GIS (geographic information system) analysis of a
plantation map dating to 1646, provides a unique opportunity to examine early
life on a small-scale farm. The excellent preservation of stratified deposits,
spanning more than 350 years and including the only undisturbed (unplowed)
enslaved labor settlement in Barbados, allow the scientific examination of the
shift from small-scale farm to large-scale production of sugar, the transition
to a sugar economy, the institution of slavery, and the rise of capitalism in
the British West Indies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trents was one of the first
estates settled in Barbados in 1627. It began as a small-scale operation engaged
in mixed agriculture (cotton, tobacco, indigo) by farmers using indentured and
enslaved laborers. It was part of a rapid and dramatic shift to
agricultural/industrial production of sugar using large numbers of enslaved
African laborers beginning in the 1640s. The significance of Barbados to the
rise of the plantation system in the Americas has been well chronicled by
historians, but prior to this study no traces of pre-sugar era estates had been
known and no intact and unplowed enslaved laborer settlements had been
identified for Barbados. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will use a rigorous set
of archaeological methodologies to collect and analyze artifacts, dietary
remains, and spatial relationships. The study will test a series of hypotheses
examining changes in social systems in the colony. It will: 1) explore and
evaluate sites associated with the founding of an English colony in the
Caribbean (1627-1640s); 2) analyze the record of social relations reflected in
the shift from small scale farms that used indentured (European) and enslaved
(African) labor to large scale capitalistic agro-industrial plantations that
relied primarily on enslaved laborers from Africa (transitional era:
1640s-1680s; and early sugar era: 1680s-1720s; and later period of slavery
1720s-1834); 3) critically examine the landscape in which slavery emerged as the
dominant form of labor; and, 4) assess changes in the local environment as lands
were cleared for agricultural production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The changes that
took place in Bardados had profoundly impacted the social and economic structure
associated with enslavement of Africans and the expansion of the Atlantic slave
trade. The plantation systems developed in Barbados were used as models in the
British settlement of Jamaica and South Carolina, and established complex
trading networks that linked merchant traders in Boston and England and
provision farmers throughout New England. The changes set in motion in Barbados
with the rise of the capitalstic sugar plantation and the shift to chattel
slavery were profound and world changing.