* 1414818
* EAPSI: Estimating methane and carbon dioxide emissions from the Three Gorges Reservoir in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Lindsey Witthaus-Yasarer, Witthaus-Yasarer        Lindsey        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The Three Gorges Reservoir (TGR) in China is one of the largest reservoir
systems in the world. Environmental concerns of the TGR construction and
operation, such as nutrient enrichment of reservoir waters, algal blooms,
fragmentation of critical habitats, and greenhouse gas emissions (methane and
carbon dioxide) from the reservoir area, have drawn global concern. Studies of
methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) production from the TGR and other large
reservoirs worldwide has demonstrated that hydroelectric power is not a carbon-
neutral energy source. However, more rigorous methods of estimating reservoir
carbon emissions are still necessary. In collaboration with Dr. Zhe Li, a noted
expert on reservoir biogeochemistry at Chongqing University, this project will
use statistical and geospatial tools to analyze data from ongoing monitoring of
CH4 and CO2 fluxes, water quality, and reservoir characteristics to provide a
comprehensive estimate of both CH4 and CO2 emissions for the TGR. The approach
developed in this project will help to estimate CH4 and CO2 emissions for other
reservoir systems around the world.

This project will use statistical and geospatial tools to create a spatially-
heterogeneous estimate of CH4 and CO2 emissions from the TGR. The proposed work
will integrate geospatial analysis into a long-term study of reservoir carbon
fluxes. Multivariate statistics and geospatial tools in ArcGIS will be utilized
to determine spatially-heterogeneous relationships between reservoir properties
- such as depth and nutrient levels - and carbon emissions. The approach
developed in this project can be used to predict how greenhouse gas emissions
may change in the TGR under various management regimes, and will be applied to
other reservoir systems. Overall, this project will help to advance the current
methods of estimating greenhouse gas emissions from reservoir systems and can
aid in understanding the carbon budget of freshwater systems. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.