* 1414211
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Complete Print-Read-Decode Prototype for RGB Upconverting Inks
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Paul May, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 256,092.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating our newly-
developed upconversion inks and associated printing techniques into a complete
system for printing, reading, and decoding covert markings that exhibit full
red-green-blue (RGB) additive color upconversion luminescence upon excitation
with near-infrared (NIR) light. This system will constitute a new anti-
counterfeiting and authentication technology to fill the need for fighting the
staggering counterfeiting and intellectual-property losses suffered across a
broad range of industries. The project will result in a prototype of a complete
Print-Read-Decode system for RGB upconverting inks. This Print-Read-Decode
system will have the following unique features: it will be based on inks
activated with nanocrystals which are responsible for the upconversion
luminescence; the covert markings are invisible under ambient and UV lighting,
and only become visible under NIR light; it will be based on the only known
print system demonstrated to fill the RGB color space using upconversion
luminescence; and it will be a closed-loop system, in which the entire system,
from printing, to encoding, to reading and decoding will be included within one
system. These features provide advantages when compared to the leading competing
security inks and marking systems due to increased difficulty to counterfeit.
Specifically, the ability to replicate would require reproduction of not only
the inks (which are intrinsically difficult to reproduce), but of the entire
system. This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates
from research discovery toward commercial application, the development of a
cyber-enabled, integrated reader; and adaptation of the current ink formulations
to accommodate industry-friendly equipment and processes. The project engages
Midwest Micro-Tek in Brookings, SD to augment its research capabilities and to
provide a suitable test environment in this technology translation
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Print-Read-Decode prototype for RGB
upconverting inks is important because counterfeit goods cost U.S. businesses
$200-$250 billion annually, and are directly responsible for the loss of 750,000
American jobs. Beyond the dollar costs, counterfeit drugs are a proven danger to
public health and safety. Counterfeit integrated circuits and electronic
components are a threat to the full functionality of national defense systems.
In addition, the economic impact of the $2 billion mass serialization track-and-
trace market is predicted to expand to $75 billion in less than three years.
Success in combating counterfeiting will require numerous creative approaches; a
single market-dominant anti-counterfeiting technology seems unrealistic and even
dangerous. If the proposed system captures a mere one percent of the predicted
market within three years, the economic impact would be $750,000,000.