* 1414889
* EAPSI: Characterizing the role of a recently discovered protein in the regulation of calcium signaling and cellular contraction in a model tubular tissue
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jeff Bouffard, Bouffard                Jeff
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Tissues containing cellular tubes are vital components of the human body, found
in our airways and blood vessels. Proper response of these tissues to stretch is
essential to health, and diseases like asthma result from unregulated
contraction. Tissues can respond to stretch and regulate contraction by altering
calcium levels inside cells. The spermatheca of the microscopic worm C. elegans
provides an excellent model for cellular response to stretch, calcium signaling,
and regulation of contraction in a tubular tissue. Many genes acting in the
spermatheca are similar to the ones in human cellular tubes, and fluorescent
sensors allow study of the tissue in a living, intact animal. This project will
advance our understanding of how cellular tubes respond to stretch by examining
the role of a recently discovered protein, SPV-1, in the regulation of calcium
signaling and cellular contraction. This work will be conducted at the National
University of Singapore in collaboration with Dr. Ronen Zaidel-Bar, an expert in
cell response to mechanical stimuli and co-discoverer of SPV-1. SPV-1 contains
an F-BAR domain that senses membrane curvature, a RhoGAP domain that regulates a
GTPase known to affect actomyosin contractility in the tissue, and a domain
which binds DAG, a lipid signaling molecule generated by a phospholipase
required for proper tissue function. These domains suggest SPV-1 can sense
tissue stretch and interact with cellular regulatory and contractile networks,
and preliminary evidence supports this. This work will image the calcium sensor
GCaMP and fluorescently labeled SPV-1 to investigate how SPV-1 localization
affects calcium signaling. Understanding SPV-1's role in this tissue will
advance our understanding of the fundamental biology of cellular stretch
response, and could open new avenues for therapeutic drug targets and tissue
engineering. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.