* 1414968
* EAPSI: Investigating the effect of environmental contaminants on female reproductive systems in American alligators, an indicator species
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Brenna Doheny, Doheny                  Brenna         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

There is increasing evidence that exposure to environmental contaminants during
embryonic development can lead to impaired adult reproductive function. A well-
known example is how exposure to the pesticide DDT severely impacted the
reproductive success of many wild birds via eggshell thinning. Studies have
shown that exposure to DDT prenatally alters the development of the female
reproductive tract (FRT) of birds, causing structural changes that alter adult
reproductive function. This study will focus on the development of the FRT in an
important sentinel species, the American alligator, which holds a unique
evolutionary position with a reproductive tract that bears similarities to other
reptiles as well as to birds. This study will investigate whether pathways
related to estrogen changes play a role in the development of alligator FRT.
This research will be conducted at the National Institute for Basic Biology in
Okazaki, Japan, in collaboration with Dr. Taisen Iguchi, a renowned expert on
the role of estrogens in female reproductive system development and endocrine
disruption.

In mammals, regional development of the female reproductive tract is influenced
by spatiotemporal expression of Hoxa 5' genes. Regional expression of these
genes in the developing mammalian FRT is regulated by estrogens. Due to the
highly conserved nature of Hox genes in body plan specification across
vertebrate taxa, this study hypothesizes that Hox genes are also involved in
regional differentiation of the developing alligator FRT, and, further, that
these genes are regulated by endogenous estrogens. Hoxa 5' expression in the
embryonic alligator FRT will be localized via in situ hybridization, and the
role of estrogens in regulating these genes will be characterized by comparing
expression patterns in tissues exposed to exogenous estrogen and estrogen
receptor isoform-specific agonists. This study will provide insight into the
factors critical for healthy reproductive system formation in this sentinel
species, and the potential disruptive impact of exposure to estrogenic
environmental contaminants. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.