* 1414714
* EAPSI: Soil microbes and stream health: the effect of nutrient load on soil nitrogen removal capacity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Corianne Tatariw, Tatariw                 Corianne
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Humans have dramatically increased the amount of reactive nitrogen in the
environment with negative ecological consequences. Bacteria that live in soil
and water have the ability to permanently remove excess nitrogen through a
process called denitrification. Runoff from dairy farms is the main source of
excess nitrogen in New Zealand waters, and has negative impacts on mahinga kai,
freshwater species that are a traditional food source for the M&amp;#257;ori.
However, dairy export is an important part of the New Zealand economy.
Therefore, it is important to understand the capacity of bacteria to remove
nitrogen (N) in soils and streams to define limits on nitrogen application rates
that protect the environment. The objective of this study is to relate changes
in microbial community composition and soil conditions to denitrification rates
in New Zealand dairy pasture soils and adjacent streams. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Gavin Lear, an expert in microbial ecology,
at the University of Auckland in New
Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Denitrification hotspots in riparian soils will be
predicted by relating denitrifier abundance (quantitative polymerase chain
reactions of functional genes), microbial community structure (automated
ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis), and soil conditions to denitrification
rates. In order to better understand the factors regulating denitrification
under different N-loading regimens, this study will be replicated in the United
States on an experimental watershed subjected to 24 years of atmospheric N
deposition at Bear Brook Watershed in Maine. This comparison study is novel
because it differentiates between N loading route and land-use effects when
assessing factors that influence denitrification rates. This research will
clarify the relationship between microbial diversity and ecosystem functioning
at local and global scales through its spatially structured design. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.