* 1414636
* EAPSI: Development and testing of optical interconnection circuit for high speed and low power computing systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Aida Colon-Berrios, Colon-Berrios           Aida           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

As technology advances, the tendency for modern electronic devices is to
decrease in size while improving battery life and speed. As the integrated
circuits (ICs) that make up our modern day devices continue to increase in
performance they are running into physical limits. Electronic communication
creates a bottleneck that limits speed and consumes power. One approach to
further improve the performance of IC interconnect is to move from the
electrical to the optical domain. Using light for communication offers several
advantages over electrical signaling. On-chip integration of optical devices is
considered to be a next frontier in high performance electronics. IBM's Tokyo
Research Lab is one of the leaders in optical research for computing systems,
developing high-speed optical systems towards the goal of developing the first
optical supercomputer. In collaboration with Dr. Yoichi Taira, an expert in
optical research at IBM in Japan, this project will provide a new insight on the
research regarding high-speed communications in the United States.

Photons are not subject to many of the same parasitic effects (such as
capacitance) that slow down electrical signals. IBM has a comprehensive internal
effort in developing the next generation integrated circuits and the use of
optical interconnect approaches to improve overall integrated circuit
performance. In this project, two important components of planned optical
interconnect systems will be evaluated. First, the quality of optical waveguides
will be measured using advanced techniques, including scattering and loss
measurements using integrated photodetectors and external modulated lasers.
Using the same strategies, the maximum communication speed using these optical
interconnect systems will also be measured and validated using a code
generator/validator and high speed electrical measurement equipment coupled to
the photodeetctors. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.