* 1414259
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Technology Translation of Discoveries in Computational Modeling to Advance Thin Film Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Kurt Barth, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 237,390.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating thermal
computational modeling of industrial scale process systems to commercial
application in order to enable a predictive understanding of thin film
properties and processes used in thin film and photovoltaic (PV) industries.
This computational simulation approach is important because thin film deposition
is the backbone for many industries including thin film PV, semiconductor, flat
panel display, LED laser manufacturing and others. The project will result in a
proof of concept of computational modeling to advance thin film manufacturing.
These computational simulation methods will include thermal aspects as well as
generation, transport and deposition of vapor species. This will bring accurate
computational simulation engineering to the thin film industry and lead to
significant economic benefits. By including thermal, vapor and film growth into
one model, this approach is a significant advancement over the less
sophisticated approaches currently in use. The project engages the members of
Colorado State University's Industry / University Corporative Research Center
(I/UCRC) Next Generation Photovoltaics Center (NGPV). This is an NSF supported
industry driven consortium. In addition, Direct Solar (DOE-STTR Grantee) will
aid in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality. This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application; these include
developing methods for the prediction of the film thickness, film uniformity and
microstructure. These will then be verified experimentally. The deposition of
thin film CdTe photovoltaics (PV) and other films will be studied. The physics
of thin film formation of these materials will be understood. The foundation of
this research is the thermal modeling of many industrial scale systems that have
been completed by our group. The exact geometries of the industrial hardware are
modeled and the resultant temperature distribution predicted by the computations
is within +/- 2% of the experimental measurements. The potential economic impact
is expected to be in a $750 million market in the next 2-5 years, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the critical simulation, thin film and
PV industries.