* 1414639
* EAPSI: Revealing Mammalian Biodiversity with Leech Blood Meals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Michael Tessler, Tessler                 Michael        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,325.00

Terrestrial leech blood meals are excellent at revealing rare and unknown mammal
diversity. Researches have identified a variety of mammals by sampling blood
meals of leeches, including species recently discovered, likely threatened, near
threatened, and unknown to a sampling area (despite attempts to find
individuals), as well as a cryptic species that requires DNA to identify. The
substantial and growing scientific infrastructure and expertise in China make it
ideal for forging life-long collaborations, while utilizing this new blood meal
method to uncover cryptic biodiversity. Dr. Doug Yu at the Kunming Institute of
Zoology in Yunnan Province, China will supervise this project. Yunnan is an
exceptional target site for mammal conservation, as it is houses half of China's
mammals, the majority of China's protected species, and is already a major focus
for existing conservation programs. China is also known for an exceptional
diversity and high abundance of terrestrial leeches, yet reconstructions of the
terrestrial leech tree of life are largely devoid of Chinese samples.

This project will test three hypotheses: 1) blood meals are a novel, efficient
tool for surveying and finding mammalian biodiversity in Yunnan; 2) terrestrial
leeches display host specificity; and 3) Yunnan terrestrial leech biodiversity
is vastly underestimated. DNA from leeches and their blood meals will be
sequenced using amplicon based next-generation sequencing. Mammal hosts
determined from these sequences will be compared to park checklists, testing
this method's efficacy for surveying mammalian biodiversity. Leech host
specificity will be tested using statistical analyses. The most extensively
sampled terrestrial leech tree of life will be constructed, using sequences from
this study and prior research, to test the accuracy of current classifications.
This also will aid in identification of new species like the recently described
Yunnan cave leech. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.