* 1414956
* EAPSI: Establishing cellular biomarker levels and biological function in lung Cancer
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Casey Burton, Burton                  Casey
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Pteridines are an emerging class of metabolic biomarkers that show promise as
noninvasive indicators of malignancies such as lung cancer. Recent advancements
in pteridine detection have elucidated the biological function of pteridines and
establish cellular levels in cancer cell lines. Using a combination of powerful
detection platforms, this study aims to establish cellular pteridines levels in
multiple human cell lines in order to propose novel pteridine mechanisms in lung
cancer and to generate corresponding pteridine profiles that can be used for
clinical screening purposes. These pteridine profiles will enable clinical
practitioners to advance pteridine validation studies and facilitate the rapid
translation of pteridine diagnostics into clinical practice while mechanism
elucidation will enable new anti-cancer technologies. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Huwei Liu, a leading expert in
bioseparations, at Peking University which affords unique access to world-class
cell culture facilities.

This study will utilize a novel capillary electrophoresis - laser-induced
fluorescence (CE-LIF) pteridine detection technique to monitor 15 clinically
important pteridines in an established human lung cancer cell line and normal
human embryonic kidney cells which will be used as a control. Pteridine
functionality will be determined through activation/inhibition of metabolic
pathways using well-established methods. Cellular pteridine levels will also be
characterized to predicate the elevated levels clinically reported in urine
matrices. Simultaneous analysis by liquid chromatography - tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) will permit identification of new clinically useful
pteridine derivatives. Pteridine profiles including the 15 clinically important
pteridines and any newly identified pteridine derivatives will be produced for
lung cancer and control embryonic kidney cell lines as a new diagnostic tool.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology.