* 1414102
* CNH: The Coupled Human Health and Environmental Dynamics of Schistosomiasis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Armand Kuris, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,499,897.00

Ecological damage caused by human activity can directly influence infectious
diseases and human health, but public health campaigns rarely turn to ecological
solutions to mitigate infectious disease risk, instead favoring traditional
approaches, such as vaccine development or drug treatment. This research project
will conduct an experimental investigation of a novel disease-control strategy
that incorporates the reintroduction of native prawns to determine whether they
might help reduce the prevalence of the snails that host the parasitic worms for
that spread schistosomiasis, which is one of the most prevalent parasitic
diseases in the world. The project will test the idea that reintroduction of the
native prawns as predators will repair the aquatic food web that has been
disrupted by dam construction and significantly reduce transmission of
schistosomiasis by reducing the prevalence of the parasites. The project will
investigate whether and how prawn restoration can be sustainable as well as add
an important protein food source and market resource for the people living along
the rivers. The project will provide new understanding regarding the complex
interaction of human and natural forces to alter patterns of disease
transmission. It will enhance knowledge across a range of fields, including
trophic ecology, epidemiology, aquaculture, economics, and other social sciences
as well as mathematical modeling. The project therefore will provide new
insights regarding how biodiversity may be enhanced, how human health may
improve, and how native prawn aquaculture may provide benefits to the rural
market economy. The transmission of schistosomiasis by parasites from infected
snails when people use open water systems for bathing, washing clothes and
equipment, tending livestock, farming, or playing has led to the infection of
about 220 million people, with an estimated 200,000 deaths per year from
schistosomiasis around the world. More than 95 percent of the infections are
occur in Africa, and this project will be based in the Senegal River ecosystem
of western Africa, but the project will provide both basic and applied insights
regarding the dynamics of coupled natural and human systems related to the
transmission of diseases in rivers and other water bodies in other locales,
including many in the U.S. The project also will provide special education and
training opportunities for post-doctoral researchers as well as graduate and
undergraduate students. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
be conducted by researchers constituting a team drawn from many different
disciplines. They will conduct experiments where prawns will be enclosed at
water-use sites and disease transmission will be compared with control sites to
determine the effect of prawns on snail abundance and on human infection rates.
Reintroduction of the prawns will be combined with drug treatments and will be
analyzed with economic models, consideration of human behavior, and monitoring
of snail and human infections. The information from these components of the
project will be synthesized with mathematical models. This project will
contribute to the technology of cultivation of the prawns as part of the
ecosystem recovery and augmentation of natural snail predators, and prawn-
stocking and harvest strategies will be modeled to seek the best approach to
maximize public health while also offering a nutritional and market incentive to
sustain prawn populations.