* 1414868
* SEES Fellows:  Improved prediction of landfalling impacts of tropical cyclones - Applications for establishing more resilient electricity infrastructure systems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2014,07/31/2016
* James Belanger, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 128,452.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenge of increasing the
resilience of the electric power infrastructure system to cascading hazards
triggered by land falling tropical cyclones. The objective is to support better
management of the associated risks and the development of more resilient
networks of critical infrastructures. This project advances the science of
probabilistic prediction of hurricanes and their landfall impacts, develops a
new methodology for decadal projections of extreme weather events, and develops
a meta-networks system framework for assessing the coupled costs/benefits of
proposed strategies for hardening infrastructure in response to cascading
hurricane hazards in conjunction with broader strategies for resilience and
sustainability. This project aims to reduce the impact of tropical cyclones on
electricity system infrastructures through engagement with regional power
providers and emergency managers. The impacts from this research will support
evaluation of the cost effectiveness of public and private investments in both
short- and long-term initiatives dedicated to strengthening critical
infrastructure and electric grid resilience.