* 1414769
* EAPSI: Interactions between slow slip and seismicity along the Hikurangi Margin, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Erin Todd, Todd                    Erin           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

New Zealand is located on a complex boundary between the Australian and Pacific
tectonic plates where the Pacific Plate sinks beneath the North Island through a
process called subduction. Since subduction zones generate the world's largest
earthquakes (magnitude > 9), it is important to understand the physics related
to sliding processes on the plate interface and deformation in surrounding
regions. In the South Island, the plate boundary continues as the Alpine Fault,
a strike-slip fault where the Pacific and Australian plates slide past one
another. Further south, subduction resumes in the opposite direction with the
Australian Plate subducting beneath the Pacific Plate at the Puysegur Trench.
This project will investigate the relationship between slow slip, motion on the
plate boundary that does not radiate seismic energy, and earthquakes on the
plate interface and surrounding faults. This research will be conducted at the
Geologic and Nuclear Sciences Research Institute in collaboration with Dr.
Charles Williams, one of the developers of a crustal deformation modeling code
that will be used for the project.

It has been accepted that a spectrum of strain release modes exists in
subduction zones, where the Earth's largest earthquakes occur. The goal of this
research is to quantify key aspects of the physics related to slow slip along
the Hikurangi Margin and to elucidate the relationships between slow slip,
tremor, and earthquakes. This research will make use of PyLith, a finite-element
crustal deformation modeling code, to simulate slow slip along the Hikurangi
Margin, New Zealand. The resulting stress changes will be analyzed along the
megathrust in both the along-dip and along-strike directions as well as on
surrounding faults. The spatiotemporal relationships that exist between slow
slip, tremor, and conventional fast earthquakes will also be investigated. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New
Zealand.