* 1414052
* CNH:   The Dynamics of Multi-Scalar Adaptation in Megacities
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Hallie Eakin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,498,870.00

Megacities (defined as cities with populations over 10 million) are highly
vulnerable to environmental change but their size and complexity can make
successful adaptation difficult. This interdisciplinary research project will
study the challenge of reducing vulnerability to increased flooding, chronic
water scarcity, and associated health problems in one of the world's largest
metropolitan areas. Residents, businesses and public agencies in megacities
respond to extremes in disparate and often uncoordinated ways, and these actions
(such as changes in land use and infrastructure) may unintentionally create
hazardous conditions in other parts of the city. The project will produce a
dynamic systems model to explore how the individual responses of specific
populations to different future scenarios of environmental change may affect one
another and produce unintended consequences. As a decision-support tool, the
model will enable decision-makers to test how altering risk-management
priorities or adjusting the geographic focus of interventions aimed at dealing
with changing climatic conditions could lead to improved overall results. The
model will be developed for use in the study locale and would be readily
adaptable for reducing risks from changing environmental conditions in complex
urban environments across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
implemented in close collaboration with the National Autonomous University of
Mexico City and local stakeholders. Four case studies of vulnerable regions
within Mexico City will be conducted to characterize the complexity of
residents' experience of hazards and their response strategies. City-level
analyses will capture the institutional context of decision -making and the
mandates, intervention strategies, and priorities of city-level agencies and
actors. A biophysical model will be developed to simulate the impact of land-use
change and infrastructure modification on the city's hydro-climatic system.
Agent-based modeling will be developed to simulate the responses of residents
and city-level agencies to spatially differentiated hydro-climatic risk, with
the outputs from this model linked to the hydro-climatic system. A geographic
information system embedded in a multi-criteria decision-analysis framework will
permit the exploration of different scenarios of hazard response in a spatially
explicit manner, thereby facilitating decision making concerning adaptation to
changing hydro-climatic conditions. The project will support the
interdisciplinary and cross-cultural education and training of U.S. and Mexico.