* 1414397
* NSF PFI: AIR-TT:  Real-time Power Measurement Software Technology for Microprocessor
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Young Cho, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2016
* USD 215,757.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an on-chip
digital power monitoring research discovery to fill the need for superior on-
chip power measurement technology. The Real-time Power Measurement Software
Technology (RTPMSoft) project will result in a prototype of a highly accurate
subcomponent level power estimation software for an embedded processor in a
System-on-Chip. This power estimation software system has the following unique
features: (1) high accuracy comparable to the direct power (hardware)
measurement method(s), (2) sampling rate in the order of digital clock rate, and
(3) run-time power estimation of subcomponents with automated self-calibration.
These features provide significant advantages in system cost, measurement
accuracy, and monitoring performance when compared to the leading technology in
this market space such as on-chip analog-digital converters (ADCs), inferential
digital sensors, and event based power modeling. The RTPMSoft is important
because the techniques developed for the prototype have broader applicability to
other areas of computing such as low power computing, high performance server
systems, and consumer appliances such as mobile phones. Indeed, all the
technology trends suggest a future where a fine-grained energy accounting system
will be an integral part of most computing devices.&lt;br/&gt;While the experts
in industry have recognized the necessity of using fine grained power
measurement in integrated circuit (IC) designs to make advances in low-power and
high performance systems, the state-of-the-art measurement technologies are
insufficient to support the needs of modern chip designs. As this project
translates from research discovery toward commercial application, the translated
product(s) will fill the technology gap in the power measurement technology to
enable advances in on-chip power management in modern ICs without the need for
specialized hardware.&lt;br/&gt;The project is driven by an innovative power
measurement technology to produce purely software based prototype running on a
full-fledged embedded processor platform capable of running Linux operating
system. More specifically, the project will (a) devise practical software
analysis methods exposing the fine-grained system run-time processes; (b)
develop runtime probing methods within the operating system that allows
instrumentation of software ?sensors?; (c) port research discovery algorithms to
a purely software based prototype and evaluate it. This prototype will provide
conclusions that generalize beyond the research results.&lt;br/&gt;The potential
economic impact is expected to increase rapidly in the next five to ten years to
affect a significant portion of $300B IC market. More specifically, the work
will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the future of power aware IC
industry.