* 1414021
* PFI:AIR-TT:  WC/Co Materials with High Hardness and Toughness Simultaneously Enabled by the WC Platelet Microstructure
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Robert Anderson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 257,045.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
discovery of Tungsten Carbide-Cobalt (WC/Co) materials with nano-WC platelets
that offer characteristics of both high hardness and toughness to fill the needs
of the hardmetal industry. This project will result in a sintering approach and
processing conditions to obtain consistent and robust WC/Co materials with full
densities and a uniform WC platelet microstructure simultaneously. These WC/Co
materials with nano-WC platelets have the unique feature of thin WC platelets
with high aspect ratios. This feature provides unprecedented enhancements in
both hardness and toughness with properties better than any WC/Co materials
known today. Such unmatched enhancements are achieved because thin thickness of
nano-WC platelets offers high hardness, while the high aspect ratio provides
superior toughness. In addition to the superior mechanical properties, this
project also addresses the cost of WC/Co materials through our patented
Integrated Mechanical and Thermal Activation (IMTA) process to make low cost
nano-WC/Co powders as the starting materials to fabricate WC/Co materials with
nano-WC platelets. This IMTA process combines mechanical and thermal activation
to reduce processing steps, lower reaction temperatures, shorten reaction times,
decrease ball milling times, and thus drastically reduce the cost of the nano-
WC/Co powder. Currently, the roadblock to the anticipated potentials is
inhomogeneous microstructure and a large variation in hardness and toughness.
Thus, this PFI: AIR Technology Translation project will focus on sintering study
and establish sintering conditions to attain consistent WC/Co materials with
compositions ranging from 6 to 18 wt.% Co in conjunction with full densities and
a uniform WC platelet microstructure simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages Kennametal, the second largest WC/Co manufacturer in the world,
to independently evaluate the mechanical properties of the WC/Co materials with
nano-WC platelets with a goal to accelerate technology translation from research
discovery toward commercial reality. In addition, the project team works with
University Technology Park (UTP) at Illinois Institute of Technology. UTP is one
of the nation's fastest-growing hubs for high-tech innovation, and has a robust
network of venture capital firms and angel investors. Working with UTP offers
the project team with the option of creating a startup company with funds from
venture capital firms or angel investors as well as office space and
laboratories required by a new startup company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WC/Co
materials with nano-WC platelets are important because WC/Co materials make up
of 98% of all hardmetal components and have been widely used in military,
aerospace, automotive, marine, petrochemical, mining, electronics, and wood
industries. In all of these military and civilian applications, superior wear
resistance derived from a combination of high hardness and high toughness is
required. In some cases, impact resistance is also a must. Therefore, advanced
WC/Co materials with simultaneous improvements in hardness and toughness will
greatly enhance the performance of many existing WC/Co components, and open up
new opportunities in areas outside their current application windows. The low
cost manufacturing that we have developed can further propel widespread
applications of such novel WC/Co hardmetals, and enhance the US manufacturing
competitiveness.