* 1414683
* Emerging Topological Quantum Phases in Proximity-Coupled Nanostructures and Cold Atom Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Tudor Stanescu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2020
* USD 231,505.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education aimed to design topological states in
hybrid materials structures on the nanoscale and in systems of atoms trapped by
light close to the absolute zero of temperature. Topological states are quantum
mechanical states of many particles, usually electrons in materials or very cold
atoms, that are characterized by properties that are peculiarly unchanged by
deformations and imperfections of the system. It may be possible to harness
topological states for applications in advanced communication, sensing, and
quantum information technologies. Theoretical work has predicted different kinds
of topological phases. Some are difficult to find in known materials. The PI
will explore a different avenue, designing nanoscale structures of materials to
engineer a predicted quantum state. Fhe PI aims to provide a detailed
theoretical characterization of systems supporting topological quantum phases
based on realistic modeling of solid state hybrid nanostructures and ultra-cold
atom systems. The result will be guidance for experimental efforts in these
areas and will contribute to the knowledgebase for engineering topological
quantum states and developing new applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims
to investigate a series of basic science problems related to the realization and
detection of topological quantum phases in solid state and cold atom systems.
This project will involve in part the development of modular software that will
be integrated into educational activities of the project. The research is
focused on enhancing understanding of effects induced by close proximity of one
part of a system to another in hybrid nanostructures and on characterizing the
effects in solid-state heterostructures and cold-atom systems that arise as a
consequence of strong interactions among electrons or atoms and lead to
different kinds of topological quantum states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports graduate and undergraduate student training in a broad range of
theoretical condensed matter techniques. A project-oriented peer mentoring
program aimed to attract students into pursuing theoretical condensed matter
research will also provide an educational resource that is expected to increase
the success of underrepresented students of lower socio-economic status in
science and engineering by effectively training them to exploit the critical
connection between science and mathematics and by providing them with the
opportunity to acquire useful computer programing and software development
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education aimed to advance the understanding of topological
quantum phases by bridging the gap between theoretical predictions based on
minimal models and the complex phenomenology of real nanostructures under
experimental conditions. This project focusses on characterizing the proximity
effects that govern the low-energy physics of hybrid nanostructures and on
carefully incorporating strong correlation effects. Specifically, the PI aims
to: &lt;br/&gt;i) Identify optimal architectures for the realization, detection,
and controlled manipulation of&lt;br/&gt;Majorana fermions in solid state hybrid
structures through realistic modeling of semiconductor nanowires and quantum dot
arrays proximity-coupled to superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;ii.) Investigate emergent
quantum states in topological insulator structures by developing a theory of
proximity-induced phenomena in topological-insulator-based multilayer
heterotructures and at interfaces between topological insulators and strongly
correlated materials.&lt;br/&gt;iii.) Investigate quantum phases characterized
by nontrivial topological properties in cold-atom systems by determining the
effects of smooth confinement, exotic light-induced spin-orbit coupling, and
strong many-body interactions.&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide firm
guidance for the experimental efforts in these areas and will contribute to the
knowledgebase for engineering topological quantum states and developing new
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports graduate and
undergraduate student training in a broad range of theoretical condensed matter
techniques. A project-oriented peer mentoring program aimed to attract students
into pursuing theoretical condensed matter research will also provide an
educational resource that is expected to increase the success of
underrepresented students of lower socio-economic status in science and
engineering by effectively training them to exploit the critical connection
between science and mathematics and by providing them with the opportunity to
acquire useful computer programing and software development skills.