* 1414877
* EAPSI: Understanding the pre-conditioning effects of solar radiation and precipitation on post-wildfire erosion
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Francis Rengers, Rengers                 Francis        K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Wildfire is increasing across the United States, and the hazards associated with
fire do not end once the fire is extinguished. Burned soils are more susceptible
to erosion than regular forest soils, therefore the first rains after a wildfire
can generate catastrophic erosion. To predict where the most severe erosion will
occur, we must understand how different soils erode after they are burned. This
research will explore if landscape aridity (a function of precipitation and
radiation) can be used as a predictor of post-fire erosion. This study will
investigate if arid soil development on local patches of a mountain range will
influence soil erosivity and if the preferential erosion of arid soils leads to
mountain asymmetry over long time periods. The results could lead to better
predictions of post-wildfire erosion. This research will be conducted under the
supervision of Dr. Gary Sheridan, a global expert on the study of post-wildfire
erosion, at the University of Melbourne in Australia. This research will use
remote sensing imagery and topographic data to calculate the aridity index
across a mountain range in Victoria, Australia. Mapping of the aridity index
will effectively delineate where arid soils are likely to form. Fieldwork will
involve measurements of soil properties in recently burned areas that were
mapped as arid soils, which we will compare with samples obtained from non-arid
zones. During the field campaign, we will test in-situ soil hydrologic
properties by measuring the water infiltration capacity, the soil shear
strength, and the total soil depth above bedrock in soil pits. Numerical
modeling will be performed to determine how preferential erosion will effect
long-term geomorphic hillslope evolution of a frequently burned landscape. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science.