* 1414612
* EAPSI: Investigating the application of Forest Reclamation Approach techniques on surface mined land in East Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kenton Sena, Sena                    Kenton         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Surface mining is an intense and ecologically destructive process that involves
the removal of native vegetation (e.g., diverse and productive forests) and soil
to prepare for resource extraction. Surface mining for coal is commonly
conducted in Appalachia in the United States, and also in parts of New South
Wales and Queensland in Australia. Because of the impacts of the mining process
on native ecosystems, restoration is critical on mined sites. In Australia,
similar to in Appalachia, many mined sites are reclaimed to grassland systems,
which provide less ecological benefit than native forests. Therefore, developing
reclamation techniques that can successfully restore native forests to mined
sites should be a priority. The Forest Reclamation Approach (FRA) is a set of
guidelines developed in Appalachia for establishing native forest systems on
mined sites. However, it has not yet been tested for transferability outside the
U.S. This project will assess the potential for FRA techniques to successfully
restore native forests in Australia. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Paul Bertsch, a noted soil scientist with the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in Australia.

This project will take place on the Wambo Surface Mine in New South Wales,
Australia. Experimental reclamation plots have been constructed with spoil type
and compaction mitigation technique as treatments. Studies in Appalachia have
shown that weathered minesoils provide a better growth medium than unweathered
minesoils. Studies in Appalachia have found that native trees grow poorly in
heavily compacted minesoils; therefore, already compacted soils must be ripped
to improve tree growth potential. Alternatively, minesoils can be placed using
minimal compaction techniques (e.g., loose-dumping) at the beginning. Five
species of native trees were planted directly into the experimental plots in
Fall 2013. This project will assess first-year survival and growth of these
trees, as well as natural vegetative colonization and soil microbial
development. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.