* 1414741
* EAPSI: Validation of Three-Dimensional Endoscopy System with Synthetic Vocal Fold Models
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kimberly Stevens, Stevens                 Kimberly
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Voice disorders affect many people in the United States but effective clinical
treatment is limited by knowledge of the physics of voice production proper
diagnosis and by challenges in diagnosis. Laryngoscopy, use of a specially
designed endoscope to examine the vocal folds, is an important technique for
vocal fold visualization in both clinical and research settings. However, the
technique is limited to providing information regarding movement in two
dimensions when the motion of vocal folds has been shown to be three-
dimensional. Dr. Isao Tokuda at the Ritsumeikan University in Japan has
developed a method for reconstructing three-dimensional vocal fold motion using
a laryngoscope with two cameras, but the technique has not yet been extensively
validated. In collaboration with Dr. Tokuda, this project will use synthetic
vocal fold models, recently used in voice biomechanics research, to validate the
stereo-endoscopy system.

Synthetic vocal fold models have recently been used in voice biomechanics
research and will be used in the proposed project because they offer more
control, are more robust, and are easier to acquire than excised animal models.
Multiple cameras and common computer vision techniques will be used to validate
the stereo-endoscopy system by recording and reconstructing the vibrating
surface of synthetic, self-oscillating vocal fold models with both the stereo-
endoscopy and high speed systems and comparing the results. The validation of
the stereo-endoscopy system will allow its use in clinical settings as well as
for quantitative analysis of vocal fold motion, leading to improved
understanding of the dynamics involved in phonation. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.