* 1414955
* EAPSI: Understanding the legacy of seabirds and fire regimes in tropical dryland ecosystems in Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kealohanuiopuna Kinney, Kinney                  KealohanuiopunaM
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

A large percent of the earth's terrestrial landscape is composed of arid
drylands. Fires are a characteristic of arid drylands. The frequency and
magnitude of fires shapes the structure, composition and functions of these
ecosystems. However, most of what is known about how ecosystems structure
develops over long periods of time has been derived from studies conducted in
humid ecosystems that are largely invulnerable to the effect of fires. Fires can
significantly reduce the productivity of an ecosystem by turning plants tissues
into ash and places exposed to a high frequency of fires may see a reduction in
the availability of nutrients key to plant growth. Recent studies have shown
that prehistoric fire regimes are a natural and persistent feature of Hawaiian
drylands that can lead to apparent declines in the long-term availability of
phosphorus and the structure of the ecosystem. However, nutrients deposited by
large colonies of seabirds known to exist in Hawaii prior to human arrival could
have potentially abated any nutrient losses associated with fires. Working in
collaboration with Professor Michael Bunce at Curtin University's world-class
ancient and environmental DNA labs, this study will sequence ancient DNA (aDNA)
preserved in semi-fossil bird bones excavated from dryland middens in Hawaii.
The aDNA data will be analyzed to quantify the diversity and abundance of
seabird populations in the past and how they may have changed in response to
human resource use.

This research contributes to theoretical understandings about the role of
disturbance, and animal nutrient subsidies in the long-term development of
dryland ecosystems. This work will provide managers in Hawaii new insights about
the function of Hawaiian dryland ecosystems in the past. For managers, these
insights are critically needed to develop informed conservation targets for the
future. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.