* 1414725
* EAPSI: Chemical reaction of pollutants within fog droplets in the Eastern Yellow Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Alexandra Boris, Boris                   Alexandra      J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Fog droplets can impact air pollutants by providing a medium for their removal
from the atmosphere, or their chemical reaction to form products that impact the
climate system, human health, and ecosystem health differently. Specifically,
solid and liquid products formed from aqueous reactions in fog droplets can
aggregate to increase the number of particles available for cloud or fog droplet
formation, and in turn, the lifetime and density of a cloud or fog. The
chemicals present in atmospheric particles, fog, or cloud water will also
determine their toxicity as they enter human respiratory systems or are
deposited into ecosystems. Identifying and quantifying chemical reactions
occurring within fog water is therefore important, particularly in regions where
large amounts of pollutants have been measured, and fog events are frequent.
This research will be conducted at Baengnyeong Island, Korea with the assistance
of Dr. Taehyoung Lee of Hankuk University of Foreign Studies in Seoul.
Baengnyeong Island is located in the Eastern Yellow Sea, where frequent fog
events during the summer coincide with large amounts of gaseous and suspended
solid or liquid pollutants from industrial, agricultural, desert (dust), and sea
sources. Chemical and physical measurements of fog water collected at
Baengnyeong Island will be made to determine whether expected chemical reactions
are occurring within the fog. Additional analyses will include analyses for
anions including sulfate and nitrate, organic pollutants such as nitrophenols,
and products of expected reactions such as small carboxylic acids. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of
Korea.