* 1414523
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Charging Processes of Dust in Complex Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Lorin Matthews, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 355,000.00

Complex plasmas, also known as dusty plasmas, consist of ions, electrons and
charged dust, tiny solid particles much smaller than the width of a human hair.
Dusty plasmas have long been of interest in the astrophysics community, due to
the fact that dust and ionized gas are found in most space environments,
including the clouds from which stars and planets form, comet tails, planetary
rings, and noctilucent clouds in the earth's ionosphere. Dusty plasmas are also
present on Earth in applied settings. They are formed in the chemically active
gases used in industrial plasma processing devices to create computer chips,
contaminating the end product and reducing overall yield. Dust contamination
within fusion devices is also an issue, since dust produced through erosion of
the containment walls raises both safety (operating instabilities) and health
(long-term contamination) concerns. The formation of dust crystals, clusters and
strings in laboratory plasmas has also proven to be a capable analog for atomic
and molecular systems.

Charging of dust grains is a unique and important aspect of dusty plasmas.
Understanding the physics behind this charging and subsequent formation of dust
structures immersed within plasma has proven to require nuanced details. The
charge acquired by the dust grains is determined by the plasma environment, but
the charged particles in turn influence this environment. Local variations in
the charge, either over the surface of a single dust grain or the multiple dust
grains comprising a larger structure, can affect both the grain's local dynamics
and the evolution of the overall system. Many situations introduce asymmetries
into this problem, making the charge difficult to describe analytically.
Complicating factors include variations in space (due to geometry of the dust
structure or of the plasma environment) as well as variations in time (due to
the response of the plasma to the moving dust grains or stochastic charging
processes). The dust charge is also extremely difficult to determine in
experiments. Thus, the primary objective of this research is to determine how
variations in charge in both time and space influence and respond to the
dynamics and configuration of dust particles in plasma environments.

In order to accomplish this goal, numerical modeling techniques will be combined
with laboratory experiments to provide a proper understanding of the processes
governing the system behavior. Numerical models will be used to model temporal
and spatial charge variation over the dust structures, including stochastic
effects to resolve the variations in time due to the discrete nature of the
plasma particles. The charging will also be linked to numerical models of the
plasma environment which define the response of the plasma to boundary
conditions and the dust itself. Simultaneously, laboratory experiments will
employ state-of-the-art techniques to control and confine the dust within dust
clouds, strings, clusters, and aggregates in order to use them as in situ probes
to measure the local plasma environment.