* 1414483
* CAREER: Engineering Biomolecules and Cells for Oral Protein Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 06/30/2013,01/31/2018
* Casim Sarkar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2018
* USD 238,304.00

Advances in biotechnology have made available recombinant forms of critically
important therapeutic proteins. The idea of orally delivering such proteins is
extremely attractive because this mode of administration is noninvasive, has
higher patient compliance, and, in some cases, can more accurately mimic native
physiology. However, due to major barriers encountered in the gastrointestinal
tract - particularly harsh pH, rapid proteolytic degradation, and low intestinal
permeability - proteins typically have very low bioavailability via oral
delivery and are therefore routinely administered through an invasive method
such as intravenous or subcutaneous injection. Here, a combined biomolecular and
cellular engineering approach will be employed to overcome these bottlenecks and
enhance oral protein delivery. This strategy will entail the development of
general in vitro directed evolution approaches to enhance protein stability in
the gastrointestinal tract as well as tunable synthetic biology approaches for
engineering food-grade microorganisms to deliver these proteins orally. The
specific application here is to create novel proteins and cells that can be used
to orally regulate glucose levels in diabetic patients. These same protein
engineering and synthetic biology approaches will also form the basis for a
broadly reaching educational and training platform. Locally at the University of
Pennsylvania, new educational modules will be incorporated into existing
undergraduate and graduate courses, the first International Genetically
Engineered Machine (iGEM) team will be created, and a new service learning
course will be established to teach molecular biotechnology to inner-city high
school students in Philadelphia. Nationally, high school teachers,
undergraduates, and high school students will be recruited from underrepresented
minority populations to carry out summer research projects. And internationally,
impoverished street children in Mumbai, India will be introduced to principles
of protein engineering and synthetic biology using examples that are of
particular relevance to that population.