* 1414477
* EAPSI: Template Strategies for the Alignment of Nanoparticle Chains
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* James Iocozzia, Iocozzia                James          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Nanotechnology has rapidly infiltrated the technology of people's daily lives.
From portable electronics, to medicine and energy; this ultra-small class of
structures is having a gigantic impact. In order to realize many of the
electrical, thermal and chemical properties of such structures, it is essential
to investigate more complicated arrangements of nanostrucutres. Though many
methods are being investigated, most are exceedingly novel, difficult to scale
up, and expensive. Strategies which combine both proven technologies as well as
novel engineering are ideal. This research will employ a developed nano-template
technology and a new method of polymer-mediated nanoparticle synthesis to create
chains of nanoparticles of specific width and length. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kohji Ohno, an expert in polymer synthesis
and surface chemistry, at Kyoto University in Kyoto, Japan. Ultimately, this
research will serve as an initial investigation that can be readily adapted to
the assembly of chains possessing different and useful properties. This
interdisciplinary research has the potential to serve as an inexpensive,
scalable source of one dimensional nano-structures applicable in current
technologies and required for emerging ones.

This work aims to produce long chains of covalently linked iron oxide (Fe3O4)
nanoparticles via magnetic alignment in nano-channels. Surface-functionalized
nanoparticles are primarily synthesized via controlled polymerization from
several multi-functional initiators. Alignment is achieved by magnetically-
directing the particles into aluminum oxide channels where they are photo-
crosslinked and removed. Drawing from polymer, chemical and materials science
disciplines; this work will be characterized by several techniques including gel
permeation chromatography, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). Though this project is limited to iron oxide
nanoparticle chains, it is generalizable to more complex systems of
nanoparticles with an iron oxide core covered in a shell material (metal,
semiconductor, inorganic etc.) to afford additional functionality. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.