* 1414379
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Toward Commercialization: Development of Neural Network Control and Power Converter Prototype for Renewables and Smart Grid Integration
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2017
* Paula Cordero, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 217,780.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a neural
network vector control technology to fill the need for renewable and smart grid
control and integration. The technology is important because it will improve the
power quality and facilitate an uninterrupted energy supply, increase incentives
for consumers to use energy from renewable resources and electric vehicles, and
accelerate progress towards America's target of deriving 20% of its electrical
energy from renewable resources by 2030. The project will result in a prototype
of a grid-connected power converter using the neural network vector control
technology. This technology has the following unique features: fast response
time, low overshoot and close to ideal control performance. These features
provide the advantages of improved efficiency, reliability, stability and power
quality of an electric utility system with integrated renewables as compared to
the leading competing conventional standard vector control technology in this
market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: (1) proving the concept of the neural network control technology
for grid-connected converters that meets the needs of electric power systems,
(2) demonstrating a functional prototype power converter board that uses neural
network control to integrate renewables into smart grids, (3) evaluating and
benchmarking a commercially valuable solution of neural network control against
conventional technology, and (4) developing a strategy for commercialization
beyond this project. In addition, personnel involved in this project, PIs,
undergraduates and graduates, will receive innovation translation experiences
through activities from technical and business perspectives. The team of
students, along with the PI, will participate in the Crimson Startup Canvas,
UA's customer discovery program to understand the formal process through which
to identify sustainable business models, increase the chance of attracting
funding and investments, create new jobs and benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Southern Company Services to
participate in an advisor role, offer guidance for the project, and guide
commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.