* 1414746
* EAPSI: Understanding the response of a natural system to long-term acidification using Sydney rock oysters and mud crabs as a model predator-prey system
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Cassandra Glaspie, Glaspie                 Cassandra      N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Ocean acidification is the gradual decrease in ocean pH as a result of carbon
dioxide (CO2) uptake, and it is expected to have detrimental effects on the
shell formation of calcified organisms such as oysters. The effect of ocean
acidification on multiple interacting species should be explored to understand
impacts on ecosystem dynamics. Mangrove estuaries experiencing acidic soil
runoff near Sydney, Australia provide a natural laboratory for the study of
ocean acidification and its effects on the ecosystem. This study will examine
the effect of ocean acidification on a crab-oyster predator-prey system through
a caging experiment and a laboratory experiment using a natural population of
oysters that have been exposed to acidification for generations. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Melanie Bishop, an expert on
community ecology of mangrove invertebrates, at Macquarie University in Sydney,
Australia.

In the source estuaries, Sydney rock oysters (Saccostrea glomerata) grown in
either acidified or normal pH conditions will be enclosed in cages with mud crab
predators (Scylla serrata) in both acidified and normal pH water for one week.
The relationship between oyster mortality, the presence of mud crabs, and pH
will be examined using linear models. In a separate laboratory experiment,
oysters from acidified and normal pH sites will be exposed to mud crab
predation, and video of predator behavior will be used to calculate handling
time (the time a predator spends manipulating or eating a prey item). The effect
of acidification on handling time and oyster mortality will be examined using
ANOVAs. This study expands upon ocean acidification research by examining the
effect of global change on interactions between two commercially important
species, and by using oysters that have had generations to adapt to long-term
acidification in nature. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Australian Academy of Science.