* 1414267
* SEES Fellows: The true meaning of "success": Developing adaptive social-ecological frameworks for evaluation of marine protected areas
* GEO,ICER
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Tara Whitty, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2017
* USD 419,336.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project focuses on
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and biodiversity.

MPAs are widely prescribed to conserve marine biodiversity (by protecting marine
habitats and species) and to ensure sustained production of marine resources.
Currently, about 2.3% of the world's oceans are protected in MPAs. While there
are recommendations to significantly increase this coverage, assessments suggest
that existing MPAs have been largely ineffective at reaching ecological and
social objectives. This project addresses the critical need to evaluate and
promote MPA success.

This project incorporates interdisciplinary, multi-scale approaches to
meaningfully contribute to the evaluation and management of MPAs as complex
adaptive systems to: 1. Develop, test, and refine adaptable and informative
social-ecological frameworks for evaluating MPA "success" at large- and local-
scales; 2. Use frameworks to guide data collection and analyses of social-
ecological attributes and MPA outcomes at sites in Baja California, Micronesia,
and Myanmar; 3. Create metrics for comparably characterizing diverse MPA sites
globally; 4. Collaborate with three open-access databases (MPAtlas, DataMARES,
and the Information System for Small-scale Fisheries) on the presentation of
final data and distribution of frameworks for future data collection; 5.
Develop, test, and refine a streamlined, holistic toolkit and training module
for collecting social and ecological data on selected priority indicators.

This effort builds upon and moves beyond previous MPA evaluation research,
linking multiple disciplines and projects to develop conceptual frameworks and
systematic, applied approaches for MPA evaluation and implementation that
incorporate sustainability concepts. The SEES Fellow, Dr. Tara Whitty, works
with host mentor Dr. Aburto Oropeza at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
and with parnter mentor Dr. Ratana Chuenpagdee at Memorial University in St.
John's, Newfoundland. NSF's International Science and Engineering (ISE) program
has co-funded this project.