* 1414616
* EAPSI: Development of New Methods for the Synthesis of Organic Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Samuel Bartlett, Bartlett                Samuel         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The synthesis of organic compounds in enantiopure form is of premiere importance
to the discovery and production of new pharmaceuticals. Enantiomers are a set of
organic compounds unique because they are non-superimposable mirror images of
one another (similar to the way a right-hand and left-hand glove cannot be
superimposed on one another). Single-enantiomer therapeutics account for sales
of over 200 billion dollars, and comprise a significant portion of
pharmaceutical sales worldwide. The increasing dominance of single-enantiomer
drugs is partially due to increased awareness of their enhanced biological
properties, in addition to regulatory guidelines. Thus, the preparation of
organic compounds in enantiopure form directly impacts human health. The most
strategic, straightforward method to produce medicinally important organic
compounds in enantiopure form is through a process called enantioselective
catalysis. In collaboration with Dr. Mikiko Sodeoka, a known expert in the field
of asymmetric catalysis, at the RIKEN Institute in Japan, this research will
study a method for the synthesis of a specific class of organic compounds that
exhibit medicinal potential but lack a direct method for their enantioselective
synthesis. The information produced in this study is expected to have broad
impact and will contribute to the development of other catalytic asymmetric
transformations as well.

Specifically, a novel transition metal-catalyzed cycloaddition reaction between
alpha-keto esters and nitrile oxides will be investigated. It is anticipated
that chiral nickel-diamine complexes will be uniquely effective catalysts in
this cycloaddition process due to their proven ability to enolize relatively
weakly acidic alpha-keto esters. Initially the effect of solvent, temperature,
ligand structure, and counterion identity on rate of conversion and
stereoselectivity will be investigated. Next, an array of differentially
substituted alpha-keto ester and nitrile oxide substrates, readily synthesized
from cheap feedstock chemicals, will be tested under the optimized reaction
conditions to evaluate the scope and utility of the proposed method. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.