* 1414274
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Prototyping bioabsorbable composites for bone-fixation applications involving low to medium loads
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Montgomery Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2017
* USD 227,851.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the novel
design and fabrication of a polymer-based composite for bone fixation
applications. The project will result in a prototype of a composite bone
fixation device. This composite device has the following unique features:
matching elastic modulus to bone, excellent toughness, and it is biocompatible
and bioresorable. These devices would eliminate the problems associated with the
commonly used metallic bone fixation devices in the market, such as stress
shielding, release of metal ions and bone re-fracture after healing. This
project addresses the use of novel materials design and fabrication techniques
to enhance the mechanical properties of the composite. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
this end, a multi-disciplinary team has been formed with expertise in
biomaterials, polymer and composite processing and characterization, technology
transfer and commercialization. The project engages investigators from
University to industry in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new composite
material will greatly benefit patients who suffer from bone fractures and are in
need of orthopedic surgeries. This is because the novel bone fixation devices,
based on the new composite material, will directly address the poor mechanical
properties of existing apatite/polymer composites and the stress-shielding and
bone re-fracture problems of metallic bone-fixation devices, the current market
solutions. In addition, the work will present a new processing approach for
fabrication of bone-fixation materials and thus contribute to U.S.
competitiveness in the bone fixation device market.