* 1414557
* PFI:  Next Generation Bioplastic Nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 08/31/2013,07/31/2014
* Richard Gross, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2014
* USD 179,741.00

This Partnership for Innovation Project from the Polytechnic Institute of New
York University (NYU-POLY) addresses the need to develop bioplastics that, in
addition to being biobased and offering a desirable environmental footprint,
will also provide future customers with improved performance characteristics
over existing materials. To do so is critical in order to motivate consumers to
renounce current petro-derived materials for new-to-the-world bioplastics such
as those proposed herein. The strategy pursued by the project team is to utilize
bioplastics with the right combination of properties while focusing on
engineering the interface or boundaries between these components to optimize
material performance. Specifically, selected material components include
cellulose nanowhiskers (CNWs), poly (omega-hydroxyfatty acids (P (omega-OHFAs)),
and poly (lactic acid) (PLA). While P (omeg-OHFAs) provides good hydrolytic
stability and physical toughness, the PLA-CNW nanocomposites provide high
modulus and improved use temperatures. The knowledge-enhance partner (KEP) small
businesses in this project, PolyNew Inc. (engineered CNWs) and SyntheZyme LLC
(P(omega-OHFAs) and their blends with PLA), bring together the required
technologies to exploit synergies that will result by the judicious combination
of materials to provide superior performance 100% biobased bioplastics. The
production of omega-OHFAs will be performed by using SyntheZyme's newly
engineered yeast strain that provides the first efficient biotechnological route
to convert fatty acids to omega-HOFAs. P(omega-HOFAs) have properties similar to
medium density polyethylene (PE). However, unlike PE, P(omega-HOFAs) contain
ester groups separated by 13 to 17 methylene (CH2) units. Thus, P(omega-HOFAs)
provide important PE-like properties such as water resistance and excellent
ductility while retaining chemical reactivity so they can be reactive blended
with PLA and strengthened by CNWs. PolyNew Inc. and SyntheZyme LLC will work
together to develop technologies by which CNWs are functionalized to engineer
interactions with blended P(omega-HOFAs) and PLAs. The impressive performance of
CNWs derives from their aspect ratio that enables them to reach their
percolation threshold (e.g., where long-range connectivity is achieved within
the material) at relatively low loadings, resulting in impressive modulus
increases. Preliminary work has shown that P (omega-OHFAs)/PLA blends show
promising properties that would greatly benefit by incorporation of specifically
functionalized CNWs.

The broader impacts of this research to society at large are many. The project
is consistent with Federal policies supporting greater use of biobased products
including the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, which is designed to
ensure that a sufficiently large base of new, non-food, non-feed biomass crops
is established to meet demands for renewable energy and bioproducts. Socially,
there are advantages associated with employment in the plastics, forestry and
agriculture sectors of the economy--the project strongly supports Green Jobs
creation. Reductions in petroleum dependence (even relatively modest ones) are
also considered beneficial. Teaching and training will be promoted and
considerable outreach activities will be pursued. Previous success in
incorporating underrepresented groups (women, Hispanics, and African Americans)
in research activities will be continued.

Partners at the inception of the project are the Knowledge-Enhancement
Partnership (KEP) unit, consisting of NYU-POLY (Brooklyn, NY) and two small
businesses partner companies: SyntheZyme LLC (Brooklyn, NY), a small business
with private stock holders; and PolyNew Inc. (Golden, CO), a privately held
woman-owned small business. Other partners are academic institutional
organizations: University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus (CO), Colorado
School of Mines (CO), NYU Langone Medical Center (NY), NYU College of Dentistry
(NY), Memorial Sloan Kettering Institute (NY), and the Denver School for Science
and Technology (DSST) (CO); private sector organizations: Fish & Richardson;
Smith, Gambrell & Russell, LLP; Berenbaum & Weinsheienk; Sealed Air; Dart
Packaging; DSM; ADM; NatureWorks; Lubrizol; BASF and Pepsico; and public sector
organizations: Aurora Economic Development Council (AEDC), New York State Energy
Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA), Colorado Bioscience Association
(CBSA), Colorado Institute for Drug, Device and Diagnostic Development (CID4),
Colorado Office for Economic Development and International Trade (OEDIT),
Colorado Small Business Development Centers (SBDC), and Fitzsimons BioBusiness
Partners (FBBp) & Fitzsimons Redevelopment Authority (FRA) (Aurora, CO).