* 1414821
* EAPSI: Documenting the Geological Controls that Influenced the Exceptional Preservation of Trilobites from 520 Million Years Ago in Southwestern China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Mathew Knauss, Knauss                  Mathew         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Well-preserved fossilized parts of soft-bodied organisms and trilobites from the
early Cambrian (520 million years ago) are exceptionally rare but are
significant for understanding the evolution of Earth's earliest animals.
Understanding the geological processes that lead to their preservation as
fossils sheds new light into how rapid, repeated environmental changes over long
intervals of time affected the biodiversity of early animals. In collaboration
with Dr. Xiguang Zhang at the Yunnan University in China, this project will
investigate the preservational and depositional controls of two early Cambrian
fossil assemblages from Southwestern China bearing rare, exceptionally well-
preserved trilobites and soft-bodied organisms. This collaboration affords an
opportunity to have access to these early Cambrian fossils recovered thus far
only in China.

These assemblages are contained within two different 1 m thick mudstone beds of
the Hongjingshao Formation near Kunming, China. The geologically younger
assemblage contains fully articulated to partially articulated trilobites of all
developmental stages belonging to the species Zhangshania typical; this
assemblage also contains numerous soft-bodied organisms. Conversely, the
geologically older assemblage comprises of clusters of mature specimens of the
trilobite Hongshiyanaspis sp. This study will involve dissecting each 1 m bed
layer by layer so that taphonomic details (e.g., orientation, posture, state of
articulation, presence of soft-bodied preservation, clustering, etc.) of the
fossils will be recorded. These bed-specific data will be sequentially digitized
into a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) database, where they will then be
assessed spatially and temporally at this stratigraphic fine scale to allow for
taphonomic and behavioral comparisons to be made between the two excavated
sections. This study will contribute new information concerning the
environmental processes that led to the exceptional, but rare, preservation of
animal life during its early evolutionary history. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.