* 1414736
* Enabling High Energy Physics at the Information Frontier Using GPUs and Other Many/Multi-Core Architectures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 784,672.00

High energy physics (HEP) experiments use extremely large data sets to study the
fundamental constituents of matter and the forces that govern their
interactions. To use computing resources most effectively, the investigators
will study algorithms and develop codes that run well on computers which provide
especially high performance for parallel execution of instructions, including
general purpose graphics processing units (GPUs) and other many-core/multi-core
architectures. These studies, and the community tools to be developed here, will
extend the quantitative reach in HEP and allied fields to the point where they
enable qualitative advances. To enhance the broader impact of this work, the
investigators will distribute the statistical analysis toolkit as Free and Open
Source Software. In addition, the investigators will disseminate their results
about effectively writing GPU-friendly algorithms via talks, short courses, and
journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific HEP context for this project
will be developing tools for analyzing data from the next generation of
experiments. The last major elements of the Standard Model (SM) of particle
physics (which describes the electromagnetic, weak nuclear, and strong nuclear
interactions of fundamental particles) have been experimentally validated in the
past decade. Detailed measurements of particle-antiparticle asymmetries in the
decays of B-mesons by the BABAR and Belle collaborations led to Kobayashi and
Maskawa sharing the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physics. The ATLAS and CMS experiments
at CERN discovered a Higgs-like boson in 2012, leading to Englert and Higgs
sharing the 2013 Nobel prize in physics. The codes and toolkits to be developed
here will enable HEP experiments to search more effectively for phenomena not
described by the SM, sometimes called Beyond-the-Standard-Model (BSM) physics.
ATLAS and CMS are searching for direct evidence of BSM physics at the highest
energies. Belle-II, the next generation electron-positron flavor factory being
built in Japan, has a design luminosity two orders of magnitude greater than
that of Belle, providing complementary BSM sensitivity in very high statistics
studies of B-meson decays, charm mixing, and searches for lepton flavor
violation. The LHCb experiment at CERN has already surpassed BaBar and Belle by
more than an order of magnitude in many channels, and the resulting BSM
constraints complement those from ATLAS and CMS. Analyzing the data from all
these experiments will require disproportionately more computing power at a
modest increase in cost. In addition to developing generally useful tools, the
statistical analysis toolkit developed here will be applied to analyze data from
LHCb.