* 1414764
* EAPSI: Beneficial use of random fluctuations in coupled oscillator arrays
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Edmon Perkins, Perkins                 Edmon          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Random fluctuations (electromagnetic noise, heat, etc.) are everywhere, and they
usually produce undesirable effects. However, if these random fluctuations are
properly understood, systems can be designed to utilize noise in a positive
manner. Many biological systems already utilize noise to improve performance.
For example, sensory neurons in crayfish use noise to locate their prey, and
ants exploit noise to optimize foraging. Engineers may look to these biological
systems for inspiration. In this project, analytical, numerical, and
experimental methods will be used to study the effects of noise on an oscillator
array. This research will be performed at Kyoto University in Japan under the
guidance of Dr. Takashi Hikihara, who is an internationally recognized figure in
the area of nonlinear systems, with a well-cited body of work on oscillator
arrays and energy localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through previous research,
tools have been developed to study oscillator arrays, notably the Method of
Cumulants for the Fokker-Planck equation, as well as a finite elements scheme.
However, it is not well understood how noise affects energy localizations in
oscillator arrays. This project will allow comparison of two experimental
arrangements of oscillator arrays, one of which is at the University of Maryland
and another at Kyoto University. Some of the differences between the two
experimental systems include the excitation direction, the nature of magnetic
effects (passive versus electroactive), and the system configurations. By
studying the same noise-influenced behavior through two different experiments,
it might be possible to further "tune" parameters to exploit noise in novel
ways. This research could develop novel ways for harnessing the energy of noise
for constructive purposes, such as energy transportation through an array, the
attenuation of undesirable energy localization, as well as for channeling
communication signals. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.