* 1414980
* EAPSI: Children's early analyses of Japanese null objects
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Michael Fetters, Fetters                 Michael        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,000.00

Japanese is a language that allows for direct and indirect objects of verbs to
be instantiated as null content, linguistic content that does not have a
pronunciation, to a much more productive degree than English does. Thus,
Japanese provides a fertile area of research for investigating how children
learning their first language create mental representations for words and
phrases that they never actually hear. Japanese monolingual preschool children
provide an ideal population for studying this property of human language, as
they are still within the period of syntactic development while being old enough
to respond to more complex experimental methodologies. Understanding this
linguistic phenomenon is a very integral part of building our understanding of
language development. In turn, theories of typical grammar building should be
used to unpack the specific challenges and potential causes of atypical language
development and linguistic impairment. Further objectives of this research
include setting the groundwork for comparative studies between Japanese and
English-speaking children. This study will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Koji Sugisaki at Mie University in Japan.

The primary objective of this research is to investigate how children mentally
represent linguistic content that does not have a pronunciation, referred to a
"null content" in the theoretical literature. The acquisition path of these
particular mental representations is the learning problem under investigation.
For the experiments described in this study, four-year-old Japanese-speaking
children would witness a particular context of events acted out in from of them,
coupled with a description of the events from a puppet. The puppet's description
of the events would include an unpronounced object, and the preceding contexts
would be set up so that the child's response regarding the truth or falsity of
the puppet's reveals their interpretation of the missing object in the puppet's
statement. In this way, the experiments will provide a carefully controlled
window into which grammatical interpretations of these missing objects children
entertain. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.