* 1414727
* EAPSI: Multicultural identity integration and conflict resolution
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sarah Huff, Huff                    Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

According to the 2010 U.S. Census, about 40 million people in the United States
are foreign-born. Moreover, recent globalization is not a uniquely American
phenomenon; the number of people living with multiple cultural identities has
greatly increased across the globe. As a result, an increasing number of
individuals persistently face the challenge of navigating between multiple
cultural identities. This research will focus on how individuals negotiate their
multiple identities. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Ying-yi Hong, one of the eminent scholars in the field of multicultural
identity, at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. Singapore is
considered one of the most multicultural nations in the world, and thus an ideal
location for studying multicultural identity.

This research will measure how cognitive styles facilitate integration of
multiple cultural identities and how people manage conflicts between identities.
In Study 1, participants will complete a task that measures ability to resolve
conflict, as well as self-reported measures of multicultural identity
integration. The relationship between these two measures will be tested. In
Study 2, the relationship between multicultural identity integration and the
resolution of intrapersonal (role) conflicts will be measured. In this study,
participants will be presented with a series of hypothetical role conflicts and
asked to generate solutions to these conflicts. For example, a working student
may be presented with the conflict of staying late at work or going home to
study for finals. The influence of an individual's cultural identity integration
on their solutions will be measured. Finally, both studies will investigate
whether participants' impressions of certain characteristics of Singapore
influence how they adapt to the culture. In conclusion, this research seeks to
gain a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms and outcomes of
multicultural identity integration and how these processes are moderated by
perceptions of the cultural context. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.