* 1414996
* EAPSI: Predicting mechanisms for the formation of terpenes - natural products from plants
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Brandi Hudson, Hudson                  Brandi         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Natural organisms produce thousands of organic molecules (natural products), but
how and why specific molecules are produced remains unknown. Terpenes constitute
a large class of complex natural products whose members have found applications
in perfumery, medicine, food and wine flavoring, pesticides, among others.
Understanding the chemical mechanisms by which terpenes are formed will allow
for these structures to be produced in the laboratory on demand. This project
will be conducted at Kyoto University, Japan with Dr. Keiji Morokuma, the
developer of a new computational tool that will be used to connect molecular
structure to natural product production. The limits of this new methodology will
be tested on a naturally occurring terpene precursor, then it will be applied to
mapping out the pathways for the formation of non-natural, designed terpene
derivatives.

The global reaction route mapping (GRRM) strategy using the artificial force
induced reaction (AFIR) method will be integrated with quantum chemical
calculations on intermediates and transition state structures (TSSs) in terpene-
forming pathways. Mechanistic studies on chemical reactions rely heavily on
finding TSSs between two intermediates. The GRRM/AFIR method is an alternative
approach to locating TSSs--often the most challenging aspect of a computational
reaction mechanism investigation--opening the door to pathways that may be
overlooked by humans. Of special interest is the effect of methylation on
carbocation precursors to terpenes. Methylation of biologically relevant
compounds has been shown to have profound effects on function and reactivity.
The GRRM/AFIR method will allow the prediction of reactivity of substrates that
are not yet known. Furthermore, GRRM/AFIR method for mapping chemical reactions
and biosynthetic pathways will be applied to advance blind and visually impaired
students' ability to search for TSSs independently and accessibly, as locating
TSSs manually currently requires sighted assistance. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.