* 1414471
* EAPSI: Investigating molecular connections between internal and external cues that affect seedling development
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David Favero, Favero                  David          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

A key question in regards to improving crop productivity is how plants integrate
both external signals, such as light, and internal signals, such as cues from
hormones, to alter growth and development. Previous work on the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana identified several DNA-binding proteins which play similar
roles in suppressing seedling elongation in response to light. Additional
evidence indicates that these proteins may also interact with internal plant
hormone signaling pathways. Based on these two pieces of information, it seems
likely that these genes serve as molecular integration points between external
light signals and internal hormone pathways that influence seedling development.
This hypothesis will be tested in collaboration with Dr. Keiko Sugimoto at the
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science in Yokohama, Japan. RIKEN is
renowned in the field of plant hormone research, and Dr. Sugimoto and other
researchers at the institute possess specialized, cutting-edge technology and
expertise which will allow two unique but complementary approaches to be used to
investigate this question.

The AT-HOOK MOTIF NUCLEAR LOCALIZED (AHL) gene family, specific to and yet
ubiquitous in plants, modulates hypocotyl growth in light-grown Arabidopsis
seedlings. This research will investigate if the AHLs serve as a genetic
integration point between light signaling and phytohormone pathways in the
control of hypocotyl growth, by using two different biochemical techniques. The
first specific aim will test if AHLs bind directly to DNA sequences associated
with plant hormone signaling pathways, using chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by sequencing (ChIP-SEQ). In specific aim two, mass spectrometry will
be used to evaluate if AHL genes influence the endogenous levels of various
plant hormones. Specifically, hormone profiles will be generated from the
seedlings of various AHL mutants and compared. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.