* 1414614
* Lattice Gauge Theory at the Intensity Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Carleton DeTar of the
Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Utah. These activities
are carried out in collaboration with scientists at several US universities and
government laboratories. The research addresses fundamental questions in high
energy and nuclear physics, and is directly related to major experimental
programs in these fields. The principal goal of this research is to discover
evidence for new fundamental physical processes and particles. This is done by
comparing precise predictions of the presently agreed upon models with results
of precise experiments. Secondary projects include a study of exotic states
consisting of heavy quarks and a study of the properties of matter at extreme
temperatures, such as may have occurred in the very early universe. The methods
the PI will develop and the calculational products and software are used widely
around the world for related studies. Algorithmic ideas developed in this
project will almost certainly have applications in other computational fields.
The supported activity promotes the development of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, Professor DeTar is
carrying out a broad research program in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
theory of interacting quarks and gluons, in which he has been engaged for a
number of years. He does this using numerical calculations on high performance
computers. These numerical calculations are done on a grid of space-time points
(lattice). During the last several years he has generated a library of gluon
configuration ensembles with up, down, strange and charm quarks, using the
Highly Improved Staggered Quark (HISQ) action. They can be thought of as
"snapshots" of the QCD vacuum. They are the basis for a wide variety of
calculations of physical interest. These ensembles have significantly smaller
lattice artifacts than those previously generated with the improved staggered
(asqtad) action. Moreover, the PI has reached an important milestone by, for the
first time, generating configurations in which the four lightest quarks are all
included with masses at or very close to their physical values. For these
reasons the HISQ ensembles are enabling major improvements in the calculation of
a variety of physical quantities of importance in high energy physics. Under
this project the PI will use them to extend studies of the leptonic decay
constants of the pi, K, D, Ds, B and Bs mesons, the semileptonic form factors of
D and B mesons, and the mixing of neutral B and Bs mesons with their
antiparticles. These calculations will enable him to significantly improve the
precision of the determinations of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix
elements V_us, V_ub, V_cd, V_cs, and V_cb, as well as the masses of the up,
down, strange, charm and bottom quarks. The calculations of the CKM matrix
elements will enable more stringent tests of current theories of the fundamental
interactions of physics, while the determination of related hadronic weak
interaction matrix elements can shed light on theories that have been proposed
to study physics that goes beyond our current theories. In addition, the PI will
extend the study of QCD at high temperatures with the HISQ action that for the
first time includes the effects of charm sea quarks. Finally, he will continue
the effort to improve the precision of the determination of lattice spacings
through use of the gradient flow.