* 1414641
* EAPSI: The role of health and relationships on positive health behaviors among older Japanese
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Anna Penner, Penner                  Anna
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Poor health behaviors such as smoking and poor exercise habits incur many costs,
both personal and public. Japan has the highest percent of older adults in the
world, raising important concerns about adequate financing and the availability
of long-term healthcare. Although declines in health occur with advancing years,
individual health promoting activities (e.g. proper exercise and diet) have been
found to delay the onset of illness and disability, while poor health choices
can increase mortality rates at all ages. This study will be completed in
collaboration with sociologist and demographer Dr. Yasuhiko Saito at Nihon
University in Japan. This study will draw on Dr. Saito's dataset, Nihon
University Japanese Longitudinal Study of Aging, to investigate the predictors
of positive health behaviors among Japanese older adults. The results of this
study will evaluate the generalizability of findings based on comparable surveys
conducted in the United States, and will also help inform understanding of how
to promote health in countries with rapidly aging populations.

The NUJLSOA is a longitudinal survey that began in 1999 with the latest wave
being conducted in 2009. Wave 6 will be conducted shortly. The survey includes
questions regarding health and functioning as well as lifestyle behaviors that
make this dataset ideal to investigate this research question. Prior research
suggests that individuals make conscious choices about engaging in healthy
activities which, along with social activities and relationships, are beneficial
to health outcomes. Of particular interest is how good health and functioning is
related to positive health behaviors, and how household members and social
networks may encourage healthy behaviors even in the face of poor health. This
study will create a scale of positive health behaviors that impact health
outcomes, and interactions between various positive health behaviors will be
noted to maximize beneficial health outcomes. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.