* 1414788
* EAPSI: Diet description and feeding group assignment of nearshore marine fishes (blennies) in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Hundt, Hundt                   Peter          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Blennies are small marine fishes (400 species), commonly found in tropical
reefs. Most blennies are food specialists feeding on detritus (decomposing
material), algae, pieces of other fishes, or invertebrates. Blennies have higher
speciation rates (process of new species arising) than other fishes and this may
be driven by diet specialization accompanied by evolution of structures such as
jaws and teeth. Unfortunately the diet of many blennies is poorly described, and
in some species, completely unknown. This research will provide a description of
diet and feeding group assignment of blennies from Taiwan. This is part of a
larger study examining the correlation between diet and feeding structures and
the evolutionary relationships of blennies. This study will be conducted at
National Chiayi University, in collaboration with Dr. Chien-Hsien Kuo, a fish
biology expert. Taiwan is an ideal setting due to the high diversity of blenny
species.

The diet of blennies is poorly known but critical to an understanding of the
evolution of trophic morphology. This study will collect 66 blenny species from
subtidal, intertidal and supralittoral habitats in Taiwan. Dissection and gut
content analysis will be conducted. Cluster analysis methods will be used to
test for similarities among diet between species and test the following
hypotheses: 1) co-occurring blenny species exhibit significant overlap in diet,
2) diet is species specific, regardless of community structure, i.e. species
occurring in multiple sub-habitats will not exhibit significant variation in
diet. Results of this diet study will provide the first description of diet for
some blenny species and add previously described diets. Ultimately, diet data
will be used in conjunction with morphological and molecular data to test
hypotheses about evolution of diet and feeding morphologies of blennies. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Science Council of
Taiwan.