* 1414723
* EAPSI: Electrical generation of a spin current in nanowires
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Nicholas Goble, Goble                   Nicholas       J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Electrical conduction is an interesting phenomenon whose study has led to
countless physical discoveries. At first glance, the casual flow of electrons
through a conductor seems to be a simple system, but the complexities of the
system quickly unravel as it is studied in more detail. Heat, impurities,
crystal structure, and quantum effects are a few simple examples of complexities
that are regularly considered in charge carrying conductors. One such complexity
is the consideration of electron spin, analogous to magnetic polarity.
Theoretically, spin-dependent currents are perfectly possible to generate and
measure. However, modern electronics are not dependent on electron spin, so
electrical conductivity is independent from it. Using spin-dependent currents in
conductors opens up the field of spintronics and will lead to numerous
applications such as spin transistors, quantum computing, and larger information
storage media. In collaboration with Dr. ZhiDong Zhang at Shenyang National
Laboratory for Materials Science in China, this study plans to significantly
impact the field of spintronics by electrically generating and controlling a
spin polarized current.

Topological materials offer robust protection to certain material properties,
making them ideal candidates for studying spin polarized currents. Topologically
invariant states may induce long quantum coherence times to allow for quantum
computing at high temperatures and induce dissipationless transport useful for
low power devices. In that sense, this research will use bismuth selenide
(Bi2Se3) nanowires, a known topological material, to generate, measure, and
control a topologically protected spin polarized current. The topological states
that provide long quantum coherence times at room temperature are also known as
surface states, as opposed to bulk states. Since nanowires have large surface to
bulk ratios, they are ideal for maximizing the effect of the topologically
invariant states. The generation and study of a robust spin polarized current is
a necessary step towards the next age of information processing. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.