* 1414649
* EAPSI: Cultural and age differences in the utilization of conflicting contextual cues in emotion perception
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Nhi Ngo, Ngo                     Nhi
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Understanding how individuals perceive emotions through facial expressions can
provide insight into how humans interact socially and form relationships.
Successful emotion perception requires attention to both the emotion expressed
on the face, and the context in which that emotion occurs. In daily life, people
have access to multiple sources of contextual information. However, these
various sources of contextual information may diverge. How the perceiver
resolves these disagreements between context sources may be shaped by their life
experiences, cognitive abilities, and culturally-specific way of thinking. The
current research thus investigates how individuals in different age groups from
various cultures use conflicting contextual information to identify emotional
expressions in others. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Sakiko Yoshikawa, a noted expert on emotion perception research, at the Kokoro
Institute in Kyoto, Japan. Japan has the highest population of elderly, and the
institute's expertise in aging research will greatly benefit this project.

Emotion perception is affected by not only situational cues, but also knowledge
about an individual's trait. Trait information can influence perception in a
top-down manner, whereas visual attention to context, especially in older
adults, has been found to be stimulus-driven. This effect might also be
moderated by cultural differences in holistic and analytical cognition. This
study will be the first to explore the effect of aging and culture on the
integration of competing sources of contextual cues on emotion perception.
Behavioral data from younger and older adults will be collected in both Japan
and the U.S, and analyzed with mixed design analysis of variance. The topic of
this project lies in the intersection of cognitive, affective, and
gerontological sciences, and results will simultaneously advance knowledge in
all these fields. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.