* 1414801
* EAPSI: Beetle-fungus fidelity: an investigation into how ambrosia beetles maintain their fungal symbionts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Craig Bateman, Bateman                 Craig          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Ambrosia beetles are a harmless component of many forests where they grow and
maintain gardens of symbiotic fungi inside dead or dying trees. This habit has
changed for some ambrosia beetles that have been accidentally introduced into
regions that are distant from their native range. Non-native ambrosia beetles
can attack healthy trees, causing tree death with the fungi they carry. For
example, redbay trees in the southeast United States now lie on a path to
extinction since the arrival of the redbay ambrosia beetle and its associated
fungus from Asia. The proposed project will investigate how ambrosia beetles
maintain their relationship with fungi, which are often the causal agent in tree
death. Beetles and fungi will be collected in collaboration with Dr. Wang Bo of
the Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Gardens in southern China, a region which
hosts some of the largest diversity of ambrosia beetles on earth. Results
generated from this study will be used to predict which non-native beetles may
be carrying tree-killing fungi and whether those fungi may be shared with other
beetle species.

Pestiferous, non-native ambrosia beetles greatly threaten forest ecosystems
across the world. It's currently unknown how frequently exotic beetles may share
their symbiotic plant pathogenic fungi with native beetles, and how faithful the
beetles are to specific fungal partners. This project will determine how the
ambrosia symbiosis is maintained through high-throughput and culture-based
analyses of the fungal communities from diverse ambrosia beetle clades in both
native and exotic territories. Understanding these relationships will allow for
predictions about the probability of tree-pathogens spreading to different
beetle species, which is key for informed management of these complexes as they
are introduced to non-native regions. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.