* 1414921
* EAPSI: Contributions of microorganisms to greenhouse gas emissions from volcanic soils prevalent in the Pacific Rim Region
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrew Giguere, Giguere                 Andrew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Soils derived from materials of volcanic origin (e.g. Andisols) play an
especially important role in Japan, the United States and other countries around
the Pacific Rim with volcanic activity. In Japan, Andisols comprise a large
fraction of the agricultural soil resource. Andisols have a large influence on
human activities on the Pacific Rim. They are often located in regions with high
population density, and have high agricultural productivity. Andisols have
unique physical and chemical properties not found in other soil types. This
research will examine how the chemical and physical properties of cropped and
noncropped Andisols influence the nitrogen (N) cycle and greenhouse gas
emissions. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yuichi Suwa
at Chuo University. Dr. Suwa's laboratory has more than 20 years of experience
examining nitrogen cycling, and has the resources necessary to conduct this
research.

Nitrification is an important part of the global nitrogen cycle in which
ammonium (NH4+) is oxidized to nitrate (NO3-). The oxidation of NH4+ is the
rate-controlling step of nitrification and is carried out by ammonia-oxidizing
bacteria (AOB) and archaea (AOA). Nitrification may promote N loss from
terrestrial environments that otherwise would be available to plants. The
process of nitrification can lead to loss of N as nitrous oxide (N2O) which is a
potent greenhouse gas with 350 times the warming potential of carbon dioxide
(CO2), and its concentration is increasing. The process of nitrification is
especially important in soils that are heavily impacted by human activities.
This study will examine how the nitrification activity and N2O emissions from
AOA and AOB in allophanic and nonallophanic Andisols respond to changes in
conditions of NH3 availability, O2 tension, and water content. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.