* 1414421
* Workshop on Data Analysis and Presentation Of Cloud Microphysical Measurements; Boston, Massachusetts; July 5-6, 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Andrew Heymsfield, Droplet Measurement Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,950.00

Despite advancements in the capability and quality of instrumentation aimed at
microphysical measurements within clouds, serious gaps remain that in turn have
implications for understanding of earth's weather and climate. Many of these can
be traced to inherent uncertainties and limitations of measurement technologies
employed aboard cloud-penetrating research aircraft and, just as importantly,
the design and behavior of numerical algorithms used to process these raw data.
As these instruments have evolved, so have the methodologies for associated data
processing and interpretation, however this evolution has not progressed
systematically and so processing approaches developed by different groups have
too-seldom been evaluated against one another in order to firmly determine
optimum processing methods and associated uncertainties. The intellectual merit
of this workshop centers upon participant travel support to allow a more diverse
group of established experts and students to undertake a carefully organized
discussion, evaluation and documentation of a comparatively large selection of
processing and analysis methods and associated algorithms that are presently
being applied by the international meteorological research community.

Broader impacts of this workshop will include educational opportunities for both
early-career workshop participants and students contributing to and later
accessing workshop publications, and by facilitating involvement of workshop
participants drawn from underrepresented groups. Following the meeting, a
technical review of the algorithms that describes their essential components,
how they are implemented and their inherent uncertainties and containing a
comprehensive bibliography to guide new students and practitioners will be
formally published in either the Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology
or Atmospheric Measurement Techniques. Benefits will ultimately extend to the
atmospheric sciences community at-large, who will for the first time have a firm
basis on which to compare diverse cloud microphysical datasets.