* 1414558
* NSF Workshop:  Expanding the role of Reactive Transport Modeling (RTM) within the Biogeochemical Sciences; Washington, DC
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2015
* Katharine Maher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2015
* USD 50,000.00

This request is to support a workshop that aims to assess the current status of
Reactive Transport Modeling (RTM) usage within the Geochemical and
Biogeochemical communities, to identify barriers, and to ultimately enhance
communication between the modeling and experimental and field researcher
communities. Proponents will invite 20 ? 25 researchers, include leading
reactive transport code developers/users and leading geochemists and
biogeochemists who are interested in including RTM in their research toolbox, to
participate in a 2-day workshop in Washington, DC. The complexity and capacity
of (bio)geochemical and hydrologic data collection have increased substantially
over the past decade, while the accessibility of interpretive tools has not. As
a consequence, there is a host of key questions regarding the fundamental
coupling of biological, geochemical and hydrological process that can be
uniquely addressed through the application of RTM approaches. The overall goal
of this workshop is therefore to identify pathways that would facilitate the
expansion of RTM approaches and concurrently build a strong community of users
and developers. By addressing the systemic challenges in education and
identifying key technical gaps, the broader impact of the workshop is a clear
roadmap to ensure the widespread expansion of powerful modeling approaches that
can capitalize on the era of expansive data to address new hypotheses in
(bio)geochemical sciences.