* 1414108
* CNH-Ex: Interactive Effects of Economics, Public Policy, Land-Use Change, and Invasive Plants in the Long Island Sound Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* John Silander, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 249,966.00

This research project will investigate the complex interactions among public and
economic policy, land-use changes, and invasive plant distributions in the
watersheds of Long Island Sound, which include land in seven northeastern states
and Quebec in Canada. Once completed, the project will provide a novel modeling
methodology for forecasting land-use change; analysis of long-term plant
invasion dynamics over a set of possible future land-use scenarios; and an
empirical test regarding the optimal locus of governmental policy in dealing
with invasive species. The project also will yield practical insights about the
potential tradeoffs in setting land-use and invasive species policies at the
local vs. higher governmental levels as well as new guidance regarding how
spatial variation in management strategies influences invasive species
abundance. Because the researchers are interacting with land managers,
government agencies, non-governmental organizations, and citizen scientists,
project findings will be disseminated broadly and can assist in the management
of watershed-level socioecological systems, thus enhancing their resilience.
Data and insights from the project will be widely available in association with
the Invasive Plant Atlas of New England (IPANE), and workshops and online tools
made available through IPANE will be reach out to the public on issues related
to invasive species biology and related government policies. Targeted
educational activities will aim to share the excitement of conducting
interdisciplinary science with middle-school students (especially girls) and
secondary-school math and science teachers. The project also will provide
special education and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists, policy makers,
resource managers, and the public long have been interested in understanding
interactions among human activities, invasive plants, and land-use changes,
especially as they assess the impact of local, state, or regional policy choices
in dealing with invasive plant species. Because the interactions among human
activities, land-use systems, policies, and invasive plants are functionally and
structurally complex, the researchers conducting this project will provide
accessible tools to forecast land-use change and invasive species spread using a
scenario approach, and they will quantify spatiotemporal uncertainty of future
interactions among human activities, policy choices, land-use changes, and
species invasion processes at multiple spatial scales. They will seek answers to
the following sets of scientific questions: (1) How might land use change in the
future in response to changes in public and economic policies? (2) How will
invasive plants respond to future changes in land use and management strategies?
(3) Are there policy and management combinations that are effective at
controlling invasive plants, and at what level of government should they be
implemented? To help answer these questions, the investigators will develop a
set of economic and policy scenarios affecting land-use change and invasive
species management, develop a new land-use change model, improve methodology for
modeling invasive species distributions, and complete multi-jurisdiction policy
comparisons on projected invasive species abundances.