* 1414844
* EAPSI: Development of a Test-Tube Model for Studying Orthopedic Injuries Using Adult Stem Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Todd Duncombe, Duncombe                Todd           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

The enthesis is the anatomical region where a tendon, ligament or joint capsule
attaches to bone - and it plays a critical role in stress dissipation at
tendon/bone interfaces. Inflammation of the enthesis, termed enthesitis, is most
commonly caused by recurring physical stress or the autoimmune disorder,
spondyloarthritis. In the United States, axial spondyloarthritis affects more
than 2 million people a year. Despite the significant disease-burden, its
pathology is poorly understood. This is in-part due to the lack of reliable
methods for developing a model enthesis-organ outside of the body for testing.
This research aims to investigate the optimal set of conditions to form a test-
tube model of the enthesis-organ from a population of adult stem cells. This
research will be conducted at National Taiwan University in collaboration with
Professor Pen-hsiu Grace Chao, an expert in orthopedic injury and tissue
engineering using mesenchymal stem cells. Results from this study could lead to
clinically relevant strategies for both understanding enthesis damage and
methods for repair.

A microfluidic bioreactor will be developed to present chemical, electrical and
mechanical cues to a homogenous population of mesenchymal stem cells to
determine the optimal tissue engineering conditions to form an in vitro enthesis
model. The spatial differentiation results - evaluated in-terms of cell
morphology, alkaline phosphatase activity, glycosaminoglycan and calcium
deposits in the extracellular matrix - will be used to directly assess the
formation of the complex three-phase enthesis-organ (comprised of tendon,
fibrocartilage and bone). Results from this study will inform strategies for
creating an in vitro enthesis model and provide insights into novel joint-
replacement procedures. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Science Council of Taiwan.