* 1414655
* EAPSI: Determining host seeking through olfaction in the nematode Parastrongyloides trichosuri
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Spencer Gang, Gang                    Spencer
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Parasitic nematodes of humans, animals, and plants are major sources of economic
loss and health-related hardship. The impact on human health alone is
staggering. Current estimates suggest that nearly 1 billion people globally
harbor a parasitic nematode infection. Despite their prevalence, our
understanding of how parasitic nematodes find and infect their appropriate
biological hosts remains poorly characterized. Olfaction is widely thought to be
an important aspect of host seeking, since it is the sensory modality most
likely to confer species-specificity. This project will elucidate the extent to
which parasitic nematodes rely on host-emitted odors to find and infect a host.
This research will be conducted at La Trobe University in Melbourne, Australia
in collaboration with Dr. Warwick Grant, a global leader on nematode genetics.
Dr. Grant also has unparalleled expertise with a unique parasitic nematode,
Parastrongyloides trichosuri, whose native hosts are Australian possums.

Research efforts in parasitic nematodes have been hampered by an inability to
develop genetically tractable model species. The goal of this project is to
develop Parastrongyloides trichosuri, a parasitic nematode of the Australian
possum, as a model for odor-driven host seeking and the genetic analysis of
olfactory neural circuits. Among parasitic nematodes, P. trichosuri is uniquely
amenable to in vitro culturing, genetic manipulation, and transgenesis. This
project will focus on conducting quantitative behavioral analysis, laser and
genetic ablation analysis, and calcium imaging of P. trichosuri. The project
aims to gain insight into the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which
parasitic nematodes locate hosts to infect. By determining the host-specific
odors that promote host seeking, and the underlying neural basis for the
behavior, this study will facilitate development of new strategies to combat
nematode infection. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Australian Academy of Science.