* 1414629
* EAPSI: Understanding the Role of the Protein Cystatin C in Alzheimer's Disease
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Tyler Perlenfein, Perlenfein              Tyler          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Alzheimer's disease is a neurological disorder which affects a large number of
people worldwide. Though little can be done at present to treat the disease, a
number of risk factors have been identified as possible drug targets.
Significant evidence points to amyloid-beta, a protein fragment found in the
fluid surrounding the brain, as the disease-causing agent. Abnormal behavior of
this protein has been shown to result in neuron death, though the toxic pathway
is poorly understood. Recently, other proteins found in the brain fluid have
been shown to interact with amyloid-beta. Notably, cystatin c has been shown to
bind amyloid-beta and reduce neuron death. This project will focus on
understanding the manner in which cystatin c binds amyloid-beta;, which could
help future researchers design more effective drugs against Alzheimer's disease.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Tamotsu Zako, a noted
expert on protein interactions at Riken Research Institute in Japan.

The traditional model of Alpha-beta;-related neurotoxicity follows the so-called
"amyloid cascade hypothesis." In this model, low molecular weight species of
alpha-beta form amyloid seeds which act as a template for rapid growth of
protein filaments and fibrils. New evidence has revealed that soluble oligomeric
species of alpha-beta; may be the most toxic form of this protein aggregate.
Interestingly, it has been shown that cystatin c can bind and sequester alpha-
beta; during the early stages of amyloid development, preventing the appearance
of larger amyloid species. The mechanism of this binding is poorly understood.
This project will utilize a novel dye molecule to probe for structural details
of the bound protein complexes and relate that structure to possible cystatin c
neuroprotective effects. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.