* 1414882
* EAPSI: Using 3D numerical models to understand deformation of an active salt system in Needles District, Utah
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Katherine Kravitz, Kravitz                 Katherine      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The landscape of eastern Utah, including Moab Valley, Arches, and Canyonlands
National Parks, is influenced by flow and dissolution of a buried salt deposit.
These deposits are some of the weakest rocks on Earth and flow plastically at
shallow depths, deforming, breaking, and moving overlying sedimentary rock. The
Needles District, located in southern Canyonlands National Park, Utah, is
actively deforming due to salt flow into the large canyon incised by the
Colorado River. To investigate how salt flow, failure of the overlying rock, and
fluid transport through the Colorado River, three-dimensional numerical models
will be produced. The focus of this study is to understand how faults develop
and interact and how plastic flow of the salt is coupled to the brittle
overlying sedimentary formations. This research will take place at GNS,
Wellington, New Zealand, allowing access to a powerful modeling software and the
expertise of landform modeler, Dr. Phaedra Upton.

The Needles District exposes an array of actively creeping normal faults that
accommodate gravity-driven extension above a plastically deforming substrate of
evaporite deposits. This research will create three-dimensional mechanical
models using Flac3D to understand the mechanics behind active deformation in the
Needles District. Models will address how 1) preexisting weaknesses (i.e.
joints) in the sedimentary units control fault expression, 2) heterogeneity in
the salt layer affects deformation patterns, and 3) varying salt flow and
dissolution rates influence the system. These models will yield mathematical and
visual solutions of how salt deforms and it is coupled to brittle failure of the
overburden. Modeling how plastic flow and brittle deformation are coupled as
well as salt heterogeneity can create a more precise picture of rock mechanics
that has yet to be explored and can potentially be applied to extensional
tectonic settings in other regions. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.