* 1414973
* EAPSI:Facilitating cooperation between unreliable processors without direct communication
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Samuel McCauley, McCauley                Samuel         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Modern high-performance computers have many different processors that must work
together to complete incoming tasks. These processors cannot communicate
efficiently, may run at different speeds, and can break down without warning.
This research will implement a new method that allows multiple, unreliable
processors to complete tasks without communicating with each other directly. The
processors have no prior knowledge of when the tasks will arrive, and must
handle them as they come. Dividing work in this setting is a fundamental task in
high-performance computing, and this research has the potential to improve
performance of real systems. This work will be conducted at the National
University of Singapore in collaboration with Professor Seth Gilbert, one of the
inventors of this method that will provide invaluable assistance in
implementation of this research. This data structure, the dynamic to-do tree, is
the first task mapping data structure for asynchronous processors and online
tasks that achieves theoretical guarantees (within log3 m of optimal where m is
the maximum number of concurrent tasks). The goal will be to verify that the
dynamic to-do tree also achieves good practical performance. This data structure
will be compared with the current state of the art, hopefully showing a
significant improvement. These results may have broader implications for less
restricted versions of the problem (i.e. the tasks are given offline) and to
other similar tasks such as mutual exclusion and distributed clocks. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of
Singapore.