* 1414913
* EAPSI: Visualization of bacterial cell membranes using high-resolution microscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Lumarie Perez-Guzman, Perez-Guzman            Lumarie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) are microscopic organisms with important
implications in environmental sciences, magnetism, medicine, and biotechnology
among other fields. These bacteria are of interest because of their complex
membrane structure and their ability to form tiny magnets inside their cells. To
make the magnets, MTB use iron present in their habitat. When the magnets are
formed and become enclosed in a membrane, they are called magnetosomes. The
latter allow MTB to navigate along Earth's magnetic field. The transport of iron
from the environment to the cell is not well understood. This research will
study the bacterial cell membrane using high-resolution microscopy. This
technology will allow the analysis of the cell membrane to better understand the
transport of iron from the environment into the cell, and the formation of the
magnetosomes. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Yoshihiro Fukumori, an expert on MTB and microscopy analysis at Kanazawa
University. The knowledge gained through this study will provide insight about
the bacterial membranes that will benefit the aforementioned disciplines.

The objective of this study is to visualize and analyze cell membrane structural
dynamics of MTB. This will be achieved by studying Magnetospirillum magneticum
AMB-1, or M. magneticum MS-1, using high-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM).
High-speed AFM has provided new opportunities in microbiology for studying
single cells and molecules in a near-native state. This research will provide
important information about the complexity of Gram-negative cell membrane and
insight about processes like binding, diffusion, drug resistance, transport, and
osmotic pressure. The images will be stored in university servers and permission
for their use can be requested from the investigators. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.