* 1414674
* EAPSI: Mechanosensitive hydrogels to measure the forces cells exert on their environment
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Augusto Tentori, Tentori                 Augusto        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Cells in solid tissue are surrounded by the extra cellular matrix (ECM), a
complex assortment of proteins and other biomolecules. The ECM provides chemical
and mechanical signals to guide cell behavior, however, it is still not entirely
understood how cells sense and respond to these signals. Progress in this area
has been limited by a lack of tools to measure the mechanical forces cells exert
in biologically relevant conditions. Therefore, in collaboration with Dr. Jong-
Man Kim at Hanyang University in Seoul, South Korea, this research aims to
create an analytical platform to allow researchers to directly measure the cell-
generated forces in three dimensional cell culture systems. Dr. Jong-Man Kim and
his research group are experts in the synthesis of polydiacetylene (PDA)
vesicles that exhibit a mechanosensitive fluorescence response. The development
of better research tools to measure these forces would enable a better
understanding of processes such as tumor invasion in cancer and cellular
differentiation during development, as well as lead to advances in areas such as
tissue engineering for regenerative medicine.

Cells bind directly to ECM proteins with integrins, forming cell-matrix
adhesions which mediate signaling between the cell and local microenvironment.
3D models of tissue culture consist of gel structures in which cells may be
directly suspended in, better simulating the in vivo microenvironment compared
to surface 2D culture systems. These PDA vesicles can be chemically modified to
display protein motifs native to the ECM, such as the RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) motif,
enabling cells to form adhesions with the vesicles. Thus, this research aims to
fabricate and characterize 3D scaffolds containing PDA-RGD vesicles, with the
goal of enabling direct observation of cell-matrix forces. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.