* 1414500
* EAPSI: Understanding the impacts of agricultural and urban land use on flood prediction and mitigation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Danielle Grogan, Grogan                  Danielle       S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Flood prediction and mitigation are important aspects of watershed management,
especially in New England where a 30-year upward trend in floods has been
attributed to a combination of urbanization and climate change. In addition to
urban development, New England is currently experiencing an increase in
agricultural land development. While increases in flood risk from conversion of
forests to urban land has been well studied, conversion from forest to
agriculture requires further research. This project will investigate the impact
that land use change from forest to agriculture has on flood risks in New
England, and will separate impacts due to land use change alone, and impacts of
combined land use and climate change. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Taikan Oki at the University of Tokyo in Japan. Dr. Oki's
lab has developed and validated a flood model that is cutting edge in the field
of flood and land-use change research.

Compared to forests, agricultural land has less capacity to store water in soil
and biomass. The seasonal cycle of water consumption through plant
evapotranspiration also differs in agricultural land, with potentially greater
water consumption than forests during peak growth periods, but significantly
less water consumption during dormant and fallow seasons. Most watersheds
contain multiple land use types. Therefore hydrologic watershed modeling can
help understand these processes and make predictions about future changes in
flood risk due to different development patterns. This study will couple two
existing models; the first is a water balance model that represents the land
surface and water management through dams, irrigation, and interbasin water
transfers. The second is a flood model that predicts flood events, flood water
volume, and inundation levels. Each of these models alone could not address the
research goals outlined here; coupling the models is therefore a unique solution
to understanding and predicting the connections between land use change and
flood risks. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.