* 1414296
* Ants as a model system to study processes that influence the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2020
* Matthew Ferrari, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,831,270.00

Living in societies affects disease transmission, and understanding how
infectious diseases transmit in social settings is a crucial area of research
for humans directly, for the animals and plants we use as food, and for the
environments we seek to protect. Many settings for disease spread are currently
being studied, from schools and workplaces to farms and wild areas. But few
systems offer the opportunity to experimentally examine the diverse factors
driving disease transmission. Social ant colonies provide a novel experimental
approach to manipulate infection and measure disease transmission. In this
project, the investigators will seek to understand the role of group size, group
complexity, and individual contact networks in driving infectious disease
transmission. Historically, linking individual contact patterns with the
emergent properties of disease transmission has been limited by logistical
constraints. In this research, scientists will use video cameras and ant
colonies as a model system to track social interaction networks and follow
movement of beneficial, null and pathogenic agents. The project will leverage a
general excitement for ants, including public interest in some of their
parasites, such as zombie ant fungi, to provide products for diverse
stakeholders. These will include comprehensive lesson plans, work modules and
experiments on mathematical biology of disease. Videos, computer code, games and
statistical packages will also be developed, enabling K-12 teachers and
students, university classes, and the broader public, to collect and analyze
data on social interactions and pathogen transmission. The Epidemics MOOC
(Massive, Open, Online Course) at Pennsylvania State University will disseminate
the project to a broad audience. Because the research focuses on understanding
the mathematical rules of disease transmission, the results will have direct
relevance for humans and provide novel insights into how to manipulate the
process of transmission to reduce disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ants have a
highly evolved social system. Their colonies have agriculture, waste management,
air conditioning, aggressive interactions and food limitation. They also are
able to effectively control many diseases. Because ant societies are known to
optimize the transmission of resources like sugar and protein while reducing
pathogen spread, they will serve as a model system for understanding disease
transmission. Using epidemiological, spatial and network models, the research
will investigate how a range of agents from positive (food) to negative
(pathogens) to null (inert beads) are shuttled around the nest. The study of
transmission elements that range from beneficial to virulent will allow the
establishment of baseline patterns for scaling transmission as a function of
colony size and extrinsic conditions (i.e. physical structure) and will shed new
light on the role of infectious processes in structuring societies. Although the
study of contact networks is often limited to examining a subset of a population
(ignoring contacts with unmeasured individuals), some proxy for the relevant
contacts that is easier to measure or to the realized transmission network of
some pathogen rather than the full network of potential paths, is needed. The
use of video recording within ant nests will allow high-resolution
quantification of contacts; thus enabling a comprehensive study of pathogen
transmission as an emergent property of societies. The project will include
continuous data recorded on thousands of individuals to study the scaling of
transmission as a generic process (i.e. independent of pathogens) and link that
transmission to the spread of both beneficial and deleterious elements. Using
novel dynamic network models and spatial movement models, the important
components of social living that promote disease transmission, and those that
reduce its spread will be identified. The role of these components will be
verified with targeted knockout experiments that will provide specific insights
into controlling destructive ant colonies and general insights into the
mechanisms behind social immunity and disease control in humans and other social
species.