* 1414931
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Teaching Computers to Follow Verbal Instructions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Littman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 514,356.00

The goal of this research is to develop techniques that will permit a computer
or robot to learn from examples to carry out multipart tasks specified in
natural language on behalf of a user. It will study each of these components in
isolation, but a significant focus will be on integrating them into a coherent
system. The project will also leverage this technology to provide an entry point
to educate non- or pre-computer science students about the capabilities and
utility of computers as tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach uses three main
subcomponents, each of which requires innovative research to solve its portion
of the overall problem. In addition, the integrated architecture is a novel
contribution of this work. The three components are (1) recognizing intention
from observed behavior using extensions of inverse reinforcement learning, (2)
translating instructions to task specifications using novel techniques in the
area of natural language processing, and (3) creating generalized task
specifications to match user intentions using probabilistic methods for creating
and managing abstractions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the work is develop
technology for an improved ability for human users to interact with intelligent
agents, the incorporation of novel AI research insights and activities into
education and outreach activities, and the development of resources for the AI
educator community. In addition to permitting intelligent agents to be developed
and trained in the future for a broad range of complex application domains, the
interactive agents that we will develop will be used for outreach and student
learning.