* 1414400
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Platform for Therapeutic Removal of Blood Constituents
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2016
* John Turner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2016
* USD 216,059.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research
activities in high flow rate microfluidics and bioactive surface coatings to
fill the need for improved technologies for therapeutic removal of blood
constituents, with an emphasis on the treatment of sepsis (blood infection). The
project will result in a proof of concept of the proposed microfluidic
adsorption technology for safe and efficient removal of bacterial endotoxin from
blood. This technology has the following unique features: microscale
architecture designed to enhance adsorption at the device surface and a
biocompatible surface coating with strong binding affinity for bacterial
pathogens in the presence of blood. These features will enable greatly improved
adsorption efficiency, as well as improved safety and reduced damage to blood
cells when compared to existing technologies for adsorption-based removal of
blood constituents. The microfluidic adsorption technology is important because
it will enable improved treatment of a variety of medical conditions that are
mediated by the blood, including sepsis, as well as autoimmune diseases such as
lupus. In particular, sepsis affects 750,000 people per year in the US and
accounts for nearly $17 billion in treatment costs. There is no cure for sepsis;
approximately 1 in 3 people who develop sepsis will die. Thus, clinical
translation of the proposed technology will have important ramifications for
both patient health and treatment costs. The potential economic impact is a
platform technology for safe and efficient removal of blood constituents, with a
product targeting removal of endotoxin anticipated in the next 5 years. This
will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in medical devices for blood
processing. Because numerous medical conditions are mediated by the blood,
extracorporeal devices for targeted removal of specific blood constituents offer
enormous therapeutic potential. However, a common challenge faced by such an
approach is the efficient removal of target entities without damaging blood
cells. To overcome this challenge we plan to develop highly parallelized
microfluidic devices that are capable of operating at clinically relevant flow
rates, with a microscale geometry that is optimized for harnessing red blood
cell migration to enhance adsorption at the device surface. To ensure
biocompatibility and selective adsorption, the internal surface of the device
will be coated with a nonfouling polyethylene oxide (PEO) brush layer, and a
bioactive agent with high binding affinity for bacterial pathogens will be
immobilized to the PEO chain ends.