* 1414415
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Integrated Substrate for High-Efficiency Low-Cost Organic Light-Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Schaffer Grimm, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2015
* USD 204,737.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a flexible
transparent conductor material to be used as a low-cost transparent electrode
for the fabrication of organic light emitting diodes for flat panel display and
lighting applications. The project will result in a prototype substrate, on
which organic light emitting diodes will be demonstrated with high light
emission efficiency and simplified device structure. This substrate has the
following unique features: high surface conductivity, low surface roughness, and
mechanical flexibility; this is a combination of properties that no existing
material can provide. These features provide the important advantages of lower
cost and higher light emission efficiency when compared to the leading competing
transparent electrode in this market space. The integrated substrate is
important because the commonly used flexible transparent electrode technology
cannot meet the performance requirements for future flexible displays that would
be required for wearable electronics, an area which is gaining increasing
attraction.&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Polyradiant Corp. to optimize the
processing of the integrated substrate for scalability study, transition onto
roll-to-roll pilot production line, and guide commercialization aspects in this
technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The surface
conductivity, surface smoothness, and visual transparency of the integrated
substrate will be optimized via processing conditions and polymer formulation.
The light extraction efficiency of organic light emitting diodes based on the
integrated substrate will be enhanced by at least 100% by adding nanoparticles
into the substrate. A solution-based process will be developed to fabricate
prototype integrated substrate and validate the prototype for high-efficiency
flexible light emitting diodes. The new substrate will pave the way to low-cost,
high-efficiency, and flexible organic light emitting diodes. &lt;br/&gt;The
potential economic impact is expected to be hundreds of million dollars in the
next five years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in organic
light emitting diode based displays and lighting panels with a present market
size of ~$4B and growing rapidly.