* 1414780
* WORKSHOP: ACM Group 2014 Conference Doctoral Research Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2014
* Daniel Cosley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2014
* USD 22,278.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 12
graduate students, along with a panel of 3 distinguished research faculty
mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with the 2014 International
Conference on Supporting Groupwork (GROUP 2014), to be held November 9-12 on
Sanibel Island, Florida, and sponsored by the Association for Computing
Machinery's Special Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction (ACM SIGCHI).
For over 25 years, the bi-annual GROUP conferences have been a leading
international forum for the presentation and discussion of research and practice
on organizational behavior, information systems, social informatics, human-
computer interaction (HCI), and computer supported cooperative work (CSCW),
providing a showcase for innovative work on the development, introduction,
management, deployment, and analysis of computer-based collaborative systems. A
strong emphasis of the GROUP conferences is to foster discourse on collaborative
technology that bridges the fields of CSCW, information systems, technology
enhanced learning, and learning at the workplace; relevant issues include the
design, implementation, deployment, evaluation, and impact of these systems, as
well as examinations of relevant research methodologies. Research reports
published in the GROUP conference proceedings are competitively reviewed and
widely cited. More information about the conference may be found online at
http://www.acm.org/conferences/group/conferences/group14/.

The GROUP 2014 Doctoral Consortium (DC) will be a research-focused day-long
meeting on Sunday, November 9, with follow-up events that take place during the
conference's main technical program. Student participants will be later stage
doctoral students from both the United States and abroad, who represent the
various disciplines and subfields of interest to the conference. The goals of
the workshop are to build a cohort group of young researchers who will then have
a network of colleagues spread across the world, to guide and shape the work of
the new researchers by having experts serve as mentors and give advice, to
provide encouragement and support for the selection of GROUP research topics, to
make it possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend a leading
research conference and to illustrate for them the interrelationship and
diversity of GROUP research, and in general to make the new entrants' experience
at the GROUP conference enjoyable and rewarding, so that they will be encouraged
to return and submit to future conferences in the series.

Broader Impacts: The GROUP conferences represent a critical link between the
research communities supported by CISE/IIS and the broader social, behavioral,
and management sciences. Maintaining and fostering research dialog among these
diverse disciplines will result in synergistic and transformative research
collaborations. Further, developing young researchers who can effectively bridge
two or more of the broader CISE/IIS, social and management sciences is an
important goal to ensure the future vitality of the IIS research community. The
GROUP 2014 DC will bring together the best of the next generation of
organizational systems, information systems, social informatics, and CSCW
researchers. The social network among this next generation of researchers, and
the relationships with senior researchers, created by the workshop will play a
critical role in their enculturation into the profession. The organizers will be
proactive in order to ensure that both students and faculty are a diverse group
across multiple dimensions including nationality, scientific discipline, gender,
institutional affiliation, and under-represented minority status. To further
ensure diversity, no more than 2 student participants will be accepted from any
one institution.