* 1414861
* EAPSI: Determining emerging contaminants in stormwater from established and newly established communities in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Rachael Lane, Lane                    Rachael        F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Environmental contaminants occur on a global level and countries all around the
world are facing similar regulatory questions. Emerging organic contaminants
(EOCs) are chemicals that come from common everyday items (i.e. personal care
products or pharmaceuticals) and have recently been detected in the environment.
This is of particular concern because EOCs can be harmful to humans and aquatic
ecosystems, creating a need for EOC identification in stormwater. This project
will determine EOC concentrations in stormwater and explore potential
differences between established and newly established communities of
Christchurch, New Zealand. Collaboration with Dr. Sally Gaw at the University of
Canterbury will provide the instrumentation to identify and quantify EOCs. This
study will benefit both the United States and New Zealand by advancing knowledge
about EOCs in stormwater and helping to guide environmental regulatory concerns
in both countries. Elucidation of EOCs in stormwater will aid in developing
regulations that can protect the health of humans and aquatic ecosystems.

Although nutrient load and metal contamination have been researched extensively,
there is a need to identify EOCs in stormwater. Stormwater has a variable
composition influenced by factors such as rainfall volume, catchment
characteristics, and drainage infrastructure (buildings, etc). Due to large
scale reconstruction from earthquake damage, Christchurch, New Zealand provides
a unique opportunity to sample stormwater from both established and newly
established communities. Newly established communities are those constructed
after the 2010-2011 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence. The focus of this research
will be EOCs listed as chemicals of concern by the Auckland Regional Council
which includes chemicals associated with phenolic resins, plasticizers, UV-
filters, antimicrobial agents, preservatives, and pharmaceuticals. Stormwater
samples will be analyzed by gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and any
necessary sample preparation or preconcentration will be performed by solid
phase extraction or liquid extraction. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.