* 1414813
* EAPSI: Diagnosing the heat engines of massive tropical cloud systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Matthew Bowers, Bowers                  Matthew        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Accurately simulating tropical cloud systems has long been identified as a
critical component of global weather and climate predictions. Indeed, prediction
bias in the tropics is known to corrupt forecasts in higher latitudes, impeding
the mitigation of weather and climate hazards posed to the global society. The
dominant 20--90 day feature of the tropical atmosphere is a massive, eastward-
propagating cloud system known as the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). Due to
the elusive nature of its physical origins and its influence on global weather
and climate, accurately predicting the MJO is a demanding and critical
scientific challenge. This research aims to provide a novel procedure for
evaluating the ability of weather and climate models to realistically simulate
the MJO and for diagnosing the sources of bias in model simulations. The
methodology is based on analyzing and contrasting the heat engines, or
energetics, of both observed and simulated MJO systems. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr.Wei-Ting Chen, a noted expert on tropical
meteorology and model simulation of the MJO at the National Taiwan University.

This research will involve contrasting features of observed MJO convection
signals with those produced by model simulations. In particular, for both
observational and model data, statistical machine learning techniques will be
utilized to identify stages (or phases) of both predominantly equatorially-
symmetric and antisymmetric MJO signals. Various energetics terms are to be
computed within the cyclic framework, enabling an examination of energy
transformation processes throughout the MJO life cycle. Contrasting features of
the energy transformation processes in observations versus model simulations
provides a powerful basis for assessing model representation of the MJO and
diagnosing the sources of model biases, tasks which are fundamental for
improving weather and climate simulations. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.