* 1414906
* EAPSI: Engineering large volume tissues
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jarel Gandhi, Gandhi                  Jarel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Tissue engineering has focused on the generation of tissues using a patient's
own cells to transplant failing tissues. By doing so, patients would avoid organ
donor lists and immunosuppressive drugs, two of the biggest current obstacles
for those in need of new organs. Although tissue engineering has shown success
in small volume tissues, larger volumes have posed a greater challenge due to
the inability to sustain cells in 3 dimensions (3D) both during growth and after
implantation. Recent work has shown that the use of a bioreactor, a system that
uses fluid flow to sustain cells in 3D, allows growth of large volume tissues.
This research introduces a second population of cells to form a blood vessel
network, to address sustaining the engineered tissue once implanted. This
engineered tissue will then be implanted and assessed within a large animal bone
graft model. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ming-Huei
Cheng at Chang Gung Medical Center in Taiwan, who has previously established and
translated a large animal bone graft model to human application. Integration and
function of a live, engineered tissue implanted into an animal could present a
realistic solution for large volume regenerative medicine.

To test this concept, adult stem cells previously used to form bone tissue
(mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)) and endothelial cells obtained from adult
peripheral blood (endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs)) will be used to form
live tissue within the bioreactor. ECFCs and MSCs isolated from autologous pigs
will be co-cultured using an aggregate angiogenesis assay in fibrin hydrogels to
form interconnected vascular networks. Current research suggests that the
presence of ECFCs improves the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs, forming
mineralized scaffolds. Multiple scaffolds will be cultured to form large volume
tissues in a perfusion bioreactor. This nascent tissue will be implanted against
the periosteum to promote tissue integration and remodeling. To assess
integration and function of the scaffold, bone mineralization and
vascularization will be quantified over time using histology. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.