* 1414427
* The Genetic Architecture of Somatic Mutation Rate
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Daniel Promislow, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 07/31/2015
* USD 223,950.00

Intellectual merit: DNA damage is important and costly enough that organisms
devote scores of genes to its repair, but little is known about how individuals
in natural populations vary in their underlying mutation rates, or in their
ability to repair those mutations. Furthermore, little is understood about the
identity of the genetic determinants of this variation, and whether these genes
differ from those found in studies on laboratory organisms. This gap in
knowledge seriously limits the ability to understand the mechanisms that
maintain genome integrity, and to understand natural variation in mutation-
dependent phenomena such as senescence. The long-term goal of this project is to
understand the genetic and environmental factors that affect genome stability in
nature. The central hypothesis of this project is that individuals vary in
somatic mutation rate, and that this variation is caused by differences in gene
sequences and gene expression. To test the central hypothesis, this project
examines variation in somatic mutation rate in 40 inbred lines of Drosophila
melanogaster derived from a natural population in North Carolina. Genome-wide
expression and sequence data are available for these lines. The study is made
possible by the recent creation of a transgenic model to measure somatic
mutation rates in vivo in the fruit fly with a lacZ reporter gene. Aim 1 will
involve experiments to test the hypothesis that genetic variation exists for
somatic mutation rate by placing a lacZ reporter gene into the 40 inbred lines
and measuring line-, sex- and tissue-specific variation for somatic mutation.
This hypothesis is strongly supported by preliminary data showing heritable
variation for somatic mutation rate. In Aim 2, genetic and regulatory factors
associated with somatic mutation rate will be investigated. Genome-wide
association studies of single nucleotide polymorphisms will be used to identify
genes associated with somatic mutation rate. Expression data will be analyzed to
search for networks of co-regulated genes whose expression levels correlate with
somatic mutation rate. Aim 3 will determine whether genotypes with naturally
high somatic mutation rate show relatively large increases in mutation frequency
when exposed to paraquat, a herbicide that has been shown previously to increase
the frequency of mutations in Drosophila. This project uses a creative
combination of quantitative genetics, molecular genetics, and high-throughput
genomics. In its focus on natural genetic variation, this work is expected to
lead to the discovery of new genes that influence evolutionarily relevant
variation in somatic mutation rates and to create a novel paradigm for
understanding the genetic basis of somatic mutation rate. This new framework
should provide better understanding of the evolution of genome stability and
genome structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This proposal provides
the first direct study of natural variation for somatic mutation rate, and
should lead to the identification of novel genes associated with somatic
mutation rate. All novel strains developed and all expression data collected
during the course of this project will be made freely available to the research
community. The project will provide continued hands-on research training for
high school and undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented
populations. Trainees will be given the opportunity to publish scientific
articles and to attend national scientific meetings with the investigator.