* 1414855
* BRIGE: Integrated Social, Environmental, Economic, and Technical (SEET) Model for Sustainable Retrofit of Existing Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Carol Menassa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 118,582.00

This Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grant in Engineering (BRIGE)
provides funding to develop and test a simulation framework to enhance and
support the decision making process for sustainable retrofit of existing
buildings. This framework will be developed using agent based modeling (ABM) to
integrate the building stakeholders' requirements and behaviors, the budget
constraints, the required energy savings and green house gas emissions reduction
benchmarks, and possible retrofit measures to simulate their complex
interactions. The primary goal is to identify optimal retrofit measures that
save energy use while delivering an enhanced environment for all building
stakeholders. To achieve this objective, data will be collected from three case
study buildings. The ABM will consist of individual agents, implemented in
software as objects with states and rules of behavior. Running the model
instantiates an agent population of the building stakeholders who interact with
each other and their environment, and make decisions based on information they
receive about the existing building condition, and the environmental/economic
impacts of the feasible retrofit measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this research will result in several contributions to the field of decision
making to sustainably retrofit existing buildings; namely (1) understanding how
the requirements of the different building stakeholders affect the sustainable
retrofit decision; (2) determining to what extent information about
environmental impact, economic constraints, and technical feasibility influences
these requirements; and (3) developing and testing an ABM simulation model of
these requirements and influences. Aligning the building stakeholders'
requirements for enhanced work environment, profit maximization and energy
savings, while choosing sustainable retrofit measures, is key to achieve
targeted reduction in green house gas emissions from the building sector. The
model validation through case studies will ensure its practical value to private
and public entities looking to reduce the environmental impact of their existing
buildings.