* 1414621
* EAPSI: Unimodality of a polynomial associated to certain polytopes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Liam Solus, Solus                   Liam           T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

High-dimensional polygons, commonly called polytopes, are geometric objects
arising from finite sets. For certain types of polytopes we can produce a
polynomial, called the h*-polynomial, that encodes interesting information about
the polytope, such as its volume. One interesting property of the h*-polynomial,
called unimodality, is when its coefficients rise and then fall when read from
left-to-right. This project aims to show that the h*-polynomials of a well-
studied collection of polytopes are unimodal. These polytopes are important
structures in algebra, integer programming and other areas of mathematics. By
proving the h*-polynomials of these fundamental polytopes are unimodal, this
project intends to add to our understanding of both the collection of polytopes
themselves, and the property of unimodality for h*-polynomials in general. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Takayuki Hibi, a leader in
the study of h*-polynomials, at Osaka University in Japan.

This project proposes a new geometric method to investigate unimodality of the
h*-polynomial of the n,k-hypersimplex. Specifically, one can show that a well-
studied unimodular triangulation of the n,k-hypersimplex restricts to a
triangulation of a nested class of subpolytopes within the hypersimplex. It is
well-known that a shellable unimodular triangulation can be used to compute the
h*-polynomial of a lattice polytope. This project aims to define a shelling of
this triangulation that respects the nesting of these subpolytopes. Through the
analysis of this shelling the PI will study relations among the h*-polynomials
of the subpolytopes and the hypersimplex. Particularly, the PI aims to relate
the h*-polynomials of the subpolytopes in such a way that yields a result on
unimodality of the h*-polynomial of the n,k-hypersimplex. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.