* 1414374
* US-UK Collab: Risks of Animal and Plant Infectious Diseases through Trade (RAPID Trade)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Charles Perrings, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,578,769.00

World trade is a boon to economic development but it also increases the risk of
dispersing human, animal, and plant diseases. Disease impacts on crop yields and
livestock put global food supplies at risk and newly emergent diseases that move
from animals to humans can threaten human health. But because trade is also one
of the main drivers of economic development, it is important that it not be
disrupted unnecessarily by measures to protect against disease risk. Striking
the right balance is currently difficult to achieve, however, because trade
impacts are not systematically incorporated into national and international
disease risk assessments. This award supports an interdisciplinary and
international team who seek to solve that problem by developing new tools for
evaluating the disease risks of world trade. The risk assessment tools produced
by the project will provide animal, plant, and human health authorities at
national and international levels with the capacity to make improved assessment
of the disease risks associated with imports, and of the consequences of
alternative trade responses. Improving disease risk management will enhance
national security and economic well-being by reducing both disease dispersal and
the losses caused by trade interdictions. The project also will strengthen
collaborations between US and UK scientists and train graduate students and
post-doctoral scientists in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
compile data from multiple secondary sources. Data on plant diseases, livestock
and wildlife diseases, disease outbreaks, and global emerging diseases, will be
provided by such sources as the National Plant Protection Organizations in the
United States and the United Kingdom, the United States Department of
Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, and the UK Food and
Environment Research Agency. Public domain databases will provide time series
data on trade, including trade volumes, trade values, sanitary and phtyosanitary
conditions along trade pathways in exporting and importing countries, as well as
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data to estimate national value at risk. These data
will be used to parameterize econometric profit maximization risk models to
assess the effects of trader decisions and trade networks on the transmission of
disease. The models will consider the intervention in trade at three spatial
scales (local, national, and global) on incidence of disease transport and
effects of altered trade on economic development. The models will be
incorporated into a virtual laboratory decision support system to help evaluate
alternative incentive-based trade management practices and the effects of
decisions on the risk of disease spread.