* 1414730
* EAPSI: Spatial estimation of early radioactive fallout from the Hiroshima atomic bomb
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kaitlin Kelly-Reif, Kelly-Reif              Kaitlin        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,300.00

In 1945, a uranium atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, Japan. Victims of the
atomic bomb experienced direct doses of radiation from the blast, but
radioactive particles were also suspended into the atmosphere and deposited
farther from the bomb's epicenter. These distal exposures are known as
radioactive fallout and exposure is of concern to victims of the atomic bomb and
their families. Researchers are studying health effects of radiation because it
is possible that persons more distal from the atomic blast center received
significant doses of radiation from fallout. Some measurements of fallout were
taken by different research organizations during the days following the bombings
but they were sparse and have not been utilized widely due to differences in
measurement techniques. This project will join data from early surveys to
estimate levels of early fallout from the atomic bomb, and produce a singular
map of fallout. This project will be conducted at the Radiation Effects Research
Foundation in collaboration with Dr. Harry Cullings, an expert in atomic bomb
dosimetry. Using geospatial statistical methods, hierarchical models, and
substantive physics knowledge, this study will model early radiation exposure in
the Koi-Takasu area. Combining early surveys while considering survey timing in
relation to radioactive decay of the fallout, the precision of each survey's
measurements, and possible differences in calibration among surveys will allow
spatial modeling of time-specific and integrated gamma-ray exposure rates. Early
radiation exposure is important to characterize in order to better inform
dosimetry research and other studies with biological endpoints, particularly the
Life Span Study, which informs radiation protection standards worldwide. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.