* 1414843
* EAPSI: Finding the optimum pumping quantity and frequency of freshwater into Neuces Delta Marsh, Texas
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Melissa Rohal, Rohal                   Melissa        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The marine organisms living on or in the sediment in the Nueces Delta Marsh,
Texas have been adversely affected by increasing salinity. The salinity has been
increasing because freshwater flow has been reduced through the construction of
dams. In an effort to reduce the salinity a pipeline was constructed to pump
freshwater directly into the marsh. To determine the optimum pumping conditions,
with regard to these organisms, copepods will be collected at three sites within
the immediate area of the pump outflow. Copepods are a good choice because they
are the second most abundant group of animals within their size class, are
affected by salinity changes, and are often preferred food for juvenile demersal
fish, shrimp, and polychaete worms. However, there are very few remaining
scientists who study this size class of benthic animals and even fewer copepod
taxonomists in the United States. Therefore, this research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Wonchoel Lee, a noted expert on copepod taxonomy, at
Hanyang University in South Korea.

This project will provide decision makers with information to better manage the
local environment, increase the number of taxonomically trained scientists in
the United States, and possibly new genetic and taxonomic data for copepods.
Core samples and water measurements are being collected from 3 stations
quarterly and from the station nearest the freshwater inflow every two weeks. To
this end the following information will be determined during the different
pumping patterns: the abundance of copepods, the taxonomic composition of
copepods, and the dominate species. All taxonomic data and species descriptions
generated will be uploaded to the Gulf of Mexico Research Initiative Information
and Data cooperative (GRIIDC). This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Korea.