* 1414795
* EAPSI: Understanding Variations in Thermal Histories in Volcanic Centers Over Time and Space
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Allison Rubin, Rubin                   Allison        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Large silicic volcanic centers are responsible for the most catastrophic
volcanic eruptions on earth, including massive 'supervolcanic' eruptions. In
order to potentially anticipate when a supervolcano is likely to erupt, it is
important to understand the timescales over which magma is generated and stored
prior to eruption. In particular, it is not clear for how long magmatic bodies
reside in the subsurface in a mostly-solid state (i.e., as low-temperature
crystal-rich mushes), relative to how long they spend in a mostly-liquid (i.e.,
high-temperature), eruptible state. This project will examine crystals from
eruptive products from the Taupo Volcanic Zone (TVZ) in New Zealand, the most
active volcanic zone in the world. The goals of this work are twofold: 1) to
determine what proportion of a crystal's existence was spent at high
temperatures within a magma reservoir; 2) to determine how magma evolves
differently over both time and space within a volcanic center. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Fidel Costa Rodriguez, an expert on
the use of diffusion profiles to determine magmatic temperatures, at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore.

In order to determine what proportion of a crystal's existence was spent at high
temperatures, it is necessary to constrain the absolute age of the crystal.
Plagioclase crystal ages from a series of TVZ eruptions will be acquired by
measuring U-series disequilibrium ages, and the difference between the
crystallization age and the eruption age will yield the amount of time spent in
the subsurface. Analyses of diffusion profiles (temperature-dependent trace
element distributions) will be completed in order to determine what proportion
of the crystal's subsurface existence was spent at high temperatures. Results
will be compared between a series of eruptions to determine not only how
volcanic centers evolve over time and space, but also what differences exist
between the evolutions of eruptions of different magnitudes. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of
Singapore.