* 1414981
* EAPSI: Implementation of High-Strength Materials in Structural Engineering Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Brett Allen, Allen                   Brett          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Recents advancements now enable high-strength materials (HSM) to be used in
structures. HSMs provide the option for equivalent column/beam strength while
reducing the dimensions of the member. Reinforced concrete structures are widely
used in many residential buildings and bridges throughout the world with the
need for high-strength concrete (HSC) towards the base of high-rise buildings
due to the large load from upper levels. A challenge associated with HSM is the
brittle failure mode resulting in poor seismic performance. Although research on
HSM is prevalent, there has been limited research on its seismic performance.
Conducting this project in Taiwan provides the opportunity to use of the unique
National Center for Research on Earthquake Engineering (NCREE) Laboratory in
Taipei. Full-scale experimental tests of columns for building structures using
HSM will be performed in the large lab under the supervision of Dr. Shyh-Jiann
Hwang. This research will help determine if standard practice using normal-
strength concrete will transition to high-strength concrete successfully.

Upon completion of the full-scale experimental tests, the results will be
compared with similar tests using normal strength materials to understand the
differences in mechanics of HSM columns under various loading patterns. A
parametric study will be performed via analytical models to further knowledge
and understanding. After results from experimental and numerical results are
processed, these results will be used to determine refinements to the column
design details. Possible refinements may include changes in reinforcement
details for varying the confinement. Once the necessary refinements are
determined, a final set of HSM column details will be generated and can be used
to determine a detailed design code for HSM. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan (Taiwan).