* 1414591
* Collisionless Shocks in the Large Plasma Device
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Christoph Niemann, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

This project will study magnetized, collisionless shock waves. Collisionless
shocks are ubiquitous in space and astrophysical environments. Magnetized shocks
are produced for example by supernova explosions, by the outflow of hot gases
from certain types of stars by the solar wind upstream of planetary
magnetospheres, or solar flares. Astrophysical collisionless shocks will be
mimicked in the laboratory using high-powered lasers. This will allow their
properties to be studied in a detail not currently possible by observing them in
space. Collisionless shocks in space affect the particle and field distribution
throughout the universe and are believed to be the primary source of cosmic
rays. The proposed experiments could open the possibility of studying
astrophysics in the laboratory and advance the understanding of space and
astrophysical processes such as coronal mass ejections, supernovae or the origin
of cosmic rays.

The magnetized collisionless shocks launched in the Large Plasma Device (LAPD)
at UCLA will be fully characterized. In these experiments, an energetic laser
pulse of several hundred joules rapidly ablates a solid target embedded in a
large (17 m x 0.5 m), and magnetized ambient plasma. Collisionless coupling
between the debris ions and ambient plasma accelerates the ambient ions to
super-Alfvenic velocities and a self-sustained shock can separate from the
laser-plasma piston and propagate through the ambient plasma over large
distances. The shock will be characterized by measuring the jump of density,
magnetic field, temperature and flow across the ramp in a variety of shock
geometries. These experiments could potentially launch quasi-parallel (i.e.
Alfvenic) shocks and find evidence of particle acceleration in a controlled
laboratory setting for the very first time. The experiments will be compared to
two-dimensional and three-dimensional computer simulations performed with an
existing multi-dimensional hybrid code.