* 1414787
* EAPSI: Development of a novel method for predicting liquid drop merging upon impact
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* David Deisenroth, Deisenroth              David          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Small liquid drops are prolific in thermal management systems, aerosol products,
and fuel injection systems. Understanding the physics behind drop interaction
and controlling that interaction in these common applications is critical to
decreasing development costs and improving performance. The objective of this
research is to test a method for predicting whether or not the drops merge to
form a single, larger drop, upon impact. The current topic of interest is a
single liquid drop falling vertically and impacting a drop resting on a surface.
Previous research has developed maps to characterize whether the drops merge or
if the falling drop bounces off. These studies have resulted in incomplete
descriptions of drop behavior. Impacting drops will be imaged at high speeds
using a well-established method in Dr. Seong Hyuk Lee's Laboratory at Chung-Ang
University in Seoul, South Korea. Preliminary data gathered with the
experimental setup at Dr. Seong Hyuk Lee's lab show the novel prediction method
may better predict drop merging upon impact, which gives new insight into the
physics behind drop interaction.

A more effective map for predicting drop coalescence will be produced using a
novel method of nondimensionalizing the impact parameters. The goal is to use
the impact parameters to separate coalescing impacts from non-coalescing
impacts. The impact parameters include mass-center offset, relative size, impact
velocity, surface tension, viscosity, and density. The novel scaling method is
based the Weber number of the falling drop, which is modified by a factor which
accounts for the inertia of the resting drop. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.