* 1414777
* EAPSI: Sea-level and paleoclimate reconstructions from Mallorca Cave Deposits
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniel Cleary, Cleary                  Daniel         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The potential impacts of climate induced sea level rise on coastal societies are
a pressing global issue. The best way to understand sea level responses to
climate change is to observe how the processes have proceeded in the past. This
research aims to produce and combine high-resolution climate and sea level
records so that an interpretation of how the sea level response to climate
variation has operated during Late Pleistocene time. The two records will
produce direct information on how sea level rose and fell in response to the
growth and decay of the major northern hemisphere ice sheets in the
Mediterranean. Under the supervision of Dr. Chuan-Chou Shen, this project will
be conducted at the National University of Taiwan. Dr. Shen is responsible for
the refined analytical precision of mass spectrometric dating methods that will
allow for radiometric ages with minimal error.

Carbonate encrustations (CE) are documented above, below, and at the current
Mediterranean sea level and stalagmites from the same caves can be accurately
dated using U-series methodology, thus precisely constraining the elevation of
each sea-level stand and a climate history for the region. Speleothems are
sensitive to climate changes as their growth mechanism is linked to Earth's
atmosphere and hydrosphere. Oxygen and carbon isotopic variations along the
growth axis of a given speleothem deposited under isotopic equilibrium
conditions are potentially powerful tracers of climatic changes. Dating of
fifteen CE and two stalagmites previously collected from Mallorca by means of
Multi Collector-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer will be used to
generate ages. The high resolution U/Th chronology of the two stalagmites and
the precisely dated CE will provide timelines for past sea level high and low
stands and climate variability. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the National Science Council of Taiwan.