* 1415404
* SEES Fellows: Be-Agile: A Mobile Network for Measuring Urban CO2 Emissions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Holly Maness, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 417,541.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a low-cost, mobile
network capable of mapping CO2 greenhouse gas concentrations in urban
environments with unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution. The work would
culminate in the deployment of a small-scale prototype network on the fleet of
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) shuttle buses. The SEES Fellow
would integrate the collected data with an atmospheric model and ancillary
meteorology, satellite, and traffic measurements to produce high spatial and
temporal resolution surface carbon emissions maps in the vicinity of the UC
Berkeley and LBNL campuses. This research project would lay the groundwork for
deploying a future metropolitan-scale network which could then serve as a much
needed policy tool for understanding and reducing emissions from traffic sources
in urban areas, and thereby promoting global sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current inventories of greenhouse gas emissions are based
on self-reported data, are subject to large uncertainties, and have historically
been systematically under-reported. Moveover, regional governments are
increasingly making commitments to greenhouse gas emission reductions, but
presently there is no means of verifying whether the proposed policy changes
have the intended effect. This research program promises to provide an
independent method for constructing emissions inventories, based on direct
atmospheric sampling. The proposed method would further provide higher spatial
and temporal resolution inventories than have previously been achieved by any
method. Strong national policy and international agreements are urgently needed
to mitigate the impacts of climate change. Trust-but-verify is a necessary
component for future treaties regulating greenhouse gases. This project
establishes a scalable approach that can be used to provide empirical
verification of CO2 emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this SEES
Fellowship broadens the Fellow's academic expertise beyond her disciplinary
training in physics to include new skills in systems engineering, traffic
emissions modeling, analytic chemistry, atmospheric transport, and the tools of
data science, including the statistical method of data assimilation for
atmospheric data. Regular interaction with regional government organizations
will enhance her understanding of the political decision-making process and its
relationship to policy-relevant scientific measurements. Dr. Tom Kirschstetter
(Lawrence Berkeley National Lab) and Professor Inez Fung (University of
California, Berkeley) serve as the Felow's principal mentors in this endeavor.