* 1415657
* SBIR Phase I:  New generation of RNA interference (RNAi) research tools to study activity of genes inside living cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* alexey wolfson, Advanced RNA technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide researchers with more powerful and
affordable tools to study activity of genes inside the living cells. RNA
interference (RNAi) is a Noble Prize-winning technology that allows specific
silencing of gene expression inside living cells. This technology quickly became
an invaluable tool in study of gene function, functional identification of new
genes, and therapeutic development. Currently, however, available RNAi
techniques are limited by non-specific effects and high cost. The goal of this
proposal is to develop and make available to a scientific community a novel
generation of RNAi reagents, based on the use of chemically modified long
double-stranded (ds) RNA molecules. The higher potency and specificity of this
technology, along with lower costs, will allow researchers to significantly
increase the efficacy of their functional genomics studies. The proposed RNAi
technology will further the field of functional genomics and move closer toward
creating a functional map of the human genome. It is anticipated that this
technology has the potential to replace a significant share of currently
available RNAi tools and capture a sizable share of the current RNAi-based
research tools market, estimated at $120-200M. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
project aims to develop a new generation of more potent and specific RNAi
research tools, based on the introduction of long dsRNAs into mammalian cells.
While long dsRNA is used successfully for RNAi screening in C.elegans and flies,
it can't be used directly in mammalian cells due to the induction of a strong
native immune response. Recent studies have demonstrated that long dsRNA has a
potent and specific RNAi effect in mammalian cells, which is usually masked by
dsRNA-induced toxicity. Introduction of a variety of nucleotide modifications
into mRNA (i.e., long structured RNA molecules) prevents development of this
innate immune response. The goal is to validate a number of RNA modifications
known to block RNA interactions with Toll-receptors in the context of long dsRNA
to circumvent the immune response. This will be accomplished by incorporating a
number of modified nucleotides into dsRNA, and then testing them for gene
silencing potency and specificity, and toxicity (ability to induce the innate
immune response) in mammalian cell culture. RNAi reagents based on long dsRNAs
are expected to have higher potency and specificity compared to standard siRNA-
based reagents, and provide a simpler and more cost effective way of handling
RNAi libraries for functional genomic screening.