* 1415757
* SBIR Phase I:  Translational Information Management for Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Bruce Buchanan, i2k Connect LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 143,800.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be improved effectiveness of document
management systems in U.S. Businesses. The project integrates novel approaches
to unsupervised machine learning, concept identification, and ontology
construction to create a sustainable content management system that will allow
companies to find and associate information more accurately and efficiently.
Corporations run on information, and routine operations depend on finding
information efficiently. For example, corporate acquisitions require filing
information quickly in the acquiring company's systems; employee turnover
necessitates intelligent analysis to enable continuing operations; and
regulatory compliance and legal retention requirements demand consistent
categorization and correct retention of records. While creating electronic
documents is easy, finding and analyzing them remain difficult tasks. The
proposed project is intended to provide effective assistance to companies,
within everyday business practices, without requiring major investments in
change. Distribution of information between corporate data centers and the cloud
further necessitates tools to help with classification consistency and
searchability. If successful, this project will provide an encompassing
framework within which company workflows are integrated and corporate workers
can more easily and efficiently extract usable information from corporate IT
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project provides new software tools for knowledge workers. Industrial
information technology requires the integration of proven methods in a robust,
sustainable framework. The investigators' prior work in artificial intelligence
demonstrated that a well-designed framework, with open source packages and
interstitial software, can provide an effective knowledge management system. In
this project the company intends to mine and extend research ideas from
knowledge management, artificial intelligence, natural language processing,
machine learning, information retrieval and human-computer interfaces. Work in
artificial intelligence has shown that domain knowledge is necessary for high
performance problem solving. The company intends to leverage corporate knowledge
to augment keyword search with semantics of the domain. Concept identification
methods developed for natural language processing will be used to augment the
powerful statistical tools provided by unsupervised machine learning and
information retrieval technology.