* 1415932
* The Noyce Connection: Building a Community of Science and Mathematics Teacher Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 898,112.00

This project addresses the nation's challenge to recruit and prepare highly
qualified STEM teachers to serve school districts that have the greatest need.
Community-building efforts are increasing access to the strategies and resources
developed through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, enabling futher
implementation of effective practices. The American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) is providing resources and building a network to
share and exchange ideas about effective STEM teacher education programs,
practices, and strategies for attracting, preparing, and supporting science and
mathematics teachers and retaining them in the teaching workforce in high need
school districts. The project serves the awardees of the NSF Noyce program,
which includes over 200 higher education institutions. In addition, through
proposal preparation workshops/Webinars, the project reaches STEM faculty from
another 100 institutions who might be interested in developing K-12 science and
mathematics teacher education programs. This multi-faceted approach enables
extensive dissemination of ideas and strategies within the greater STEM teacher
education community, thus broadening the impact of Noyce program.

The specific objectives include: 1) Co-sponsoring and implementing the 2014 NSF
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship conference for faculty, administrators, student
scholars, and STEM teachers who are supported through the Noyce program; 2)
Developing and implementing Webinars that will facilitate information sharing
about campus-based Noyce Program strategies and practices; 3) Developing an
online resource locator to share papers, videos, tools, and documents developed
by and of interest to the Noyce community; 4) Producing a short Voices from the
Field video series featuring former Noyce Scholars or Fellows who are now
teaching in high needs schools for teacher recruitment and public awareness
purposes; 5) Co-sponsoring and implementing proposal preparation workshops and
Webinars for prospective Noyce grantees; and 6) Developing and maintaining an
NSF Noyce Program website that includes: conference information; an online
project locator with information about the projects; and profiles of Noyce
Scholars and Fellows.

The project provides a conference, webinars, and online resources to help
science, engineering, technology, and mathematics (STEM) faculty develop and/or
strengthen science and mathematics K-12 teacher education programs and to form
partnerships with high-need schools. The conference and resources focus on (a)
recruiting and preparing STEM undergraduate majors and professionals for
teaching careers in elementary and secondary public schools; and (b) building
effective partnerships with public schools, particularly with high need schools.