* 1415014
* EAPSI: The effects of toxins ingestion on locomotor speed in the snake Rhabdophis tigrinus
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kevin Moses, Moses                   Kevin          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

All toads produce a class of toxins known as bufadienolides that have a lethal
effect on cardiac muscle in most animals, making them inedible to the majority
of species. Rhabdophis tigrinus is a Japanese snake that is resistant to those
toxic compounds and stores, or sequesters, the toxins in its own tissues. This
unusual adaptation provides this snake with a chemical defense against its own
predators. Despite its evolved resistance to the bufadienolide toxins (BDs) of
toads, preliminary evidence suggests that R. tigrinus experiences physiological
consequences from BDs consumption, including increased heart rate. To date, no
well-controlled study has demonstrated experimentally any definitive
physiological effects of ingestion of toads by R. tigrinus. In collaboration
with Dr. Akira Mori at Kyoto University in Japan, this research will determine
the effect of toad toxins on a key measure of physiological performance,
locomotor speed. Using a racetrack equipped with infrared timers, this study
will measure locomotor speed before and after injection of BDs, along with
examining cardiac function and metabolic rate in response to the injection of
toad toxins in R. tigrinus. Because there is evidence that R. tigrinus exhibits
seasonal shifts in foraging associated with reproductive activity, this research
will document the male reproductive cycle and seasonal changes in the size of
the adrenal glands using preserved specimens in the collection of the Kyoto
University Museum. Finally, reproductive and adrenal tissue samples will be
collected for subsequent preparation and microscopic examination. These further
studies will shed light on the physiological changes associated with toad
eating. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.