* 1415541
* Instructional leadership for scientific practices: Resources for principals in evaluating and supporting teachers' science instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Katherine McNeill, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,839.00

Although K-8 principals are responsible for instructional improvement across all
subject areas, their focus has traditionally been on literacy and mathematics
and only occasionally on science content and practice. New standards and
assessments in science require that principals and other instructional leaders
provide significant support to teachers to help them successfully integrate
scientific practices into their instruction. There is evidence that these
instructional leaders often lack the knowledge, resources or skills to provide
this support. This project will research the knowledge and supervision skills
principals' and other instructional leaders' need to support teachers in
successfully integrating scientific practices into their instruction, and
develop innovative resources to support these leaders with a particular focus on
high-minority, urban schools. The project will contribute to the emerging but
limited literature on instructional leadership in science at the K-8 school
level. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The resources developed will involve: (1)
Introducing scientific practices (including rationales, descriptions and
vignettes illustrating each of the 8 scientific practices); (2) Using tools in
schools (providing an observation protocol, teacher feedback form and
improvement planning template); and (3) Analyzing sample video (including links
to video of K-8 science instruction, completed supervision tools, explanations
of their coding, and discussion of how to use them with teachers). The project
will conduct in-depth interviews with four principals, work with 25 principals
in the Boston Public Schools to iteratively design and test the resources. The
project will also develop a measure of Leadership Content Knowledge of
Scientific Practices (LCK-SP) which will be used to assess principals'
knowledge. The project's research component will: (1) investigate principals'
current knowledge about scientific practices and methods for supervision of
science instruction; and (2) examine how resources can be designed to support
instructional leaders' content knowledge of scientific practices.