* 1415561
* Multi-Worm Algorithm for Path Integral Quantum Monte Carlo in Ultracold Dipolar Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Barbara Capogrosso-Sansone, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2015
* USD 292,856.00

The goal of this project is to investigate quantum phases of strongly correlated
systems with an emphasis on cold polar molecule setups. Strong correlations are
at the core of many fascinating biological, chemical, and physical systems. The
understanding of these systems is one of the major challenges facing physicists
and a key issue in the community. Indeed, strongly correlated systems hold great
potential in revolutionizing technological applications in medicine,
communications, and computations. Within the framework of this project, novel
extensions of a path-integral quantum Monte Carlo algorithm will be developed.
The use of these Monte Carlo techniques will produce reliable and accurate
results with controlled uncertainty. Unbiased theoretical predictions are timely
and crucial to guide experimentalists in helping interpret experimental results
and/or suggest observables. Moreover, the numerical results that will be
obtained in this project can provide a platform for testing and validating
analytical techniques. Indeed, these numerical techniques will also greatly
contribute to the deeper understanding of certain classes of quantum many-body
models which are, or will soon be, realizable in Atomic Molecular and Optical
(AMO) experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator and
her students will develop extensions of quantum Monte Carlo techniques needed to
study strongly-correlated many-body systems with an emphasis on cold polar
molecules in optical lattice setups. When free of the sign problem, quantum
Monte Carlo is a powerful theoretical tool to study equilibrium properties of
strongly interacting systems, especially in dimensions higher than one. In this
project the investigator will use the Worm algorithm to study properties of
many-body strongly correlated systems of bosonic polar molecules trapped in
optical lattice geometries. Emphasis will be given on geometries for which the
anisotropic nature of the dipolar interaction will play a major role in
determining the phase diagram of the system. The geometries that will be studied
include stacks of one- and two-dimensional layers, and two-dimensional gases
where molecules have tilted dipole moments. Considering the recent successful
experimental advances in cold polar molecule experiments, these phases are very
likely to be within reach in the near future. Therefore, accurate and reliable
theoretical predictions are timely and valuable to the experimental community.
The single-worm algorithm is not suitable to study the quantum phases of these
multimers. In this project, the investigator plans to develop three different
non-trivial extensions of the single-worm algorithm: (i) N-distinguishable-
worms, (ii) N-indistinguishable-worms, and (iii) a hybrid algorithm with both
distinguishable and indistinguishable worms. These multi-worm algorithms for
quantum systems will allow for the study of multimer formation in a rich variety
of optical lattice dipolar systems.