* 1415110
* EAPSI: Measuring the hearing and echolocation characteristics of a Risso's dolphin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Adam Smith, Smith                   Adam           B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

All toothed whales and dolphins possess highly developed hearing and biosonar
systems that cannot be replicated even with modern technology. These exceptional
capabilities are the result of extremely specialized anatomical structures in
the head. A better understanding of these systems in toothed whales may lead to
improved technological advancements for signal processing, sonar techniques,
medical imaging devices, and cochlear implants. One species of dolphin, the
Risso's dolphin, has evolved a unique vertical crease on its forehead which is
absent in other dolphin species. Although the function of this crease is
unknown, its location on the head indicates it likely plays an important role in
the hearing or echolocation systems. Detailed study of these systems requires
the cooperation of a trained captive subject animal. In collaboration with Dr.
Jack Wei-Cheng Yang at National Chiayi University in Taiwan, this project will
investigate the function of the melon crease by measuring the hearing
capabilities and echolocation sounds of a trained captive Risso's dolphin at
Farglory Ocean Park in Hualien, Taiwan, one of only three captive individuals of
this species in the world.

Proposed experiments for this project will 1) measure the hearing sensitivities
of the animal to acoustic stimuli presented at different points on the animal's
head, and 2) measure acoustic characteristics of the echolocation beam in the
near and far sound field. Hearing measurements will be conducted using non-
invasive Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) methodology, which measures nerve
impulses from the brainstem in response to the reception of sound. Echolocation
beam patterns in the near and far field will be recorded using a variable array
of synchronized hydrophones. The proposed study would represent the first
description of the hearing pathways and echolocation beam patterns in the
Risso's dolphin and the first step toward studying the functional morphology of
the melon cleft. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Science Council of Taiwan.