* 1415794
* SBIR Phase I:  BIOSIGNAL MUSIC DISCOVERY HEADPHONES
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Eric White, EGW TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,006.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project results from its potential to significantly
change the way humans interact with intelligent systems. The ability to
determine human emotion, level of consciousness, activity levels and facial
gesture controls using affordable, wearable technology has the potential to
disrupt the technology industry. The proposed technology will empower developers
to create software applications that learn about individual user preferences
based on the user's biosignals and serve highly relevant content to those users.
The potential impact of the technology extends well beyond the proposed music
discovery application to include news, videos, books, pictures, targeted
advertising, custom hands-free facial gesture controls, activity/fitness
tracking, etc. The technology also enables remote (live and pre-recorded)
suggestive psychotherapy treatment applications by allowing audio streams to be
correlated with human mental/biological states. The number of life-changing
applications that can be developed using the proposed technology is limited only
by the imaginations of third party developers. The initial implementation of the
proposed technology will be in consumer headphones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to develop a
technology that will power the first-ever Biosignal Headphones. The proposed
technology monitors a user's biosignals - such as brainwaves (EEG), muscle
signals (EMG) and heart rate (ECG) - and makes determinations regarding user
emotions, level of consciousness, facial gestures and activity levels. The
interpreted biosignal information can be sent to personal smartphones,
computers, media players, etc. where it can be used in applications developed by
third party developers. For example, while a user is listening to music powered
by a music discovery application, biosignal-equipped headphones will report to
the application whether or not the user is enjoying a song, which will feed the
discovery process that recommends artists/songs the user is likely to enjoy. In
another example, while a user is jogging, the headphones can provide activity
tracking metrics and play music that corresponds to endurance levels. The
biosignal headphones could also enable applications for at-home remote
suggestive psychotherapy to treat conditions such as Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD).