* 1415353
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Pressure Plasma-Biomaterial Interactions - Bridging Understanding Of APP Sources To Rational Modification Of Biomolecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Gottlieb Oehrlein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Researchers from University of Maryland, College Park, and University of
California, Berkeley, plan to investigate atmospheric pressure plasma (APP)
sources for modification of selected model biomolecules and to establish a
scientific framework for development of atmospheric pressure plasma applications
in biotechnology and plasma medicine (or biomedicine). Non-equilibrium
atmospheric pressure plasmas are powerful sources for reactive chemical species
that can have profound biological effects, but the sources are complex, poorly
understood, and are difficult to design and control. Our knowledge of the nature
of the plasma-biomaterial interaction using such atmospheric pressure plasma
sources is especially inadequate. This work combines plasma source
characterization/simulations, plasma-surface (tissue) treatments/in-situ surface
characterization with biological assay methodologies, and various
characterization approaches, including magnetic resonance characterization of
solid state and solution macromolecules. The broader impacts of this project go
beyond the establishment of baseline methodologies that can be used to
characterize and control interactions of APP sources with biological targets. As
an enabling technology, approaches and concepts unveiled in this work can be
broadly applied in diverse applications where the biological environment must be
well-controlled, e.g. disinfection of packaging for food and medicines,
modification of biological systems, cells and tissue, including the field of
plasma medicine. The principles under study in this project are also relevant to
all applications of APP for surface functionalization of organic materials such
as polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's first objective is to obtain a
fundamental understanding of how fluxes of reactive species produced in two
representative APP devices depend on source type, operating parameters and
environmental conditions using relevant chemistries. The second objective is to
expose selected biomolecules to well controlled species from these APP sources
to induce atomistic modifications of the biomolecules. The changes in
biomolecule properties (chemical, morphological etc) along with alterations in
biological function will be characterized using an array of complementary
methods. Furthermore, modifications in biological function will be correlated
with the results of the comprehensive materials/surface characterizations to
provide underlying chemical and biological mechanisms. The third objective is to
obtain a scientific understanding of how water modulates APP-biomolecule
interactions to affect its biological function. This includes establishment of
differences in APP species fluxes, chemical/morphological changes in
biomolecules, and their biological responses to bio-assays when water is present
either in the gas stream passing through the APP source, the environment
(humidity) or as a liquid on the surface of the biomolecule. The fourth
objective is experimental validation of current computational efforts on
simulating atomic-scale modifications of specific model biomolecules by reactive
species produced by APP sources. This will be based on investigating
biomolecules for which atomic-scale simulations of the interaction of reactive
plasma species with these biomolecules have either been published, or are
currently ongoing.