* 1415459
* Extensible Computational Services for Discovery of New Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Ronald Workman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 517,498.00

The origin of matter is one of the great puzzles of nature. Even though the
visible component is only a small part of the mass/energy balance of the
universe the strong force that permanently confines quarks and gluons to atomic
nuclei remains mysterious. Understanding of the phenomenon of confinement is one
of the fundamental questions in physics. Protons, neutrons and other hadrons are
the bound states of quarks and gluons allowed by confinement. This project will
pursue studies of individual hadrons and their interaction and is expected to
offer a unique window into this fundamental phenomenon. In the process, this
project will enable best practice spectroscopy analysis across a broad range of
forthcoming experiments, particularly at the Jefferson Laboratory. Education
activities are an integral part of this effort. Students will have ample
training opportunities and will acquire computational and analytical skills that
will serve them well in their future careers in the industry or academia. A
vibrant set of summer undergraduate research experiences will be hosted by the
investigators at the Jefferson Laboratory with both computer science and
particle physics projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developments in particle
accelerators and detection techniques have led to a new generation of
experiments in hadron physics that are flourishing around the world. An
important set of experiments studies hadron spectroscopy, what hadrons exist and
with what properties. The new experiments at these facilities generate
complicated data sets, which demand a qualitatively new level of sophistication
in analysis never achieved before. The objective of the project is to develop
new theoretical tools and underlying computational services for analysis of
large statistics data sets from current and future experiments in hadron
spectroscopy with the goal to search for new hadrons, in particular the so
called, hybrids and glueballs, which are expected to carry some unique
signatures of the confinement phenomenon. The unique features of the underlying
theory of strong interactions also make it an attractive template for
constructing theories beyond the Standard Model of fundamental interaction. This
project will enable such work.