* 1415195
* SEES Fellows: Enhancing Sustainability of Shellfish Harvest in Alaska: Addressing the Ecology of Alexandrium Blooms and their Sociocultural Impacts.
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Elizabeth Tobin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2019
* USD 386,516.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project focuses on
the sustainability of shelfish harvesting in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Alaska, paralytic shellfish poisoning caused by the marine alga Alexandrium is a
severe and persistent problem that significantly impacts human health and the
availability of shellfish resources. This project aims to enhance sustainability
of commercial, recreational and subsistence shellfish harvest in Southeast
Alaska by addressing the ecology of Alexandrium harmful algal blooms and their
sociocultural impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the recognized impacts of
paralytic shellfish poisoning, little research has been done on the causative
organism, Alexandrium, and the sociocultural impacts of toxic Alexandrium blooms
in the Southeast Alaska region. This study is a three-pronged effort. First, the
project bolsters understanding of the ecological mechanisms that promote
Alexandrium blooms by mapping cyst seedbeds (i.e., bloom initiation sites),
monitoring cyst emergence, and identifying environmental conditions under which
blooms form. This information adds to the body of scientific knowledge about
Alexandrium bloom dynamics in coastal, fjord systems, provide early-warning
information about toxic bloom development and help focus future paralytic
shellfish poisoning testing and harmful algal bloom monitoring efforts in
Southeast Alaska. Second, the application of novel in situ sensors will overcome
previous benthic emergence monitoring challenges and has the potential to
improve harmful algal bloom forecasting capabilities. Third, human dimensions
research will generate critical information about how social systems can reduce
vulnerability to harmful algal blooms and how local/traditional knowledge can
support scientific efforts by establishing strong community partnerships. The
SEES Fellow, Dr. Elizabeth Tobin, works with host mentor Dr. Ginny Eckert at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks, and with partner mentor Dr. Thomas Leschine at
the University of Washington.