* 1415129
* SEES Fellows: Understanding the hierarchical assembly and economics of cellulose to enable high-performance, biomimetic, and sustainable composite materials
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Sebastian Pattinson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 285,512.00

Non-technical: The project, supported by the Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Chemistry, is made under the auspices of the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. Sustainability science is an
emerging field that addresses the challenges of meeting human needs without harm
to the environment, and without sacrificing the ability of future generations to
meet their needs. A strong scientific workforce requires individuals educated
and trained in interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area
of sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project addresses
the use of composite materials that are increasingly prevalent in applications
where their high specific strength and stiffness outweigh the cost of their
production. The use of sustainable materials in demanding applications
demonstrate how additive systems enhance manufacturing processes both
economically and environmentally. Working with Prof. John Hart of the Department
of Mechanical Engineering at MIT and Prof. Eric Stach of the Center for
Functional Nanomaterials at Brookhaven National Lab, this SEES Fellow
investigates methods for combinatorial variation and in-situ characterization of
cellulose source and treatments to discern and understand structural variation
in all-cellulose composites. Significant professional development for the SEES
Fellow will result from gaining experience in a new discipline, learning new
experimental and computational techniques, as well as development of courses in
sustainable 3D printing and CAD to enable wider participation in the
opportunities for product design enabled by additive techniques and to educate
the public in the environmental aspects of manufacturing. This will contribute
to existing MIT educational programs for K-12 students, the local community,
and, through massively open online courses, the wider world.

Technical: This project addresses the cross-disciplinary factors necessary to
make cellulose composites competitive and thus to advance the use of sustainable
materials in manufacturing. The physical properties of cellulose composites are
limited by the lack of understanding of how structure and interfacial bonding
translate to mechanical behavior. This project studies study how biomimetic
structuring of cellulose composites can enhance mechanical properties by local
control of fiber alignment, porosity, and composition through a 3D printing
process. Computational modeling is used to understand and predict optimal
material architectures. Additionally, the project explores whether cellulose-
bonding reversibility can enable a form of sustainable programmable matter. For
these novel composites to contribute to global sustainability they will need to
be adopted by industry and bring environmental benefits. In collaboration with
Prof. Erica Fuchs of the Department of Engineering and Public Policy at Carnegie
Mellon University, simulation modeling and empirical data will be used to
compare the competitive position and environmental impact of additively
manufactured biomimetic cellulose composites with glass fiber composites using
prostheses as a case study. Comparing data on existing processes with the
assumptions required to make the new materials competitive will elucidate how
the technology must develop to become viable and the applications where it will
have the greatest economic and environmental impact. The scientific focus of the
project is on understanding structure-property relationships and subsequent
formulation of rational strategies to enhance mechanical behavior in cellulose
composites, which will also be applicable to other biomaterials and composites
such as collagen or chitin. The ability to adapt biomaterial design principles
by programming material properties across multiple length scales using 3D
printing may also open a new avenue in the design of composites. This work will
also advance understanding of how technology development can be guided towards
viable applications using cost modelling.