* 1415498
* EAGER: Convex Optimization Algorithms for 21st Century Challenges
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Motivation. The need for faster and better optimization algorithms is ubiquitous
and ever increasing. Besides the sheer size of data to be analyzed, the nature
of modern optimization instances presents formidable challenges with data being
partially specified, uncertain or high-dimensional data. Convex optimization
remains the principal workhorse, but needs to be developed in several ways to
meet these challenges. This project aims to do so by (a) developing faster
algorithms for convex optimization using randomization (b) making optimization
algorithms robust to uncertainty, and (c) providing robust guarantees when the
input is only partially specified or
uncertain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The foundational
ideas of this project are novel, timely and will extend the frontier of our
knowledge of optimization. They integrate multiple disciplines --- operations
research, theoretical computer science, signal processing and statistical
learning --- with the common goal of fast, robust and versatile convex
optimization algorithms. Trading off accuracy for efficiency, the use of
randomization, guarantees in the face of uncertain data and new formulations of
convex optimization problems for learning, are all promising methods with wide
applicability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project is
motivated by several general problems in applied mathematics that touch many
different application areas. Progress on these problems, which include
structured matrix factorization and estimation, graph estimation, robust multi-
stage decision making and signal recovery, will have direct and lasting impact
in applications as diverse as medical imaging, radar array processing, passive
acoustic imaging, and digital communications. Mentoring and collaborating with a
graduate student and a shared postdoctoral student across multiple EAGERs are
additional aspects of the broader impact of this EAGER.