* 1415600
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Mechanics of Non-local Disordered Models Associated with Quantum LDPC Codes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Alexey Kovalev, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,000.00

Quantum low-density-parity-check (LDPC) codes is the only class of quantum error
correcting codes where an asymptotically finite rate is&lt;br/&gt;known to
coexist with a finite fault-tolerant error-correction threshold. In simple
terms, using these codes for coherence protection, a large quantum computer can
in principle be built, and compared to other existing schemes, it would require
fewer redundant qubits. Good finite-rate quantum LDPC codes are preciously few:
the firstanalytical examples have only been constructed a few years ago. These
codes will be used as a scaffold to construct novel non-local statistical
mechanical models with unusual properties. Studying these models will improve
our understanding of the quantum theoretical problems related to quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will also offer an insight in
general properties of non-local models. Many studies of such models concentrated
on cases&lt;br/&gt;where interactions between particles are chosen randomly;
these tend to produce generic mean-field behavior which is well understood. In
contrast, in this work models will be constructed with features never seen
before and even proved to be impossible in a local setting. At the same time,
because of the connection to the original quantum codes, these models can be
guaranteed to have some highly&lt;br/&gt;sought-after qualifications, e.g.,
several distinct thermodynamical phases and non-trivial "duality" mappings
between them, "topological"&lt;br/&gt;phases where different ground states
cannot be distinguished by a local measurement, etc. Among the more ambitious
potential applications is a consistent theory of quantum gravity where the
universe itself would emerge from chaos via some quantum
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports theoretical research on physics of
non-local discrete and continuous statistical-mechanical models associated with
quantum error correcting codes. An important feature of such codes is the
existence of the decoding threshold, where a sufficiently large&lt;br/&gt;code
can deal effectively with any noise level below the threshold, but not above
it.Disordered spin models associated with decoding transition (these models have
exact Wegner's self-duality), related models with large gauge groups associated
with fault-tolerant decoding, as well as models with extensive ground state
entropy, including U(1) gauge theories which generalize Wen's mutual Chern-
Simons theory describing the ground state of Kitaev's toric code will be
constructed and studied. Models associated with quantum LDPC codes are expected
to be particularly interesting since their interaction terms involve a limited
number of participating particles. The low-energy sectors of these models are
expected to be dominated by non-trivial extended defects which generalize the
notion of topological defects like domain walls, vortices, etc. New physics
includes a phase transition driven by an extensive entropy of
defect&lt;br/&gt;classes, coming from the exponentially large number of
dimensions describing the original quantum code. Results will be relevant
to&lt;br/&gt;several established fields of physics traditionally dealing with
similar models: statistical mechanics of spin glasses, phase transition theory,
etc., with potential applications extending to many other fields.