* 1415972
* SBIR Phase I:  Water Distribution Network Condition Assessment Instrumentation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Ivan Howitt, InfoSense Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of instrumentation for the water pipeline industry to assess a
comprehensive set of common water pipe failure modes. The water industry faces
an aging infrastructure with a fast growing need for maintenance, while at the
same time facing budgetary constraints and external pressures to reduce costs.
Failure to maintain these systems can lead to numerous issues, including 1)
inefficiencies leading to increased energy usage and cost, or customer service
issues, 2) poor water quality resulting in poor taste or color, or the presence
of dangerous pathogens, and 3) delivery failure, which costs $2.8 billion
yearly. The proposed instrumentation addresses the global need for condition
assessment within municipal distribution and transmission water lines. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) forecasts that U.S. water transmission and
distribution systems alone will require investment of $247.5 billion between now
and 2030. As part of this effort to identify and rehabilitate aging drinking
water systems, the EPA recently identified the need "for low cost inspection
methods to conduct screening for high risk locations in all pipe types for
further assessment". The proposed instrumentation provides new capabilities to
meet these industry-identified needs.

Failure modes may result in a wide spectrum of negative effects ranging from
energy loss to revenue loss to catastrophic failure with loss of life. The
proposed instrumentation introduces innovative technology to detect, identify,
and locate faults representing failure modes and/or precursors to failure modes
within a water distribution pipeline network. This project will investigate an
extensive sensor measurement protocol and exploit the measurement data using
advanced statistical signal processing and pattern recognition techniques.
Reliable prediction of fault locations will eliminate the cost of over-
maintenance while preventing the significant costs incurred due to failures.
Utilization of this instrumentation will allow utilities to more effectively
balance the trade-offs between allocation of maintenance resources and the risks
associated with pipeline failures.