* 1415007
* EAPSI: Investigating the correlation between jellyfish occurrence and marine ecosystem degradation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Naomi Yoder, Yoder                   Naomi
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Human impacts on the natural world are of growing and increasingly urgent
concern. Utilizing information about the causes and conditions of ecosystem
health, this study contributes to the broader scientific understanding of
degraded marine ecosystems. Such understanding in turn benefits decision-makers
and the general public in identifying conservation and management priorities.
This project will investigate the claim that jellyfish excel and multiply
rapidly in degraded (or less pristine) marine conditions, using data from Japan
as a case study. The study will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Shin-Ichi
Uye, an expert on jellyfish at Hiroshima University. The Sea of Japan is an
especially useful location for analysis because there is a robust dataset on
jellyfish occurrences, combined with an ecosystem that has been significantly
impacted by human activity. In this study, the term "jellyfish" refers to
species within the phylum Cnidaria that have a free swimming (medusa) stage in
their life history. A framework for defining marine ecosystem degradation has
been recently advanced. This study will overlay human impact data with jellyfish
location data. The datasets will be compared and analyzed for correlation.
Information is lacking about the role of jellyfish in either healthy functioning
or degraded ecosystems. This study aims to answer the question of whether
occurrences of jellyfish, especially in large numbers, are correlated with
degraded systems. The hypothesis is that jellyfish abundance and occurrence
patterns in Japanese seas will be strongly correlated with a degraded marine
environment. This project will advance knowledge of jellyfish dynamics and their
role in the ecosystems they inhabit, and also inform the process of measuring
and understanding ecosystem degradation. The outcomes will contribute to the
ability to employ science, conservation and management in the ocean. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.