* 1415130
* SEES Fellows: Understanding the Dynamics of Resilience in a Social-Ecological System
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Melissa Eitzel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2020
* USD 520,412.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With SEES Fellowship support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish herself in an independent
research career related to sustainability.

This fellowship project examines the dynamics of social and ecological
resilience. Scientists have long sought to understand how human societies and
ecosystems respond to and recover from disruptive events such as natural
disasters, economic collapse, war, and changing physical climate. As research in
both the natural and social sciences has progressed, it has become clear that
human societies and ecosystems are inextricably connected or coupled. Likewise,
our examination of the processes and components that influence a system's
resilience in the face of disruption must incorporate data from both the social
and ecological components of the system. Despite this recognition of the
complexity of resilience, it is difficult to find sufficiently comprehensive,
multi-year data that includes unpredictable disruptive events. Mazvihwa,
Zimbabwe is uniquely situated to provide such data because an ongoing community-
based research project has been collecting data about the area's social and
ecological conditions since 1980. Mazvihwa has also undergone several
significant system shocks (including dramatic change in public health and land
access and economic booms/busts) in the last 30 years making it an ideal site
for studying resilience. Understanding the dynamics of resilience in coupled
social and ecological systems may help communities, cities, and nations better
plan for and manage unexpected and disruptive change so that negative
consequences are minimized.

This research draws on Mazvihwa's remarkably robust dataset that tracks human
demography, health, nutrition, agricultural practices, rainfall, land use
choices, woodland dynamics, household assets, and land tenure in the area over
the last 30 years. The quantitative data are modelled using multiple techniques
(including a state-and-transition model, a hierarchical statistical state-space
model, and an agent-based model using cellular automata) to allow for a robust
exploration of resilience measurements. The researcher will also gather
qualitative data that captures community members' experiences with change and
resilience and experiment with a variety of techniques for incorporating these
qualitative data into the quantitative models. The combination of qualitative
and quantitative data provide an even richer understanding of the resilience
dynamics at work in this system. Finally, the researcher will use the models to
develop a decision support tool that will help community members understand
tradeoffs between land use choices and better plan for their future.