* 1415871
* SBIR Phase I:  One Step Catalytic Synthesis of Higher Alcohols
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Brian Vicente, Greenyug, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will lead to the
development of a new technology for a higher alcohols production process that
will provide a cost competitive method for producing C6-C13 alcohols (with 6 to
13 carbons) from a renewable feedstock. C6-C13 linear and branched alcohols are
used in a variety of applications such as solvents, cosmetics, plasticizers, and
surfactants, with a current global demand in excess of 5 million tons per year.
It is expected that the process for producing these alcohols will provide at
least 30% reduction in capital cost, energy consumption, waste produced and
thereby has potential to replace the process by which higher alcohols are
currently produced. A major benefit of this new process is substitution of
petroleum based non-renewable feedstock with inexpensive, abundant, domestically
sourced ethanol. This process will also allow ethanol producers to convert
ethanol ($0.4/pound) to a higher value product, plasticizer alcohols, which are
priced at $0.95 - $1.2/lb. Utilizing ethanol as a feedstock to make high value
chemicals can enable the US ethanol industry to find other markets for ethanol
that will supplement the current gasoline additive market and help new
cellulosic ethanol technologies gain market access even as the blend wall is
reached.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will enable the
development of a one- step catalytic process for making higher alcohols that are
currently produced via complicated, multi-step processes employing precious
metal-based catalysts and petroleum derived feedstock. The focus of Phase I work
will be on developing and characterizing novel catalysts, optimizing reaction
conditions and understanding the reaction mechanism and kinetics. The proposed
one-step process requires a dual-function catalyst that must both act as an
alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenation/hydrogenation catalyst and an aldol
condensation catalyst, and identifying a suitable catalyst will be the major
hurdle for project success. If successful, catalyst(s) will be developed that
can convert bio/renewable ethanol (more than 20%) into plasticizer alcohols with
6 to 13 carbons (greater than 45% selectivity) in a single-pass fixed-bed
reactor with no change in performance for at least 500 hours of operation. The
current best catalysts can achieve the required ethanol conversion, but
selectivity to heavier alcohols remains well below target. Development of
catalysts that can meet the selectivity requirement would represent a major
advancement in the development of this technology.