* 1415497
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Platform Technology for Rapid Three Dimensional Micro Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Eleanor Derbyshire, Hummingbird Nano, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,265.00

This SBIR Phase I project will reduce health costs and increase accessibility to
diagnostics by reducing the cost of manufacture, and increasing manufacturing
volume of superior quality microfluidic devices. The proposal seeks to develop a
platform technology that produces the same manufacturing benefits as rapid
prototyping and rapid manufacturing, though the resolution and surface finish
will be optical grade on the micro scale. This may enable a variety of things
including less expensive drug making, to faster disease diagnosis, to health
benefits to the third world, to eliminating the backlog of rape-kits awaiting
analysis. The end results - the lowering of medical expenses, faster diagnosis
of disease, a boost in research, lowered pharmaceutical costs - are likely to be
broadly beneficial. The technical innovation is a leap forward in the conceptual
basis of Small Form Factor designs. The novelty of the idea opens and enables
new research areas in engineering and chemical
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address manufacture of very
low cost (~1/10th the current market price) capillary electrophoresis (CE) chips
by developing a platform technology for fast prototyping microfluidic chip
layouts. The technology allows the formation of a three dimensional ?shell? of
micron sized scale parts. The research will take a two-pronged approach:
developing an improved understanding of interactions of the prototyping
components and combining it with experimental development of a prototype
?T-shaped? CE chip. The theoretical aspect of the microfluidic molding, which
has been demonstrated by a laboratory proof-of-concept experiment, will focus on
understanding the feasible operating range and defining the performance
limitations of the system. The experimental aspect will be dedicated to
manipulation of the system to reveal the configuration required for the
?T-shaped? CE chip.