* 1415005
* EAPSI: The enzymatic conversion of methane to methanol
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Ann Kowalski, Kowalski                Ann
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Advanced drilling techniques have increased access to natural gas, which is
often emphasized as a global energy source. However, high costs for steam
reforming and pipeline infrastructure can make natural gas production
impractical at remote locations. Some bacteria use methane, the primary
component of natural gas, as an energy source by converting methane to methanol
with the enzyme methane mono-oxygenase (MMO). In collaboration with Dr. Kini, an
expert in mini-enzyme design at the National University of Singapore, this
project will investigate the potential for improvement to an existing MMO
enzyme. The project will require research in improvements to modeling enzymes
like MMO, and investigation of methods to immobilize MMO on a solid surface. The
economical conversion of methane to methanol at industrial scale provides two
significant benefits: reducing potent greenhouse gas emissions from methane
flaring and generating methanol as an efficient fuel source and commodity
chemical.

Starting with an active fragment of the enzyme, computationally redesigned for
solubility, the project will investigate further improvement of the construct
via directed evolution - purposeful mutations to the structure of the protein
that alter and may enhance desirable qualities like stability and activity.
First, the expressed fragments must be loaded with Cu+2 at the active sites.
Next, propylene epoxidation activity can be tested by HPLC and compared to that
of the wild type. The design space can then be probed by directed evolution.
Enzyme fragments with considerable activity will be further stabilized for
industrial use by immobilization to a host scaffold. The result will be a solid-
state biocatalyst with retained activity and enhanced qualities for industrial
application: stability after multiple recycles, performance under harsh
conditions, and immobilization for ease of separation. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.