* 1415008
* EAPSI: Using Molecular Genomics to Analyze the Chloroplast Genome of Illicium
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Opal Leonard, Leonard                 Opal           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Illicium is a genus of flowering plants comprising roughly 40 species across the
Southeast of United States (U.S.), Mexico, Greater Antilles, and Southeast Asia.
Illicium is recognized by its star-shaped fruits, which give the group the
common name "star anise". The fruits are found in teas, incense, and Indian and
Chinese cuisine, and some species of Illicium are producers of an important
precursor of Tamiflu. Illicium is one of the earliest diverging lineages of
flowering plants and is therefore an important model for the study of floral
development and evolution. In this study samples of Illicium that are
inaccessible in the U.S. will be collected. DNA from the samples will be
extracted, and the chloroplast genomes will be sequenced using next-generation
sequencing. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhiduan
Chen at the Institute of Botany at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, granting
access to 30 species of Illicium found in Asia that are not accessible in the
U.S.

Previous molecular studies supported recognition of two major groups: one Old
World, located in Asia, and one New World, located in southeast U.S. Species
resolution within both groups is lacking, leaving questions regarding boundaries
between species and biogeographic history unanswered. Molecular tools are being
developed for use to address these questions and long standing taxonomic issues.
This research will use the sequenced genomes for comparison to identify the most
informative noncoding chloroplast regions in species of New and Old World
Illicium, and use the most informative regions to analyze the evolutionary
relationships within Illicium. The genome sequences will be deposited into
GenBank. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.