* 1415431
* SEES Fellow: Linking Rural Smallholder Soil and Water Management Practices in Tropical Deltas to Sea Level Rise Vulnerability
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Kimberly Rogers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2019
* USD 568,532.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With SEES Fellowship support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish herself in an independent
research career related to sustainability. This interdisciplinary (geosciences
and social sciences) project will explore linkages between smallholder soil and
water management practices in tropical deltas to sea level rise vulnerability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fertile soils, vibrant ecosystems and abundant
waterways of tropical deltas have attracted humans and supported social,
cultural and economic development for millennia. Unfortunately, their high
populations and cultivated, flat landscapes also make tropical deltas vulnerable
to sea level rise predicted in this century. To address coupled socio-
biophysical feedbacks between smallholder farm practices and regional scale
vulnerability to coastal flooding in tropical deltas, this study will utilize
two complementary conceptual frameworks to identify links between rural soil and
water management practices and erosion and increased tidal flooding for
development of a geospatial analysis and open-source coupled model. The study
focuses on the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta in Bangladesh, where social and
environmental concerns converge, thus providing a dynamic, complex and globally
significant case study for understanding coupled biophysical and socioeconomic
processes. The research will advance understanding of how these coupled
processes underlie the sustainability of human-natural delta systems by applying
an Institutional Development and Analysis Framework, and a SocioEcological
Systems Framework. The analyses and results will be produced and stored in open-
source formats that will provide for broad dissemination of the results to
policy makers, environmental managers, development organizations, and foreign
agricultural extensions. The SEES Fellow, Dr. Kimberly Rogers, will work with
host mentor Dr. James Syvitski at the University of Colorado, and with partner
mentor Dr. Eduardo Brondizio at Indiana University Bloomington.