* 1415436
* SEES Fellows: Interdisciplinary Research on Introducing Heat-Tolerant Wheat to Bolster Food Security
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Meha Jain, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 487,020.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project focuses on
food sustainability and security on a global scale. The partnerships built into
this project will give the Fellow significant inter-disciplinary training
(adding the components of randomized controlled trials and crop modeling) beyond
the scope of her current expertise. This is particularly important since her
goal is to become a sustainability scientist who combines methods and tools from
the natural and social sciences to understand how humans are impacted by and
adapt to environmental change. Specifically, the Fellow will participate in an
interdisciplinary institutes (Center on Food Security and the Environment at
Stanford, and Center for Effective Global Action at UC Berkeley). Also, at
Stanford University, the Fellow will gain teaching and mentoring
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is predicted to negatively
impact agricultural communities and food security across the globe, with models
estimating up to a 40% reduction in the yield of some crops by the end of the
century. This is particularly problematic for wheat, which is a major staple
crop (providing 20% of daily calories) that is already facing declining yields
due to warming temperatures. Previous studies have shown that autonomous
adaptation strategies (e.g. increasing irrigation, shifting planting date) are
not enough to mitigate the negative impacts of warming, and planned adaptation
strategies that introduce heat-tolerant wheat varieties are needed to
sustainably bolster yields and food security in the face of climate change.
Interdisciplinary research is necessary to (1) identify the most effective ways
to introduce these new technologies to vulnerable communities, and (2) assess
whether the predicted yield benefits of these crops are realized in the field
where farmers may deviate from ideal management practices. This study uses
randomized controlled trials from development economics to evaluate introduction
strategies, remote sensing to quantify if new heat-tolerant wheat varieties
provide yield benefits in the field, and process-based crop models to assess
whether these new varieties provide predicted yield benefits in future warming
scenarios. Understanding the effectiveness of information transfer is
particularly important for heat-tolerant crops because, unlike high-yielding
varieties introduced during the Green Revolution, heat-tolerant crops may not
provide immediate benefits and only produce higher yields in unseasonably warm
years. Thus, the adoption and diffusion of this technology may depend purely on
whether farmers trust and receive accurate information about possible future
benefits. This study is one of the first to examine the most effective ways to
introduce new crops that mitigate against climate variability and future climate
risk, which is necessary to sustainably enhance food security in the face of
climate change.