* 1415485
* Spin Based Quantum Computation Using Photon Mediated Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In a quantum network, information is transmitted and processed using quantum
mechanical objects called qubits. This revolutionary computational paradigm
enables unprecedented information processing capabilities such as unbreakable
cryptographic codes and exponential speedup of computational tasks. To achieve
these remarkable capabilities requires the ability to both store qubits and
create qubit-qubit interactions over long distances. Trapped spins in solids
offer a remarkable system for storing quantum information, but these spins
cannot easily interact with each other unless they are in close proximity.
Photons provide a promising solution to this problem because they can be
transmitted over long distances to create effective interactions between spins
that are separated by long distances. However, long distance communication
requires photons at optical frequencies while spins usually have resonances in
the microwave frequency ranges. Because of this large frequency mismatch,
photons typically don't interact with spins. In this project, the group will use
optical cavities strongly coupled to a single spin trapped in a quantum dot to
solve this problem. Cavities can create a strong effective spin-photon interface
by enhancing light-matter interactions. These enhanced interactions open up the
possibility for optical frequency photons to couple spins separated by long
distances for quantum networks. The group will demonstrate photon mediated spin
interactions using quantum dots coupled to optical cavities. Quantum dots are
nanoscale structures that behave as artificial atoms. A quantum dot can capture
an additional charge that behaves as a trapped spin qubit. By strongly coupling
the quantum dot to a cavity, the group will develop a device called a quantum
transistor, which forms the basic building block for complex quantum networks.
Methods to utilize this device to implement quantum logic operations over long
distances will be explored. These results could ultimately enable chip-
integrated solid-state quantum devices that form the building blocks for long
distance quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A novel approach to spin-based
quantum information processing where photons mediate effective spin-spin
interactions will be developed. The fundamental building block for this approach
is the spin-photon quantum transistor, which enables a single spin quantum bit
(qubit) to apply quantum logic operations on a photon. This spin-photon
transistor will be realized using a charged indium arsenide (InAs) quantum dot
in a photonic crystal cavity. The charged dot contains an additional electron or
hole that provides a spin degree of freedom with long coherence times. By
coupling the quantum dot to a photonic crystal cavity, it is possible to attain
a strong light-matter interface where the state of the spin modulates the cavity
spectrum. This work will attain a better scientific understanding of the system
and underlying decoherence mechanisms, and address practical device design and
fabrication challenges for creating a scalable quantum architecture. This will
provide a unique approach to spin-based quantum information processing that have
many important advantages including the ability to couple arbitrary spins,
implement gate operations on ultra-fast timescales, and create effective
interactions over long distances for quantum networking. Novel devices that
could enable quantum information processing in a chip-integrated device that is
compact and scalable will be investigated. Major device design and fabrication
challenges will be addressed that are crucial for scalable implementation
including optimizing light-matter interactions in photonic crystals and aligning
quantum dots spatially and spectrally with resonator modes. This could provide a
direct pathway for developing highly compact and scalable quantum information
processing on a semiconductor chip. This capability would have a revolutionary
impact on information technology, enabling exponential faster computation,
unconditionally secure communication, and high precision sensors that operate
far below the classical noise limit. The devices developed could have major
impact in other fields such as opto-electronics, nonlinear optics, and
spintronics. In addition to the proposed research effort, the research program
will support training of graduate and undergraduate students, and develop an
outreach program to create interdisciplinary research opportunities for local
high school students.