* 1415171
* SBIR Phase I:  A new conducting, transparent, solution-processable polymer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Bruce Chase, Voltaic Coatings LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the development of a variety of
conducting polymers which can be solution processed into thin films with high
transparency and high conductivity. These films will be used as transparent
conductors in devices ranging from flexible displays to photovoltaic cells. The
ease of solution processing will have an immediate impact on the overall cost of
device fabrication since these new conducting polymers can be readily introduced
into current manufacturing protocols in place of existing difficult-to-process,
and hence high cost, materials. The lower cost of solution processing will have
a significant impact on the overall cost of device fabrication resulting in
significant savings for device manufacturers who are constantly striving to
reduce manufacturing costs while providing order of magnitude improvements in
performance for next generation devices. The use of these conducting polymers
will extend beyond transparent electrodes to hole conducting layers in
photovoltaic cells. This work will lead to potentially new synthetic strategies
for a variety of conducting polymers with tunable solubility for reduced capital
cost of fabrication and ease of processing. The benefits of these new conducting
polymer films will impact device fabrication in flexible displays, photovoltaic
devices and any electro-optic devices requiring both high transparency in the
visible/near infrared and high conductivity.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide a
low cost alternative for transparent conducting materials such as Indium Tin
Oxide (ITO) and the currently used polymeric material, PEDOT:PSS. Both materials
have limitations in processing and, hence, have not become widely adopted for
the next generation consumer electronics. This new polymer under developed in
this project has superior properties, lower production and manufacturing costs
and will transform the way electronic displays, touch screens, organic lighting,
and thin film solar devices are produced. This new material is estimated to
provide a 50% cost savings over existing materials (ITO and PEDOT:PSS) while
offering a polymer that can be customized for multiple applications.