* 1415090
* EAPSI: Investigating the potential release of trace elements and heavy metal contaminants during drilling for shale oil and gas
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Jon Yang, Yang                    Jon
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Black shales have recently come to the forefront of the energy portfolio with
the realization of the vast natural resources contained within these deeply
buried rock formations. The relatively recent application of drilling
technologies such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing to the black
shale system have made accessibility to the natural gas and oil economically
viable. However, relatively little is known of the chemical changes occurring
during these drilling operations and the potential for heavy metal contaminants
(e.g. arsenic) and other trace metals (e.g. rare earth elements (REEs)) to be
released. As a step towards understanding the potential chemical changes
occurring during shale oil/gas drilling, this project will evaluate the thermal
maturity (i.e. potential to produce natural oil/gas) of black shale samples to
evaluate the system before drilling occurs. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Ji-Hoon Kim at the Korean Institute for Geological and
Mineral Resources. Dr. Kim is an expert in characterizing organic carbon content
in terms of energy utilization and is also well-versed in REE systematics during
diagenesis of deep-sea sediment cores.

This project will characterize the organic matter content in ~100 samples of
continental black shales which are of interest to the energy industry for shale
gas development. Additionally, ~60 samples from marine sediments will be used to
provide context and guidance for interpretations of the black shale data.
Organic matter content will be analyzed using LECO CHN-900 and LECO SC-132
instruments for total carbon, nitrogen, sulfur contents and using a Rock-Eval 6
instrument for total organic carbon content and organic matter character. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation
of Korea.