* 1415572
* A Planning Workshop for an International Coupled North Atlantic-Arctic Science Program
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2015
* USD 75,735.00

The coupled North Atlantic and Arctic Ocean basins and the associated regional
shelves and marginal seas are an integral part of the global climatic,
biological, and biogeochemical system. As the locus of confluence of the warm
Gulf Stream and cold Arctic waters and the northern arm of meridional overturn
circulation (AMOC) and deep-water formation, it is a major player in global
climate and heat redistribution. This extensive region provides habitat
supporting some of the largest exploited fish stocks on Earth. Moreover, the
North Atlantic alone sequesters approximately one-quarter of the annual
anthropogenic carbon dioxide production. At a time of accelerating global
climate change, it is especially important for North American and European
governments and scientists to work jointly to advance our mechanistic
understanding of the links between this region and global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funds from this award, the U.S. Ocean Carbon
and Biogeochemistry Program Office at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
will join with the European Commission and Canada to coordinate and run a
scientific workshop to develop a comprehensive vision for a North Atlantic -
Arctic research program. The workshop will bring together the necessary
expertise in marine ecosystem dynamics, marine biogeochemistry, and ocean
physics to establish the interdisciplinary framework for a large international
research initiative to examine key components of the North Atlantic - Arctic
system (AMOC, spring bloom timing and dynamics, etc.). While previous
observational campaigns in the region have provided tremendous insights, this
effort would be a long-term investment in a coordinated research program to
enable the study of biogeochemical and ecosystem processes alongside ocean
physics that will be required for obtaining a more complete picture of how the
North Atlantic - Arctic system works and how it is changing. Potential program
themes might include (among other things) communication between the two basins,
small-scale (mesoscale and submesoscale) and large-scale (AMOC) circulation,
spring bloom dynamics, sustainable fisheries, ecosystem health, and predictive
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop and the
international research initiative that will emerge from it embody the type of
global scientific enterprise that is needed to address important science
questions that directly impact humans. International pooling of intellectual and
monetary resources not only improves the quality of the science, but it prevents
duplication of effort and wasted resources, and promotes a collaborative
approach and a comprehensive vision that spans multiple disciplinary and
geographic boundaries. The timing of this effort is critical, since key
international players are ready to move forward with scientific planning efforts
and commit resources to an international&lt;br/&gt;research program.