* 1415690
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Germanium-based Short Wavelength Infrared Image Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jae Hyung Lee, Stratio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be widespread use of Short Wavelength
Infrared (SWIR) imaging technology in a variety of industries. New Ge-based SWIR
imaging sensor technology enables infrared imaging to move beyond niche
industrial and scientific applications and enter mainstream commercial markets.
The Ge-based SWIR sensors proposed here are low-power, high-resolution and
dramatically lower cost. When incorporated into handheld devices, such as
smartphones, SWIR image sensors may allow non-invasive, real-time biological
monitoring. For example, they may enable diabetic patients bloodless glucose
monitoring. Furthermore, these SWIR Image sensors can be utilized in diverse
fields, including automotive safety and food safety inspection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to develop high-resolution Ge (Germanium) based Short Wavelength
Infrared (SWIR) image sensors. SWIR lights (800 nm to 1.8 Âµm) are invisible to
the human eye, but they can provide invaluable information. Image sensors that
detect SWIR lights enable night vision and sub-surface views of a variety of
products and materials. However, current SWIR image sensors are made of a
material called InGaAs, which is costly to create and has limitations in terms
of resolution and power usage. To overcome these problems and bring the benefits
of SWIR image sensors into our daily lives, a new method for producing SWIR
image sensors has been invented. Improving the resolution of Ge-based SWIR image
sensors to VGA (640x512) resolution while maintaining low noise level will
dramatically advance SWIR imaging technology.