* 1415896
* SBIR Phase I:  A low-cost instrument for rapid sub-micron particle size and concentration measurement
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Franklin Monzon, Spectradyne LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the challenge
of fast, high-precision nanoparticle sizing - a critical issue for a wide range
of industries - by the development of a revolutionary nanoparticle sizing
instrument. This project has the potential to enable a deeper understanding of
nanomaterials and their application in a wide range of industries, starting with
pharmaceuticals. Currently, the market for nanoparticle analysis instrumentation
in the life sciences is about $5.6 billion. Millions of tests are run each year
because protein aggregation directly affects drug performance and can lead to
undesirable immunogenicity. Similarly, vaccine developers must closely measure
viral loads to achieve a desired level of immune response. A particle analyzer
able to quickly and efficiently resolve nanoparticles below 0.4 microns would
provide quicker turn-around and more efficient operations in these applications.
This would lead to direct cost savings and better therapeutic outcomes. The
importance of nanoparticle analysis goes well beyond therapeutics though, as
there is increasing concern about the presence of nanoparticles in consumer
products such as food and cosmetics. A major challenge in understanding the
health impacts of nanoparticles is simply in detecting their presence and size
distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on a nanofluidic extension of the
Coulter principle, the instrument leverages a known fundamental technology and
combines it with state-of-the-art techniques in nanofabrication, fluidics, and
electronics. The initial target application for this invention is in the
analysis of protein aggregation during the drug development process. Current
techniques lack precision both in sizing and counting particles of diameter less
than about 0.4 microns, and generally cannot accurately analyze polydisperse
solutions. The focus of the Phase I work will be on the following objectives: 1)
improved fluidic circuit control enabling repeatable measurements without manual
user intervention, 2) tightly integrated electronics, fluidics, and user
interface in support of rapid measurements using disposable devices; 3)
improvement in signal analysis algorithms, with quantification of the rate of
false positives; and 4) characterization of instrument output versus variation
in nanofluidic device fabrication, which consists of both plastic molding and
nanofabrication techniques. The Phase I project outcome will be a prototype
capable of semi-automated reproducible measurements of customer samples.