* 1415460
* Eager: Discrete Optimization Algorithms for 21st Century Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Motivation.&lt;br/&gt;Discrete optimization problems have been studied by both
the optimization and computer science communities. This EAGER project proposes
to develop new approaches by synthesizing the ideas from the two communities by
interdisciplinary collaboration between computer scientists and optimization
specialists in mathematics and engineering. The goal is to develop rigorous and
systematic approaches to discrete optimization problems by combining insights
and state-of-the-art methods from integer programming (e.g., cutting planes and
branch-and-bound) and algorithmic ideas from computer science (including online
algorithms and machine learning). To be able to evaluate and compare methods on
real-world instances, PIs plan to develop a theory of "natural instances". This
theory starts from the application side, tries to model properties of the
instances that arise from that application and then give guarantees for
algorithms on such instances. The project plans to incorporate machine learning
into algorithms to solve integer programs. PIs propose a systematic development
of an algorithmic theory of cutting planes to identify families of instances for
which they are provably efficient and to take advantage of the computational
benefits of sparse cutting planes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
ideas that are proposed here are novel and intellectually challenging. The
notion of natural systems, insofar as known, has not been investigated
previously. While machine learning algorithms currently use optimization
technology, the reverse has not been systematically studied. Cutting planes are
mainly used on an ad-hoc basis. There is no systematic theory regarding problems
for which cutting plane algorithms are provably efficient. It is known that
sparsity is needed in the linear algebra of cutting plane algorithms, but there
is very little known about polyhedra that are defined by only sparse
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This EAGER project is
motivated by a range of optimization problems of high societal impact from
transportation and supply chain logistics such as palletizing, package delivery,
petro-chemical cargo routing, vehicle and mobile robot routing to energy
production and distribution. The ultimate goal is to study algorithmic
optimization methods which over the next decade could lead to more than a
billion dollars in annual savings in energy production and distribution, a 50%
reduction in fuel consumption in supply chains and elimination of energy
shortages caused by extreme weather disturbances. This will be possible by the
creation of optimization algorithms that are orders of magnitude faster, more
robust and capable of dealing with massive and messy data. This EAGER will
provide research training for both graduate and postgraduate students and
intensive collaboration among multiple EAGERs, and will provide rapid
dissemination of the research throughout the relevant communities by hosting a
workshop at Georgia Tech.