* 1415910
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Quantitative analysis of Hydrogen bonding in a membrane milieu
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Alessandro Senes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

Professor Alessandro Senes at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA, is
supported by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, for an International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award that
comprises an international collaboration with Professor Isiah Arkin, of The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel, who is supported by The Israel Bi-
national Science Foundation.

The aim of this project is to investigate one of the forces responsible for the
shapes of membrane proteins. Integral membrane proteins are embedded within
cellular membranes, at the boundaries between the cell and the outside
environments, as well as within the membrane of intracellular compartments
called organelles, where these proteins perform a wide variety of essential
functions. In order to perform these functions, membrane proteins are required
to fold into a defined three-dimensional structure and often associate with
other membrane proteins. The forces that allow membrane proteins to fold into a
particular three-dimensional structure and associate with each other are still
not well understood. This research will elucidate the specific role played by
one of these fundamental forces - hydrogen bonding - in the folding and
association of membrane proteins. The outcomes of this proposal will be used to
better understand a wide variety of important biological systems. The project
will have a broader impact through research training in an interdisciplinary
environment. The interdisciplinary nature of the work will provide graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as early career students, with
opportunities to acquire inter-disciplinary training in a variety of
experimental and computational methods. In addition, a broader impact is
achieved through providing high school students with computational skills and
outreach efforts to inform the public of the importance of multidisciplinary
research in the advancement of science.

The research in this project addresses quantitatively the important question of
the contribution of hydrogen bonding to stability and interaction specificity in
membrane proteins, with the use of a unique combination of advanced experimental
and computational approaches. Isotope-edited FTIR spectroscopy coupled with DFT
calculations will be used to analyze the specific energetics of individual
hydrogen bonds in interacting transmembrane alpha-helices. In parallel, the
overall thermodynamic stability of association of the same alpha-helices will be
assessed by using a combination of FRET and analytical ultracentrifugation. This
research will be accomplished using a structural framework provided by advanced
computational modeling, initially in the context of characterized model systems,
and later using predicted oligomerizing helices from single-pass membrane
proteins, as well as membrane proteins of known structure. This approach will
allow exploration of the relationship between the strength of individual
hydrogen bonds and their effective contribution to complex formation.