* 1415495
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Manufacturing Process for Cost-Effective Production of Discontinuous SiC Fibers from Renewable, Organic Precursors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Thomas Quantrille, Advanced Composite Materials, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a cost-
effective and scalable manufacturing process for producing high performance
silicon carbide (SiC) fiber for use in protective polymer coatings to increase
wear resistance and extend service lifetime. The outcomes of this project will
include reduced environmental disruption and potential savings of billions of
dollars associated with protecting valuable assets such as underground and
offshore piping infrastructure. Successful completion of the proposed Phase I
project will result in a commercially feasible process to manufacture SiC fiber
which can increase coating wear resistance and service lifetime by at least 30
percent compared to existing additives, at a price point that enables high-
volume applications. SiC fiber is expected to enable more rapid substitution
away from solvent-based coatings which currently dominate the market and towards
sustainable, environmentally friendly water-based solutions. Widespread adoption
of SiC fiber in the $100 billion global protective coatings market will drive
the creation of high-skill, high-paying jobs as companies build research and
development teams tasked with developing new categories of products using the
results of this research.

Coatings are used to protect equipment in increasingly demanding environments;
the need is for extended service lifetime to reduce total cost of ownership in
critical applications. SiC fiber is not used commercially today by the global
protective coatings industry in spite of observed performance benefits, because
of the high cost of current manufacturing processes. The project will develop a
process for manufacture of SiC fiber from renewable, inexpensive organic
precursor material, converted to finished product in a single, step-wise reactor
at high throughput and low cost. The SiC fiber will be discontinuous with a
diameter of 5-10 microns and a length of over 30 microns, with a high purity and
density, and it will be easily dispersed in water or solvent for effortless
incorporation into a wide range of protective coatings.