* 1415695
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Wirebonding
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jonathan Halderman, Helios Lightworks LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,994.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in the fact that our lifestyle data-demand
is deluging telecom networks. Yet, carriers who could use optical components to
service this traffic are extremely cost sensitive. This problem can be solved
with simplification of the technologies that are already being used. For
example, optical-interconnects is projected to be a $3.5 billion market by 2015
and is a ripe market for such advancement. This project applies the quickness of
making polymer waveguides to connecting optical devices in a novel direct-write
method. Eliminating technical complexity or removing laborious alignment will
potentially dramatically lower manufacturing costs and accelerate optical
component adoption by carriers. This market alone has been evaluated to
represent about $500M in cost savings. In so doing, the project will also
further our understanding of the polymer sciences as it relates to the written
waveguide and its effects on the optical path. While cost improvements are first
expected in optical-interconnects, this work is likely to later also affect
high-speed optical 3D-manufacturing, system-on-a-chip, and Programmable-Optical-
Device capabilities.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a method
to quickly and reliably makes low-loss connections from a small core-diameter
fiber optic cable to an even smaller optical device. Techniques today all
require near-perfect alignment of the two and are laborious or require complex
technologies. This complexity keeps optical packaging expensive and time
consuming. On the other hand, polymers have been widely used to make optical
devices using a mask and flood exposure, resulting in devices with identical
cross-sectional shape and that lie in one plane. Advanced optical packaging
requires non-planar structures with different cross sections at each
termination. This project will direct-write polymer waveguides of arbitrary
shape and position, in a matter of seconds between optical functional-blocks
allowing low loss connections. In addition to connecting fiber optic cable to
optical device, this method is an enabler for optical-system-on-a-chip. Other
3D-rapid-prototyping techniques, such as 2 photon lithography, have been
attempted but their slowness and rough sidewalls make for commercially
unacceptable high loss connections. This project will provide dynamic-tailoring
of the cross-sectional shape being written, arbitrary starting and ending points
in space, low loss connections, smooth optical path, mode-changing capabilities
and high throughput.