* 1415284
* Taking Games to School: Exploratory Study to Support Game-Based Teaching and Learning In High-School Science Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2018
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 449,928.00

Research shows that educational games can enhance students' science learning,
but current work leaves teachers dependent on researchers and games companies to
provide good games and game-based curricula. This project aims to study how
teachers can be involved in making science learning games more effective, and
how educational science games can better support good teaching. This project is
building a set of software tools, including a tool for annotating screen
recordings of activities in games, a teacher data dashboard for information
about students' in-game learning, and tools to help teachers customize
activities in games to better align with curricular standards. It will conduct
studies with successful research-based educational games for learning science,
and popularly available educational games from websites such as BrainPop, in a
network of teachers who have experience using 'canned' games in their
classrooms. The project will find out whether these new tools can enhance
teaching and/or learning. It will also help develop a list of the types of
customization options teachers need in order to be able to effectively use
educational games in their classrooms. If successful, this research could point
the way towards new tools that let teachers create activities that turn any game
into an educational game, and to better use existing educational games in their
classrooms. This could greatly speed up our ability to deliver high-quality
learning experiences through educational games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves a participatory design process in which a small number of
experienced teachers will feed into a principled, iterative refinement of
prototypes of the tools (annotation, data dashboard, and level-builder) to be
prototyped within the Brainplay suite. In the beta testing phase, a hierarchical
linear model analysis will be conducted on both student and teacher outcomes in
25 classrooms. In addition to the quantitative analysis, qualitative studies
involving classroom observations, focus groups, and teacher journaling will be
conducted to examine impact on teaching practices and refine the functional
specifications. Project dissemination will take place through the community
around the previously-developed Leveling Up games (played around 10,000 times
per week), and through existing professional networks such as Edmodo. The
project will also work within the games community to help inform possible
approaches to logging learning data and allowing teacher customization across
all games.