* 1415655
* SBIR Phase I:  Measuring Aqueous Metal Concentrations with the Chemometer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Daniel Miller-Lionberg, Access Sensor Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on the ability
to measure concentrations of toxic metals in water using a simple, power-free
technology. Metals represent an important class of water contaminants that come
from a variety of sources including mining, transportation, manufacturing, waste
management, and energy production. The U.S. EPA has developed water-quality
regulations that require periodic monitoring for specific metals, such as:
nickel, chromium, iron, and zinc (and many more). These regulations have largely
driven the development of the environmental water-quality market sector, within
which we will initially target mining, energy production, and waste management
segments. At present, however, the cost of monitoring toxic metals is high
(hundreds of dollars per sample) given the large numbers of samples that must be
analyzed across the life cycle of many of these sites. Our technology is simple
and inexpensive and thus will allow for more frequent monitoring to better
protect critical water supplies from contamination. The long-term impact from
this technology is a significant cost reduction needed to protect and monitor
our nation?s water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a novel, sensitive
technology for metals in water. This technology, called the Chemometer, is
inexpensive and portable and requires no power and no external reading
equipment. Quantifying metals in water is presently done using large, expensive
laboratory equipment with costs of &gt;$100/sample. Current portable measurement
systems (most notably X-Ray Fluorescence) are not well suited to aqueous
samples. Thus, a need (and a viable market) exists for simple, portable, power-
free measurement tools that enable rapid in-field quantification of metals in
water. Our approach will be substantially less expensive and simple to use. The
Chemometer is made on ordinary filter paper using innovative barrier printing
technology. Reagents are selectively patterned on the paper to give selective
and sensitive measurements of metals in water. Quantifying metal concentrations
is done by simply measuring the length of a colored region on the Chemometer
once the assay is complete. The Chemometer is portable (and disposable), making
streamside measurements feasible in all sorts of resource-poor locations.