* 1415117
* EAPSI: Modeling virus protein shell assembly
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Farrah Sadre-Marandi, Sadre-Marandi           Farrah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

This proposed research project aims to examine the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1). Mathematical models will be developed specifically for the first
stage of the virus formation, called the nucleation stage, of HIV-1 capsid. The
capsid acts as a protective shell for the genetic material (DNA or RNA) inside
the virus and is in its weakest stage during maturation. After the capsid
matures, the virus is able to attack new cells and replicate its DNA or RNA,
leading to virus spread throughout the body. Therefore it is of great interest
to characterize the favorable, restrictive, or even prohibitive conditions for
capsid development so that these deterministic features can be targeted with
antiviral therapies. This research will be conducted in collaboration with the
computational virology expertise of Dr. Xiufen Zou at Wuhan University in China
and will be validated with biological experiment data using the resources from
The (China) State Key Laboratory of Virology. Previous work has modeled the
process of viral capsid assembly using one large-size dynamical system,
combining both the nucleation and elongation phase. This approach has overlooked
the effects and experimental evidence of these two stages. Investigating the
nucleation stage first gives this model a unique advantage for characterizing
the conditions required to start capsid formation and produce the building
blocks for the mature capsid. Numerical simulations of the capsid protein
assembly will be conducted using a 6-species dynamical systems model and will be
implemented as a simulation code package. Deterministic and stochastic factors
in the biological processes of viral capsid assembly will be examined as well as
the stability of equilibria and sensitivity to model parameters. While in vitro
experiments can be conducted to investigate these conditions, certain biological
parameters in this process are immensely difficult to measure, so the
mathematical model will enable us to analyze sensitivity of these parameters to
outside factors, such as drug treatments. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.