* 1415462
* Research and Development towards next Generation of High Power ECR Ion Sources for Hadron Accelerators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Guillaume Machicoane, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,221.00

Overview This project focuses on the understanding of the plasma physics of
Electron Cyclotron Resonance (ECR) ion sources and the complex beam transport
involved in the extraction of particles from ECR ion source plasmas. ECR is a
phenomenon observed in plasma physics, condensed matter physics and accelerator
physics. The cyclotron is an electron particle accelerator that uses an
oscillating electric field tuned to a resonance frequency of the electrons
moving in a magnetic field. This resonance adds kinetic energy to the electron.

ECR ion source development is a cross disciplinary research field that combines
plasma physics, atomic physics, accelerator physics, magnet technology, and
accelerator engineering. ECR ion sources are superior injectors for heavy ion
facilities because of their versatility and reliability. Higher charge state
ions allow making accelerators more compact and cost effective, which has been a
major motivator for ECR ion source research. To fulfill the intensity
requirements of future heavy ion facilities, the technology needs to be extended
to the next level. Based on previous experience, the next technology leap will
be a demanding research and development intensive task. To take advantage of the
higher plasma density, new ion beam extraction systems must be developed which
allow one to extract high quality ion beams from the high magnetic field. This
award addresses some of the fundamental physics questions and technical
challenges that need to be answered to facilitate this technology leap.

Intellectual Merit This award will extend the understanding of the plasma
physics of ECR ion sources and the complex beam transport of beams extracted
from ECR ion source plasmas. The experimentally measured plasma properties will
be combined with ion beam transport experiments to develop a realistic model of
the extracted multispecies ion beam. The research will advance beam transport
simulation tools by modeling the interaction of the beam with the residual gas
in the beam line. This will allow the design and optimization of the beam
transport line for ECR ion source injectors.

Broader Impacts ECR ion sources are state-of-the-art injector systems for heavy
ion accelerators, carbon therapy accelerators and industrial applications. Thus
the expertise gained through this award will be not only of academic interest,
but will contribute to the development of a highly sought-after workforce for
research facilities and industry alike through the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in this field. The ECR ion sources at Michigan State
University provide an ideal, hands-on educational experience for students and
postdocs and will provide an opportunity to develop advanced simulation tools.