* 1415399
* SEES Fellows: Sustainable Infrastructure in a Changing Climate
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Anne Marie Stoner, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 419,446.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need of incorporating climate trends and
projections to ensure the sustainability of long-term planning in the
infrastructure sector. For infrastructure in particular (e.g., roads, bridges,
culverts, and storm drainage systems), future change may shift many of these
risks beyond historical and even current design standards. Modifying existing
infrastructure and ensuring new construction will be adapted to future change is
a central and critical concern surrounding the issues of infrastructure
resiliency and sustainable infrastructure design. The proposed work will combine
state-of-the-art models and tools in climate change research with engineering
know-how to help design stronger and longer-lasting infrastructure for the
future. Advances in both high-resolution climate modeling and implementation of
climate projections in infrastructure engineering will enhance collaboration
efforts within the ICNet RCN and significantly contribute towards the science of
sustainable engineering under changing environmental conditions. This proposal
aims to reduce the knowledge gap between climate scientists and engineers and to
address specific challenges that climate change poses to infrastructure
engineering. It will explore the ways in which climate information can be used
to inform design standards to build better bridges and roads that will last
longer in the future and require less money and energy to maintain.