* 1415603
* Collaborative Research:   Linking Maps, Manuscripts, and Place Names Data to Improve Environmental Knowledge in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Gary Holton, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2016
* USD 539,639.00

This award supports a project that will compile a geographic database linking
place name data found on historic Alaskan maps, manuscripts, and within oral
histories and printed materials. The project builds on the existing, proven
infrastructure of the Exchange for Local Observations of and Knowledge of the
Arctic (ELOKA) project to create a sustainable platform accessible to both
current and future researchers and community members. A collaborative approach
brings together researchers with expertise in Alaska Native languages and
geography (Gary Holton) and in web-based mapping and visualization applications
for traditional knowledge (Peter Pulsifer). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking place
names with maps and manuscripts allows for a greater time depth in place name
research, since the archival record for Alaska Native languages stretches back
some three centuries. Rather than viewing place names as lists of disassociated
points, the integrative approach adopted here reveals connections between
configurations of named places and socio-ecological dimensions of landscape,
thus providing insights into biological and cultural diversity, adaptation and
resilience, and cultural values and ecosystem services within the context of
environmental change. In particular, this project provides a foundation for
biocultural diversity research at the local level, avoiding subjectively-defined
ethnic and linguistic boundaries. By comparing current and traditional resource
use, ecosystem services can be understood, helping to inform policy and
management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open and extensible platform
developed by this project will provide a foundation for use by both researchers
and community members. The web-based platform and associated mobile apps
provided can be easily navigated by K-12 students, yielding opportunities to
incorporate geographic and environmental learning directly into the classroom.
At the same time, the project framework has full GIS capabilities, allowing
users to access geolinguistic datasets with analytical tools of their own
choosing. The long-term institutional commitments by the two collaborating
institutions positions this project to grow into the standard repository for
Indigenous place name data in Alaska.