* 1415035
* EAPSI: Investigating the role of soil hydrophobicity on groundwater recharge beneath differing land uses in China's Loess Plateau
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Zablon Adane, Adane                   Zablon         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Previous studies in the Loess Plateau have found that tree and shrub plantations
have reduced groundwater recharge in the Loess Plateau. Whereas these studies
have assumed that the reduced recharge is solely due to higher transpiration and
rainfall interception, other studies suggested a link between soil
hydrophobicity and reduced infiltration and recharge beneath plantations in the
northern High Plains region of the United States that may also be applicable in
China's Loess Plateau. In collaboration with Dr. Zhonge Pang and Dr. Tianming
Huang at the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, this project aims to
investigate hydrophobicity of near-surface sediments beneath differing land uses
in order to determine the role of hydrophobicity on reduced recharge in the
Loess Plateau. Further, the study will help determine whether plantation induced
soil hydrophobicity is a phenomenon unique to the High Plains region.

The proposed methods include new and traditional approaches including surface
infiltration tests, ethanol water drop penetration tests on sediments up to 50
cm profile depth with 5 cm depth intervals, and water retention curves to
determine soil hydraulic parameters. Leveraging detailed recharge studies that
have already taken place, this project will examine patterns amongst hydrophobic
soils, plantation types, and recharge rates from previously-observed data. In
addition, the proposed study will determine the extent of soil hydrophobicity in
each land use plot as a function of soil moisture content, organic carbon
content, and profile depth. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.