* 1415524
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel biological method to suppress Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) Toxin resistance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Angelika Fath-Goodin, Paratechs Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a technology to sustain
the efficacy of transgenic plants expressing the Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)
toxin. Transgenic expression of Bt toxins is a major tool for the control of
insect pests in agriculturally important crops. Bt transgenic technology has
been deployed on over one billion acres because it improves crop yields and
reduces the environmental problem of using toxic chemical pesticides. Insects,
however, are becoming increasingly resistant to the Bt toxin, which is
threatening its sustainability. This project proposes to develop alternative
means to suppress populations of important lepidopteran pest(s) targeted by Bt.
There is no greater threat to sustainability of the Bt technology than the
development of resistance, with current evidence indicating that resistance is
increasingly impacting producers globally. Novel strategies to suppress or
eliminate insect populations resistant to Bt represent a significant commercial
opportunity. This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel biological
control agent for use in specifically suppressing insect populations that are
developing resistance to the Bt toxin. This project will produce a biological
control agent, and test it for the ability to replicate in the target insect and
determine if it has the predicted pathology. Once the agent is developed and its
properties evaluated in the laboratory, experiments will be performed to
establish methods for efficient infection of target pests. Phase II will assess
impacts on pest populations in microcosm experiments with data used to develop
population models of effects in the field. Successful experimental results will
develop the technology to the point of field testing and commercialization
planned for Phase III.