* 1415700
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Low-power, Photoenabled Gas Sensors for Mobile Devices based Industrial Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Baomei Wen, N5 Sensors, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2015
* USD 166,240.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in various
applications requiring real-time detection of toxic, explosive, and other
harmful chemicals in a variety of environments. This innovative chemical sensor
technology promises single-chip multianalyte sensors with significant cost
savings resulting from enhanced performance, reliability, and lifetime.
Developing ultra-small chemical detectors capable of detecting various toxic and
hazardous chemicals in air reliably is essential in safeguarding individuals and
communities. Such ultra-small multianalyte detectors could save lives of
industrial workers and fire-fighters by making them more aware of their
dangerous surrounding. Also next-generation of cloud-based, crowd-sourced,
large-area sensor networks for urban monitoring can protect our communities from
terrorist attacks. The diversity of potential industrial, environmental, and
safety monitoring applications ensures sustainable growth paths in various
domestic and international gas detection markets. The scientific component of
this project will enhance the understanding of the complex processes occurring
at the surfaces of these novel multicomponent nanoclusters, which could have
profound impact in various other fields including photovoltaic, energy storage,
and catalytic pollution-remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate single-chip ammonia
(NH3) and carbon monoxide (CO) sensors using patent-pending innovation in
multicomponent photocatalytic nanocluster-based hybrid sensor technology. Both
NH3 and CO are toxic industrial chemicals with very serious health hazards, and
often present in various industrial, farming, agricultural, and transportation
related activities. High-performance mobile devices used in various operational
situations represent a powerful infrastructure which could be leveraged for
chemical monitoring. Due to their size and power requirement, traditional
sensors are not suitable for mobile-platform deployment. Single-chip, ultra low-
power selective detection of NH3 and CO will be a significant accomplishment
towards the goal of development of mobile devices based multithreat monitors
that can be used by industrial workers, civilians, first-responders, and
soldiers for both personal safety and infrastructural security.