* 1415756
* SBIR Phase I:  Learning Technology and Deployment - Transforming STEM Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Cynthia Kaiser, AfterMath Education Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,982.00

This SBIR Phase I project's broader/commercial impact is to create a shift of
the national educational paradigm in education so students succeed and employers
have a ready pool of highly skilled, math and science fluent employees;
especially, students that can graduate career and college ready to fill and
thrive in professional technical positions. A primary focus of this project?s
programming is to attract minorities, girls/women, students with disabilities
and other underrepresented populations and to actively influence these
populations toward educational attainment; especially in STEM skills. The
project outcome will result in scalable technology/know-how that will impact the
broad arena of education and will have sustaining economic, commercial and
societal benefits to populations not being reached on a large scale currently.
The commercial outcome of the proposed SBIR project leads to a marketable
product and/or process that warrant significant NSF support. This SBIR project
will create scalable technology and know-how that will impact a broad arena of
education leading the way to practical solutions for both students and teachers
in math and science skill enhancement.

The project aims to renovate the current educational model in instructional
technology using innovative design to transform students' declining interest and
proficiency in mathematics and science; cultivating a foundation for STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) expertise in learners of all
ages. The project will develop and deploy compelling educational technology that
promotes student interest, skill and proficiency in mathematics and science. To
achieve this, the developers will fabricate, deploy and commercialize hybrid
experiential educational technology through instructional kits comprising
developed apparatus, curricula and methodology. Curricula will be focused on
STEM-targeted activities and projects specifically designed for high interest,
multi-sensory, hands-on student lessons. Employing curriculum that is highly
engaging using teaching strategies developed specifically for an alternative
presentation of math and science instruction that is innovative, intensive, and
integrated will be the primary objective of this SBIR project. This project is
designed to offer practical solutions to both students and teachers in math and
science educational enhancement by providing learning tools applied to real
world life skills. Embedded in the instructional technology are approaches for
students to increase confidence, competence, and self-esteem especially for
underserved and underrepresented students; increasing their college and career
readiness.