* 1415046
* EAPSI:Bioinformatic Analysis of Metal-complexing Domains in Dinoflagellate Genome
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Lindsay Rutter, Rutter                  Lindsay
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Coral reefs have profound ecological and economical importance but face
environmental challenges, including seawater temperature rises, ocean
acidification, and ultraviolet radiation. Corals exist in a symbiotic
relationship with dinoflagellate algae. Understanding how this symbiosis
protects the system from heavy metals could simultaneously address one of the
most important questions in environmental biology, namely, how organisms
maintain homeostasis in changing environments. This project will investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying coral symbiosis, using genomic information from
both coral host and algae symbiont. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Nori Satoh, professor of the Marine Genomics Unit at the
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology. This collaboration will allow a
unique opportunity to access cutting-edge expertise and data: The lab recently
decoded the genome of Acropora digitifera, a coral that is one of the most
sensitive to environmental changes, and also produced the first draft assembly
of a dinoflagellate, Symbiodinium minitum, nuclear genome.

Of the environmental challenges coral reefs face, heavy metal exposure may be
one of the least studied. The lab recently identified candidate genes for eight
members of metal-complexing proteins in A. digitifera, although they did not
determine a homolog of the metal-responsive transcription factor (MTF1) gene,
despite its cited significant role in metal detoxification in other marine
biology. The proposed project will analyze the genome of S. minitum to determine
candidate genes for metal-complexing proteins, particularly the MTF1 gene that
was not present in A. digitifera. Candidate genes could provide preliminary
evidence that their byproducts may be symbiotically used by the coral, which
apparently cannot produce certain metal-complexing proteins on its own.