* 1415057
* EAPSI: Day vs night greenhouse gas emissions from the draw-down zone of China's Three Gorges Reservoir
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Benjamin Miller, Miller                  Benjamin       L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 70.00

Hydropower reservoirs emit heat-trapping gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and
methane (CH4) like the coal-fired power plants they were designed to replace.
Carbon carried by river waters settles in sediments when it enters slow-moving
reservoir waters. When sediments are exposed to oxygenated water, microbes
convert carbon to CO2. Without oxygen, microbes also produce CH4. Therefore, the
proportions of gases produced depend on the presence of oxygen in water, which
varies between day and night. Previous studies of CO2 and CH4 emissions from
reservoirs have been almost exclusively conducted during the day. In
collaboration with Dr. Huai Chen of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, this study
will measure CO2 and CH4 emissions from one of the world's largest reservoirs,
China's Three Gorges. These measurements, conducted during day and night, will
contribute to a more accurate understanding of CO2 and CH4 emissions from
hydropower as it expands throughout the developing
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of CO2 and CH4 in reservoirs varies
spatially, as well as temporally. As water levels in the Three Gorges Reservoir
rise and fall annually, 20% of the reservoir area around its margins is flooded
and dewatered. Senesced plants in this draw-down zone are a rich and regular
substrate for microbial oxidation. This study will measure diel CO2 and CH4
fluxes from the draw-down zone in dissolved and bubble form. Though studies in
other reservoirs have taken similar measurements during the day, diel
differences in 1) photosynthesis, which consumes CO2 and produces oxygen, 2)
respiration, which consumes oxygen, and 3) atmospheric pressure, which may
govern bubble release, could mean that current estimates of CO2 and CH4 fluxes
in reservoirs are inaccurate. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.