* 1415688
* SBIR Phase I:  Clinical decision support in Multiple Sclerosis: pioneering precision medicine in complex disease management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* jason crane, MIRA Medicine, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is pioneering the development of a precision
medicine platform for the management of complex diseases. As demand increases
for personalized medical practice, there is a growing need to empower clinicians
with sophisticated clinical decision-support tools ? especially in complex
diseases, such as Multiple Sclerosis (MS). The prototype of such a tool,
developed from an MS research cohort, received excellent user feedback and broad
interest from the MS community. This application allows a clinician to visualize
a patient?s disease progression and anticipate its trajectory. The physician can
share this information with her patient from an intuitive interface to inform a
more data-driven, collaborative therapeutic decision-making ? shown to increase
compliance and improve outcome. Between therapeutics, disability-related costs,
and other care, MS represents a yearly burden of $28 billion. This opportunity
is in the hundreds of millions as it merges three rapidly-expanding markets:
precision medicine, knowledge-based analytics, and clinical decision-support
software. This effort opens novel collaboration opportunities, leveraging
millions of publicly-funded research. The broad adoption of this tool will
realize cost savings system-wide, from patients, to providers, and payers, by
accelerating the path to the right treatment for each patient.

This project is a research study for a clinical decision-support software
platform for the management Multiple Sclerosis (MS). This software facilitates
the access to multiple types of patient data (clinical, genetics, imaging) and
assesses the normality of a single patient?s data in the context of reference
distributions that are custom-computed from other patients with similar baseline
characteristics. This navigation tool is powered by a knowledge infrastructure
and proprietary data analytics to visualize, interpret and predict
multifactorial patient trajectories in a novel, more effective, and data-driven
way. This NSF-PHASE I grant will enable the development of the cloud-based data
infrastructure and enable a robust and generic contextualization framework for
non-research health data. This framework will strengthen the portability of the
application to other complex conditions. Technically, the proposed project uses
a cloud-based back-end for data storage and computing, rendered on a tablet
interface. From the mobile interface, the user can compare individual patients
to reference group(s) bringing reference population data at the point of care.
This personalized use of datasets challenges the use of averaged results from
clinical trials. The contextualization of individual trajectories to reference
longitudinal datasets enables the visualization of dynamically-generated,
evidence-based therapeutic scenarios ? thereby achieving personalized clinical
decision-making.