* 1415073
* EAPSI: Improving Cognitive Health in Older Japanese Adults Through Web-Based Exercises
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Sean-Ryan Smith, Smith                   Sean-Ryan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The 21st century will see huge demographic movements and cultural shifts caused
by a global increase in the elderly population. The prevalence of Web
applications appears to be growing in parallel with this increase in life
expectancy. It is believed that people over 60 today constitute one of the
fastest growing groups of Web users. Unfortunately, aging users face many
challenges when trying to access the Internet due to declines in vision,
hearing, mobility and cognitive abilities. This project will focus on developing
a set of accessible Web-based exercises that aim at improving cognitive well-
being of elderly Japanese adults. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Chieko Asakawa, IBM Fellow and Group Leader of the
Accessibility Research Group of IBM Research in Tokyo, Japan. As an
Accessibility Designer, Dr. Asakawa focuses on aiding web developers and
designers create more universally accessible content.

This project serves two purposes: 1) to gather information about the
accessibility barriers faced by older Japanese Web users by observing their Web
interaction, and 2) to carefully design Web-based brain-training software
capable of improving the cognitive well-being of the same target population. An
investigation into the current accessibility and usability issues experienced by
older Japanese persons with Web applications will be conducted through
interviews and focus group discussions. A low-fidelity prototype will be
developed and tested via a cognitive walkthrough with users to measure user
engagement and acceptance. A high-fidelity prototype through the desired Web
interface will be developed and accumulated user data will be used to adapt the
system for specific and individualized use with elderly Japanese persons. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.