* 1415060
* EAPSI: Resilience of the South Korean electric grid to disasters: Development of socio-infrastructure network models
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Daniel Eisenberg, Eisenberg               Daniel         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Catastrophic events such as the Fukushima nuclear meltdown have intensified
global interest in improving the resilience of electric power systems in East
Asia. Defined as the ability to plan and prepare for, absorb, recover from, and
adapt to threats, resilience represents the ability of engineered systems to
take positive action under known and unknown stress. Recent corruption cases
that caused the shutdown of multiple Korean nuclear power plants demonstrate
that social dimensions such as management practices, public concern for nuclear
power, and disaster protocols must be considered when measuring the resilience
of the grid. However, resilience analysis of engineered systems often does not
incorporate social dimensions and cannot measure disaster planning, preparation,
or adaptation. Until a new method is developed that can link social and electric
power infrastructure dynamics together, Korea's electric grid will remain
fragile to disaster. This project seeks to create empirical network models of
Korean institutions and electric power infrastructure to measure the resilience
of the interdependent socio-infrastructure system. With resilience expert Dr.
Jeryang Park at Hongik University, data about generation, transmission, and
distribution infrastructure will be collected to create a network model of the
Korean grid.

Korean resilience and electric power experts will be interviewed to create a
network model of Korean electric power and disaster governance and management
institutions. The models will be analyzed to determine their topological
features that influence disaster planning and preparation, absorption, recovery,
and adaptation. Furthermore, both models will be analyzed to determine
interdependencies between social institutions and built infrastructure to
identify resource and operations decisions that can reduce the impacts of future
disasters. Overall, this project is a first step towards better analytical tools
for resilience analysis and validated theories of coupled social-ecological-
technological resilience. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
National Research Foundation of Korea.