* 1415308
* Collaborative Research: New Statistical Learning and Scalable Computing for Large Unstructured Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Annie Qu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2017
* USD 229,042.00

This proposal focuses on some fundamental issues concerning unstructured data
that arise from text-heavy documents, where the underlying data exhibit unique
characteristics such as large volume, large variety and large velocity of
change. Automating the process of information extraction is extremely critical
in the information age, and has high-utility in online surveys, and threat
detection and prevention. The integrated program of research and education will
have significant impacts in many fields such as machine learning and data
mining, natural language processing, opinion survey, business forecasting and
service, health research, and social and political science, among others. This
will stimulate interdisciplinary research and collaboration with scientists from
disparate fields. The proposed project requires extensive algorithm and software
development for target applications. In particular, advanced computational tools
will be developed through mapReduce over distributed computational platforms
such as OpenMP, MPI and hadoop, and documentation of the software will be
disseminated along with the technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unstructured data impose great challenges in that
text documents need to be embedded and integrated with numerical input for
statistical modeling, which requires overparameterized modeling to achieve
accurate prediction and unbiased inference for high-dimensional data. The
proposed research aims to develop new statistical methods and tools for
sentiment analysis and text summarization utilizing word relations through
graphs and personalized prediction for recommender systems. It borrows
information across all available information for document summarization,
including tagged and untagged documents, leading to higher accuracy of tagging.
This will enhance information storage, sorting and processing as well as
filtering. Moreover, the project develops a novel approach for accurate
personalized prediction utilizing the heterogeneity variation among all users,
which impacts everyday life in terms of personalization, such as in service,
recommendation and advertising. More importantly, the proposed statistical
methodology and scalable computational algorithms will be valuable and useful
for other types of unstructured data. Finally, many of the advanced optimization
techniques and computing procedures to be developed will also be applicable to
other types of ``BIG" data problems.