* 1415883
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Population Dynamics and Subdomain Stability of Folded Species in the Full-length Overhang Region of Human Telomeres
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2018
* Hanbin Mao, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 10/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry award from the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division supports the work of Dr. Hanbin Mao
from Kent State University to study telomeres, which are new DNA structures
present at the end of chromosomes. The work is done in collaboration with Dr.
Hiroshi Sugiyama of Kyoto University, Japan, who is funded by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science. The telomere regions of human chromosomes are
involved in the processes of biological aging and tumor formation. Consequently
the study of telomeres can inform and advance the quest for the treatment of
age-related diseases and cancer. The goal of Dr. Mao's research is to elucidate
the mechanochemical properties and population dynamics of the G-quadruplex
species formed in a human telomeric DNA. To achieve this goal, Dr. Mao will use
both existing physical methods as well as new methods developed in his lab for
the study of one molecule at a time. The international character of the
collaborative research offers a unique setting to train U.S. students. Visits of
the research lab in Japan create the opportunity for the students to gain a
global perspective and to acquire collaborative skills. High school students
will participate in research in Dr. Mao's lab and will be prepared to
participate in high school science competitions and scientific exhibitions.

Although of fundamental importance, the DNA G-quadruplex formed in the telomeres
is difficult to investigate given the length of the telomeric region and the
diversity of conformations it can adopt. This complex structural problem can be
addressed using single-molecule methods newly developed in the labs of the
investigators. At Kent State, optical tweezers will be used to dissect
G-quadruplexes at sub-molecular level by mechanical unfolding through specific
locations inside a G-quadruplex unit. On the other hand, by an approach
analogous to the population dynamics in Biology, the population profiles of
G-quadruplex species can be reconstructed after deconvolution of different
structures. Evaluation of these population profiles in the presence of small
molecules could enable the development of drugs, which interact with telomeric
G-quadruplexes and thus interfere with various biological processes.