* 1415101
* RUI: Quantum Information in Matrix Black Holes and Black Hole Horizons in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Vatche Sahakian, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 90,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vatche Sahakian at Harvey
Mudd College. The project addresses fundamental questions at the boundary of our
knowledge involving general relativity and quantum mechanics, in short, quantum
gravity. The proposal explores several keys ideas in string theory and quantum
gravity: the accounting of information in black holes, and the understanding of
black hole surface dynamics. The accounting of information in black holes has
been a topic of great discussion recently, since black hole dynamics seem to
violate some basic principles of quantum mechanics involving the destruction of
information, and black hole surface dynamics have recently shed light on
possible resolutions of this conundrum. Hence, the research addresses
fundamental questions in two general areas of theoretical physics: scrambling of
information in quantum information theory, and black hole physics in quantum
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accomplishments expected from the project are:
A better understanding of the mechanics of information scrambling in black
holes; A better understanding of black hole evaporation and the details of
entanglement evolution in the process of transferring information from a black
hole to the outside; A better understanding of the nature of the black hole
horizon; The development of new highly multi-threaded algorithms in
computational physics as applied to understanding black hole dynamics in string
theory. An extensive undergraduate research program is part of the proposal,
including: a course development component for an undergraduate course on modern
topics in theoretical physics, providing students with solid foundations for
graduate school; and the associated preparation of an undergraduate textbook on
classical field theory.