* 1415080
* EAPSI: Understanding the Creation of High Elevation Plateaus
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* John McDermott, McDermott               John
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

High elevation topographic plateaus are some of the most important geologic
features on the planet. They influence global climate and producing significant
earthquake hazards such as the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, which killed nearly
70,000 people. However, it is not fully understand the processes that generate
these broad regions of high elevation or why such significant hazards exist. In
order to understand these hazards, it is critical to study the processes that
create plateaus. This collaboration with Dr. Lei Wu at Zhejiang University in
Hangzhou, China presents an opportunity to access data that will allow the
characterization of the development of the northwestern margin of the Tibetan
Plateau. Understanding this margin will give insight into the processes that
create plateaus by establishing the geologic relationships of the plateau to the
surrounding region. By establishing these relationships knowledge about how
plateaus are created and why they present such significant risks will be
acquired.

By constructing geologic cross sections from existing seismic reflection data
gathered in the Tarim Basin northwest of the Tibetan Plateau, this project will
characterize the subsurface geology of the northwestern margin of the plateau.
Combined with existing work, these cross sections will establish the total
vertical offset along this margin, providing insight into the amount of crustal
shortening that has occurred on this margin. The total amount of vertical offset
will constrain the possible models of development of high topographic relief
along this margin. This work will be conducted using open-source data
visualization tools, broadening the user base, and enhancing development of,
these tools, as well as enhancing the data visualization capabilities of
Zhejiang University. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.