* 1415128
* EAPSI: Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle to Detect Wind Turbine Blade Defects in Offshore Wind Parks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Huiyi Zhang, Zhang                   Huiyi
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Current wind turbine blades (WTB) maintenance requires a crane, a highly trained
expert who can diagnose issues, and a large amount of safety equipment.
Performing these inspections is enormously costly and time intensive, and in
some cases nearly impossible to perform in a safe and consistent manner. This
project aims to reduce inspection costs and improve worker safety by developing
a prototype of an unmanned aerial vehicle that will be able to perform
inspections that can identify hairline thickness cracks on turbine blades in
even the most challenging environments. This research will be conducted at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China in collaboration with Dr. Long Chengnian.
China is an especially good site for studying semi-automatic blade inspections
because China has a larger fraction of wind energy capacity than the United
States and the air pollution in China complicates blade inspections because dust
and particles can reduce the visibility of site employees and inspection
devices.

This project will develop a cost-effective semi-automatic device that can
identify and classify WTB surface defects using advanced image processing
techniques and especially will focus on offshore WTBs because offshore sites
represent a worst-case scenario of obstacles to performing safe and consistent
blade inspections. Offshore WTBs are especially large in size, are far from land
on which a crane may be anchored, and are prone to defects and poor inspection
lighting caused by dust, salt, and water vapor in the air. If the wind energy is
to further develop its offshore capabilities, it is critical to develop a semi-
automatic blade inspection system that can detect early defects and minimize the
costs that remain an obstacle to wind energy's adoption as a replacement for
burning fossil fuels. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.