* 1415841
* SBIR Phase I:  New approach for producing increased quantities of human antibodies for research, medical, and biodefense applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Alexey Zdanovsky, Alpha Universe LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will address the needs of the antibody market for fast
and inexpensive production of antibodies. Antibodies are among the most utilized
molecular tools in the life sciences, whose applications span a variety of areas
in biological science and medicine. The worldwide antibody market was estimated
at approximately $40 billion in 2008, and is expected to rise above $68 billion
by 2016. The development of new antibodies, however, is a lengthy and expensive
process. The goal is to develop a system that significantly reduces the time to
develop new antibodies as well as the cost. The proposed system and resulting
antibodies may be used as a source of future therapeutics, as components of
detection systems in biodefense and medicine, or as affinity purification
systems for research and diagnostics. The system will be demonstrated in Phase I
with the production of antibodies targeted at botulinum neurotoxin, which will
be of value to the biodefense area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR project aims
to develop a system for the fast generation of high quantities of antibodies
targeted at specific applications. The main objective in Phase I is to develop a
platform that allows robust generation of clones producing high quantities of
antibodies without the need for time-consuming and labor-intensive gene
amplification techniques, such as the dehydrofolate reductase or the glutamine
synthase selection systems. This will be coupled with a previously developed
method that allows simultaneous generation of multiple humanized or completely
human antibodies for the fast generation of diverse collections of antibodies
that can address specific needs existing in each segment of the antibody market.
However, clones generated via direct transfection of constructs into secondary
cell lines, such as Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) and Human Embryo Kidney (HEK),
produce substantially lower amounts of antibodies than do conventional
hybridomas. The amount of antibodies produced is not sufficient to address the
needs in any segment of the antibody market. To address needs existing in all
segments of the antibody market, it is proposed to develop a new approach for
fast and efficient generation and selection of cell clones whose immunoglobulin
production levels will be comparable to those of average hybridomas. In
combination with the system for robust assembly of immunoglobulin-encoding
constructs, this approach will allow the rapid and robust generation of
antibodies adapted for use in specific applications.