* 1415206
* SEES Fellows:  Leveraging the waterscape to increase agricultural landscape sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Amy Hansen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 476,039.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Midwestern United States is often referred to as the Corn Belt for its
importance as a center of agriculture. Unfortunately, agricultural productivity
has come at the expense of the water quality and biological integrity of
surrounding and downstream waterscapes within the Minnesota River Basin and the
Northern Gulf of Mexico. This project will assess the ecological and economic
implications of modifying wetland and backwater hydrologic connectivity to
enhance nitrate retention during critical nitrogen loading storm events and
seasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a conceptual end-to-end
framework to define functionality and variability of key hydro-biogeochemical
processes controlling wetland nitrogen retention at multiple scales and to
evaluate the economic-environmental trade-offs that define policy implementation
feasibility. This research will contribute to scientific understanding of how
hydro-biogeochemical processes at sub-watershed scales influence whole watershed
export of an important aquatic contaminant, i.e. nitrate, by investigating the
processes and scale specific controls in an intensively agricultural watershed.
Defining sustainable agricultural practices and controlling diffuse pollutant
loading with external environmental degradation are issues of local, national
and global importance. By providing a sound scientific basis and an economic-
environmental tradeoff assessment model, the proposed research could advance
wetland policy implementation by addressing key knowledge gaps. The SEES Fellow,
Dr. Amy Hansen, will work with host mentor Dr. Efi Foufoula-Georgiou at the
University of Minnesota, and with partner mentor Dr. Catherine Kling at Iowa
State University.