* 1415489
* Shelf-Basin Exchange in the Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 347,020.00

The observed ongoing decline of summer sea ice coverage in the Arctic Ocean
results, in part, from heat carried by ocean waters. This heat enters the Arctic
Ocean by direct solar heating and by the transport of heat with flows from the
Atlantic Ocean and Bering Sea. The warm waters from the Atlantic Ocean are
isolated from direct contact with the sea ice by subsurface colder waters. This
project will develop a model that synthesizes our understanding of important
physical processes in the Arctic Ocean, compare the model output to
observations, use the model to increase understanding of the processes
responsible for modulating heat flux to the sea ice, and understand the observed
recent trends in those processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
proposes to study processes that lead to water mass transformation within the
Chukchi Sea, exchange across the shelfbreak to the basin interior, and the
melting of ice using a very high resolution regional numerical model in
conjunction with recent and historical observations. The model is a
realistically configured coupled ocean/sea ice model forced by synoptic
atmospheric fields and flow through Bering Strait. Physical processes
responsible for exchange of mass, heat, freshwater, and tracers across the
shelfbreak will be diagnosed. The circulation and fluxes in the model will be
compared with in-situ mooring and hydrographic data. The objectives of the
proposed study are to better understand the processes responsible for cross
shelf exchange in the Pacific sector of the Arctic Ocean, their relation to ice
melt in the interior, and how they might change in a changing Arctic climate.
The focus of the regional model is to diagnose the mechanisms responsible for
shelf-basin exchange and relate them to the basic forcing mechanisms in this
region (flow through Bering Strait and the atmosphere). The efficiency of the
regional model allows for large numbers of calculations to be carried out, and
for hypotheses relating to exchange to be tested. Such a process-based approach
allows for a general understanding of the controlling physics with broader
implications for other regions and forcing scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator teaches graduate level classes in the MIT-WHOI Joint
Program in Physical Oceanography, and the material developed during this project
will be incorporated into his classes. He has also been involved in the GFD
summer school and will offer summer school lectures about the understanding
gained from this study. Undergraduate students strong in mathematics and physics
will also be recruited to work on the model analysis through the WHOI Summer
Student Fellowship program at no cost to this project. The PI also maintains a
web site that summarizes and highlights his research interests for a broader
audience.