* 1415352
* Improving agricultural practices for sustainable development
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2014,12/31/2015
* Rachael Garrett, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2015
* USD 393,334.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This SEES Fellowship
project focuses on food sustainability.

Finding ways to increase the global food supply without further exacerbating
climate change, reducing biodiversity, or degrading water resources is one of
the most important challenges facing humanity. The goal of this project is to
create information that can be used by policy makers and farmers to promote the
adoption of more sustainable agricultural practices in two of the largest food
growers and exporters in the world. In particular, this project investigates
what enabling conditions (policies, market mechanisms, and extension programs)
are needed to help farmers transition from specialized production practices to
integrated crop and livestock systems (ICLS). The project also examines the
robustness of ICLS under future climate and price scenarios.

Prior ecological research suggests that ICLS have the potential to vastly reduce
the environmental impact of agriculture, but it is not clear whether ICLS are
socio-economically suitable to producers and other stakeholders. If these
systems do not address the core needs of farmers (by generating income,
decreasing risk, and smoothing out income flows), it is unlikely that they will
be adopted. Furthermore, it is essential to understand whether ICLS will meet
farmers' needs under future prices and climate scenarios. This project addresses
these knowledge gaps by answering the following questions: 1) What are the
problems faced by farmers in a given region? 2) How do the benefits provided by
ICLS solve these farmer-defined problems as compared to other potential
competing technologies? 3) Where are integrated systems most likely to be
profitable, given underlying biophysical conditions and transportation
infrastructure? 4) What socio-economic and biophysical factors have the largest
influence on farmers' willingness to adopt ICLS? 5) How will future changes in
these socio-economic and biophysical factors influence future adoption or
retirement of ICLS? This project utilizes multiple methods and spatial scales:
comparative case studies at the national level, regional statistical and
mechanistic models, and local fieldwork.