* 1415104
* EAPSI: Analyzing lithium and boron isotopes in hot springs and rivers of Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kirstin Washington, Washington              Kirstin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Atmospheric carbon dioxide is a direct external driver of Earth's climate. Over
geological timescales, carbon dioxide is released through volcanism and is
balanced by weathering of silicate minerals. To constrain our understanding of
how weathering processes affect Earth's carbon cycle and climate, this project
will employ geochemical tools to characterize the chemistry of hot springs and
rivers on the island of Taiwan. Taiwan serves as an ideal natural environment
for studying hydrothermal inputs to river systems and has been shown to have
some of the highest rates of chemical weathering. Lithium and boron isotopes can
be used as proxies for chemical weathering intensities through Earth history and
today. Interpretations of weathering processes via lithium and boron isotopes
are confounded by a lack of data from hot springs; records of chemical
weathering should correct for these isotopic inputs through mass balance. Hot
spring and river water chemistry will be analyzed in collaboration with Dr.
Chen-Feng You's Isotope Geochemistry Laboratory (IGL) at the National Cheng Kung
University. Dr. You's expertise in low-temperature geochemistry, and IGL's
equipment affords an opportunity to employ unique methods to address the
problems presented by this project.

In addition to isotopic measurements using a Multi-Collector Inductively-Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) for lithium and a Thermal Ionization Mass
Spectrometer (TIMS) for boron, major elements will be measured for chemical
geothermometry. Chemical geothermometry will estimate the subsurface water
temperature in hot springs during interaction with rock. This will help to
constrain the temperatures lithium and boron isotopes experience during the
fractionation. Mixing calculations for hot springs inputs to rivers using
lithium and boron isotopes will determine inputs of hot springs, which can
inform the global budgets of the isotopes. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.