* 1415596
* Beam Manipulation of Laser-Plasma Accelerated Beams for Advanced Accelerator and Radiation Source Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Wim Leemans, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 594,900.00

Plasma acceleration is a cutting-edge technique for accelerating charged
particles such as electrons using the electric field associated with a plasma
structure, such as an electron plasma wave. The plasma structure is created
using either ultra-short laser pulses or particle beams. This technique offers a
way to build high performance particle accelerators of much smaller size than
conventional accelerator techniques.

This award will further develop Laser-Plasma accelerators (LPA). Applications of
LPA electron beams require capture, transport, and manipulation of the electron
beam following exit of the plasma accelerator. This award will investigate two
aspects of beam dynamics following the plasma accelerator that are critical to
future applications: 1. Coupling of the LPA beam into conventional beam
transport systems. 2. Beam decompression to enable light source applications.

This work will benefit most applications of LPA beams, in particular for high
energy physics and light source applications. The production of high-energy
particle beams for particle physics applications requires the staging of
multiple LPAs, and the proposed research will directly impact the design of the
LPA beam coupling system between stages. An LPA driven Free Electron Laser (FEL)
is considered one of the most promising near-term applications of LPA
technology, and this research will lay the groundwork for the first proof-of-
principle demonstration of an LPA-driven FEL generating coherent, high-peak
brightness x-rays.

The intellectual merit of this award lies in the development of practical LPA
applications such as future high-energy physics beams for exploration of new
physics. This will be done by exploring solutions to the two issues mentioned
above. First, the use of tailored plasma profiles will be investigated to reduce
the beam divergence, enabling improved coupling to a conventional beam transport
system. Second, by exploring Free-Electron lasers (FEL). LPAs deliver high peak
current beams, and, hence, it is natural to consider LPA beams as drivers for
FELs. Although the FEL application is presently hindered by the energy spread
(few percent) of the LPA electron beam, application of LPA beams to FELs may be
accomplished using experimentally-demonstrated LPA beam properties by beam phase
space manipulation following the LPA. This project considers decompression of
the femtosecond LPA beam, reducing the beam slice energy spread, enabling FEL
lasing.