* 1415134
* SEES Fellows: Building Informatics: Utilizing Data-Driven Methodologies to Enable Energy Efficiency and Sustainability Planning of Urban Building Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2014
* Rishee Jain, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2014
* USD 528,179.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the fact that buildings are
responsible for over 40% of all energy consumption and GHG emissions in the US.
The impact of building systems is even more pronounced in dense urban areas like
New York City (NYC) where over 75% of GHG emissions come from energy used in
buildings. Any transition towards a sustainable NYC will require addressing this
energy and pollution intensive built environment. This research proposal aims to
integrate data-driven methodologies from information science, social science,
network science and urban planning with engineering to increase the energy
efficiency and sustainability of urban building systems. Specifically, this
project will identify district level energy efficiency opportunities for urban
buildings systems, characterize the interdependencies between the built, natural
and human environments and model the impact of energy policy instruments to
enhance the sustainability and resilience of NYC and Mumbai, India. As a part of
this project, the PI will build upon his expertise in civil engineering and
building systems by incorporating data science, social science and urban
planning into his exploration of energy and sustainability challenges facing
urban building systems.