* 1415099
* EAPSI: Physical characterization of extreme, deep-subsurface microorganisms from Homestake Gold Mine
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Lily Momper, Momper                  Lily           M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Earth's deep subsurface is a typically extreme, energy-starved ecosystem. This
vast biosphere represents the largest microbial habitat on Earth and is a
similar environment to those found in the subsurface of other planets. This
project aims to grow and characterize microbial life in Earth's deep continental
subsurface, specifically at the former Homestake Mine, in South Dakota. It was
recently discovered that the continental deep subsurface is a populated
ecosystem where single-celled organisms survive. In the continental subsurface,
microbial life has been detected 3.3 km below Earth's surface. Only a few deep
subsurface microorganisms have been grown in the laboratory hence how they
survive remains unclear. Biological samples from the deep subsurface will not
grow using traditional microbiological cultivation techniques. Therefore,
successfully cultivating its residents requires innovative technology. Dr.
Hiroyuki Imachi at JAMSTEC-Yokosuka in Japan has designed low-flow bioreactors
to cultivate fastidious, low energy-adapted anaerobes (organisms that use a
terminal electron acceptor other than O2) from the subsurface.

For the current study, water and rock samples collected from 5,000 feet below
surface at Homestake Mine will be incubated in low-flow bioreactors. The
bioreactors contain mineral substrates and media designed to mimic the deep
subsurface environment from which samples were collected. Subsequent collections
of effluent from the reactors have yielded enrichments of subsurface anaerobes,
excellent for isolation and metabolic characterization of typically low-density,
slow-growing microorganisms. The methods to taxonomically and metabolically
characterize these previously unstudied microorganisms will include rRNA and
functional gene sequencing, lipid analyses, metabolic substrate usage, and qPCR
and FISH probe design for in situ environmental detection. Because Earth's
subsurface is analogous to that of other planets, understanding how life exists
in Earth's deep subsurface will help in the search for life in the subsurface of
other planets. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.