* 1415922
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel enzymes for producing homogeneous preparations of individual, monounsaturated industrial fatty acids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Libuse Brachova, VariFAS Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a new scalable
manufacturing capability for producing bio-based chemicals for surfactants,
lubricants, and polymers. This manufacturing platform will utilize biologically
derived sugar carbon-source and transform this carbon to higher value products
via microbial fermentation. At the core of this new manufacturing platform is a
re-designed microorganism that will deliver homogeneous preparations of
individual fatty acids of defined carbon-chain length that contain a single
carbon-carbon double bond. This contrasts with current sources of oleochemicals,
which are complex mixtures of fatty acids of different carbon chain lengths
ranging between 12 and 18 carbon atoms, and may contain 0-3 carbon-carbon double
bonds. The complex mixtures that occur in these oleochemicals limit the types of
products that can be generated from fats and oils, or adds considerable
separations cost to the manufacture of homogeneous products. The project will
take advantage of unprecedented technological capability to produce homogeneous
preparations of a single monounsaturated fatty acid, which is a platform
feedstock for producing many chemicals that impact surfactant, lubricant, and
polymer markets, currently valued at $40B per annum, and predicted to grow to
$150B per annum in the next 5-years.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop new transformational technology
that is based on the discovery and fundamental understanding of the biocatalytic
mechanism that terminates the elongation cycle of Type II fatty acid synthase,
the enzyme acyl-ACP thioesterase. The project will harness this technology for
the production of near homogeneous preparations (~60%) of the monounsaturated
fatty acid, 7-tetradecenoic acid, and proposes to optimize the system to produce
over 80% homogeneous preparations of this fatty acid. This monounsaturated fatty
acid is not currently available in the marketplace at a reasonable cost. The
unprecedented availability of 7-tetradecenoic acid makes it a platform
biochemical for subsequent chemical conversion to numerous biorenewable
chemicals that have applications in surfactants, lubricants, and polymers. In
the long-term, this platform technology can be expanded to produce alternative
homogeneous preparations of monounsaturated fatty acids of different chain
lengths, with carbon-carbon double bonds at different but defined places in the
molecule.