* 1415236
* Integrated Photonic Chips for Generating Entangled Photon Triplets
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Quantum information technologies are a driving force for the advancement of
fundamental physics and enable large-scale secure communication, unprecedented
processor speeds, and higher resolution measurement techniques. These
applications require a source of entangled photons, which act as bits of
information with interesting quantum properties, as well as circuits that can
manipulate and measure these photons. An almost unexplored approach is to
generate triplets of entangled photons in a single step. This scheme
significantly simplifies the generation of larger entangled states, enabling
exciting quantum experiments and filling a huge gap in the development of
quantum computers. In this project, the investigator and his students will use
titanium dioxide (TiO2) integrated photonic circuits to produce triplets in a
robust, scalable, and commercially viable format. Leveraging their expertise in
TiO2, nonlinear optics and integrated photonic devices, the group will develop a
source that directly produces entangled triplet photons at telecommunications
wavelengths. Maturation of TiO2 and photonic integrated quantum circuits will
move the field of quantum information science in the direction of
commercializable products. While advancing the discoveries in the fields
described above, this project will also contribute to the training of future
multidisciplinary scientists and engineers through research-based education of
undergraduate and graduate students. Quantum information technologies are a
driving force for the advancement of fundamental theories and can enable large-
scale secure networks, quantum information processors, and enhanced measurement
and lithographic techniques. Photonics is an ideal platform for such
technologies; however, the generation, manipulation, and detection of single and
entangled photons remain a challenge. While sources of spontaneous single and
pairs of photons are widespread, triplet-photon sources are almost completely
unexplored and represent the missing link for fundamental tests in quantum
theory and heralded photon pairs for quantum communication and computation.
Furthermore, a triplet-photon source significantly simplifies the generation of
larger entangled states. This project will seek to developm a source that can
directly produce entangled triplet photons at telecommunications wavelengths
(e.g., 1500 nm) at a rate of 4,000 triplets/sec (six orders of magnitude greater
than current experimental efforts) using third-order spontaneous parametric
down-conversion. By coupling to a resonant cavity, the group will further
enhance the emission rate by an additional order of magnitude and improve
spectral control. TiO2 is the ideal material for this process because of its
high transparency, large nonlinearity, high linear refractive indices, and
negligible fluorescence. The group will exploit the strong, sustained
nonlinearity and tight light-confinement in TiO2 devices to achieve
unprecedented triplet-photon generation rates directly on chip, where they can
readily be routed, manipulated, and then measured using integrated detectors.