* 1415895
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Time-resolved Studies of Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase Catalytic Mechanism Using Photoactive NADPH Analogues
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Linda Roman, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 03/31/2018
* USD 461,000.00

Dr. Linda Roman at the University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio,
USA, is supported by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, for an International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) award that
comprises an international collaboration with Dr. Anny Slama-Schwok, Professor
Joanne Xie and Dr. Eric Deprez, who will be supported by Agence Nationale de la
Recherche in France.

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Linda
Roman from the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio and Dr.
Jung Ja Kim from the Medical College of Wisconsin to develop probes for and
undertake an investigation of the mechanism of nitric oxide synthases. The
nitric oxide synthases (NOS) generate nitric oxide (NO), which plays key roles
in many physiological processes. The endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)
generates NO in the cardiovascular system, where it is a potent vasodilator.
Similarly, the neuronal isoform (nNOS) is involved in neurotransmission and
skeletal and cardiac muscle function, and the inducible NOS (iNOS) is expressed
in response to an immune challenge. The investigators will study the mechanism
of function of these enzymes with the use of customized photoactivatable probes.
The ability to modulate the activities of these enzymes will help elucidate
their physiological roles and regulation, as well as give insight into their
mechanisms. This pursuit will allow undergraduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to acquire specialized training in protein expression, purification,
characterization, and in the use of X-ray diffraction to determine the protein
structure. Specific compounds that bind to the NOSs will also be designed to
help achieve these goals, exposing trainees to synthetic chemistry techniques.

This project focuses on the use of novel photoactivatable NADPH analogues,
called nanotriggers (NTs), targeted to the NADPH site of nitric oxide synthase
(NOS) isoforms and cytochrome P450 reductase (POR), to elucidate the mechanism
of electron transfer through these enzymes as well as stabilize them in a closed
conformation, facilitating crystallization. This project will: (1) determine the
X-ray structure of various NT-protein complexes; (2) elucidate time-resolved
structure/function studies of the first catalytic steps by kinetics studies in
solution and time-resolved X-ray crystallography; (3) design novel isoform-
specific eNOS activators by in silico simulations; and (4) monitor eNOS
trafficking in cells by biphotonic excitation, due to the intrinsic imaging
properties and specificity of the NT probes. The photoactive tools to be
developed and characterized can trigger a specific catalytic event upon
irradiation with a laser pulse. The laser pulse occurs at zero time, allowing
for synchronization of initiation of catalysis, which can be monitored in a
time-resolved manner. This proposal will develop new tools for time-resolved
studies of selected proteins that overcome the limitation of slow (greater than
or equal to ms) diffusion of the probe by binding directly to the protein with
the ability to trigger catalysis by ultrafast electron injection to the protein.
This approach represents a new tool to synchronize an ensemble of enzymes in
solution induced by a laser pulse and represents an alternative to single
molecule studies.