* 1415502
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Periods of Automorphic Forms and Applications to L- Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Shou-wu Zhang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 183,806.00

This project centers around the interactions between periods of automorphic
forms, automorphic &lt;br/&gt;representations, and arithmetic algebraic
geometry. In particular the PIs propose to work on several problems on the
general derivative conjecture, analysis and arithmetic of Fourier coefficients
on exceptional groups, bounds on heights, computational study of nontempered
periods, averages/nonvanishing of derivatives of L-series. Recently the study of
periods has yielded new results and proofs about L-functions, breakthroughs
towards conjectures about algebraic cycles, and new perspectives on classical
questions of representation theory. Combined with other tools, periods have also
enhanced our understanding of equidistribution problems and topology on locally
symmetric spaces. The PIs are at the forefront of these developments. The
proposed framework presents an ambitious plan to work on and formulate
conjectures incorporating/connecting the recent groundbreaking works in these
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topic is central to several areas of
mathematics (arithmetic geometry, automorphic representation theory, analytic
number theory). A long range goal of the project is to establish a network of
scientists working in automorphic representations, number theory, and arithmetic
geometry. The PIs envision a group of PhD students and post-docs participating
actively in the proposed Research Retreats and Annual Workshops. This group
would include the 15 PhD students presently advised by the PIs.