* 1415954
* SBIR Phase I:  Object Pose Estimation System for Pick and Place Robots
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Brian Hargrave, Perception Robotics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2015
* USD 138,800.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will enable improved
cost-efficiency and industrial automation in manufacturing, increasing worker
productivity and reducing injuries. The end-users of the robots, i.e.,
automotive original-equipment-manufacturers and subassembly suppliers, will be
able to achieve significant cost advantages by automating new assembly tasks
with more inexpensive systems. Of the non-fatal injuries and illness cases
reported in the U.S. workforce, 43% of injuries were due to bodily
reaction/exertion, and 62% of illness cases were due to repetitive trauma. This
innovative solution will facilitate the automation of repetitive, injury-prone
manual tasks and greatly improve the speed, accuracy, and cost-efficiency of
current robotic handling systems. Beyond handling, there is significant market
potential in packaging and warehousing, hazardous materials handling, medical
device and other precision manufacturing, and military applications such as bomb
defusal and evacuation robots. By enabling new robotic applications and
increasing productivity in current automation, this sensor will help the U.S.
(and other developed economies) maintain a competitive domestic manufacturing
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project?s goal is to develop a visual-tactile sensing package for parts
handling. The solution is two-fold: (1) A new flexible tactile sensor that can
be tailored to a wide variety of form factors; (2) Software to fuse the tactile
data with a vision system to estimate pose of objects in pick-and-place tasks.
Object grasping and manipulation by robotic hands in unstructured environments
demands a sensor that is durable, compliant, and responsive to various force and
slip conditions. The goal is to be the first commercially available sensing
package that integrates tactile and visual data with accompanying software for
state estimation. A large software and gaming company was able to greatly impact
the machine vision space by introducing an inexpensive, easily calibrated robust
visual sensor; this will do the same for touch sensing ? our team has studied
the desirable properties of such tactile sensors for years and discovered a way
to produce them in an inexpensive, robust format.