* 1415041
* EAPSI: Comparisons of conditional associations to navigate spatial location
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Chad Ruprecht, Ruprecht                Chad           M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The ability to use cues to navigate through the environment is a trait shared by
mammals. This research focuses on spatial cognition procedures in two mammal
species (rats and humans) to explore similarities and differences in learning
and memory. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Tohru
Taniuchi, a noted expert in comparative psychology at Kanazwa University in
Japan. A major aim of the project is to explore conditional relations by setting
up experiments on either a two-dimensional touchscreen monitor (humans), three-
dimensional search task (humans), or an iPad equipped apparatus (rats). Making
species comparisons by exploring conditional relations during search tasks will
further elucidate the true psychological mechanism backing our species
extraordinary ability to navigate through space.

Aristotle pondered the concept of an association, contending that objects close
together in space tend to be associated together, however, considerably less is
known about how spatial information is encoded within a conditional relation.
This project will train rats and humans that the spatial location of a hidden
goal, in relation to the landmark, is entirely conditional on the conditional
cue paired with it. Transfer tests will pit pre-trained conditional cues with
landmarks differing from training, to assess the general excitatory, and spatial
properties of the conditional cue. The results will be discussed within the
backdrop of current configural and hierarchical accounts of conditional
relations. The findings of this project will be incorporated into educational
research examining why children have particular problems solving problems in
geometry and trigonometry: two subfields of mathematics that require both
conditional and spatial reasoning. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.