* 1415359
* STTR Phase I:  High-Performance Windows for Daylighting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Ann Anderson, Sunthru LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2015
* USD 224,840.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is in the development of energy-saving window
products that are aesthetically pleasing. Aerogel window products have the
potential to be transformative to the fenestration industry, due both to the
high translucency and low thermal conductivity of the aerogel materials and the
particular advantages of the fabrication method to be employed. The rapid
supercritical extraction process is an environmentally friendlier approach to
aerogel preparation than other methods currently used. Due to the high thermal
insulating ability of silica aerogels, constructing windows from these materials
will result in considerable energy savings compared to conventional windows. The
fact that the optical transmission properties of aerogel materials can be
tailored by varying the recipes used to prepare the aerogels can be exploited to
further improve energy efficiency. The energy savings resulting from
implementation of aerogel-based windows will be
significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will fund research in aerogel-based window commercialization.
The specific market opportunity addressed by this proposal is in daylighting,
where the goal is to provide window systems that allow natural light to be used
instead of electric lights. A key challenge in such applications is to also
reduce the heating and cooling costs. The low density, good optical translucency
and low thermal conductivity of silica aerogel materials make them particularly
attractive for these applications. The rapid supercritical extraction (RSCE)
method to be employed for fabricating aerogels has the following advantages: (a)
it can be easily automated; (b) it is fast; (c) it is environmentally friendlier
than other methods; (d) it minimizes the use of solvents; (e) it is potentially
less expensive than other methods, and (f) the process can produce large intact
aerogels. During the project, a range of window prototypes based on the RSCE
approach and tailored for desirable properties will be produced, and the
enhanced performance of these window prototypes demonstrated. The resulting
aerogel window products will offer end-use customers a higher value than current
daylighting products.