* 1415082
* Collaborative proposal: Workshop on Best Practices for Integrating the Social Sciences and Natural Sciences for Sustainability Research and Education
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Andrew Kliskey, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2015
* USD 13,745.00

This workshop brings together scholars who are doing research that involves
team-based, interdisciplinary, integrative research focused on the social
sciences in collaboration with natural sciences and engineering. The purpose is
to explore lessons learned from such research toward producing a report of best
practices for integrating the social sciences with the biophysical sciences,
mathematics, and engineering for sustainability science. The workshop explores
what works, what doesn't work and why in order to engage these leaders in
questions of how to best mentor emerging integrative scientists, to identify the
key technologies which are critical to enabling integrative sustainability
science and to provide structured guidance on how to integrate the social
sciences in sustainability research and education. These best practices are
directed at diverse audiences ranging from NSF and other funding program
decision makers to researchers and education experts engaged in sustainability
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability science encompasses a myriad range
of issues and processes that involve diverse aspects of the natural world and
the societies that are part of it. It is only through an understanding of these
latter phenomena that likely solutions will be derived. Moreover, the approaches
to sustainability science have to address the multitude of worldviews and values
that comprise the roots of the many challenges we currently face. To date, no
meeting has occurred in the Americas to clearly articulate what has become an
overwhelming call to find effective and powerful ways to incorporate the social
sciences, and an understanding of social dynamics, into sustainability science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve sustainability, decision makers must learn to
integrate knowledge and methods from the natural sciences, engineering, and the
social sciences. Solutions are neither purely technical nor socio-economic, but
involve bringing together best practices from all fields. This workshop is a
step toward learning how to do the necessary integration.