* 1415763
* Improved Dissemination of Global Crustal Model CRUST1.0
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* M. Gabrielle Laske, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2017
* USD 164,981.00

Earth's outermost layer, the crust, comprises a critical zone that participates
in and controls processes of Earth's deep interior as well as in the atmosphere.
Variations in crustal rocks influence Earth's magnetic field as well as gravity.
A good model of Earth's crust is therefore essential to understand a wide range
of applications including improved seismic imaging of Earth's mantle,
understanding the causes of Earth's topography and Earth dynamics, defining the
chemical make-up of Earth's crust and the recycling of these materials into the
mantle through plate tectonics, and ultimately understanding the linkage and
interaction of Earth's crust with its atmosphere processes. Last year, the PI
released CRUST1.0, a global model that is based on a large new database of
seismic data. In the past, the crustal models were used primarily by academic
investigators and their students, who are typically located at universities or
research institutions. But now there is an increasing traffic from non-
university locations, with an increasing interest from the industry. A growing
fraction of users appears to rely on a diverse set of computer programs to read
and work with the model. To respond the demands a web-based support will be
provided. At the same time, the model will be continuously improved by carefully
testing it against data collected in the field and making modifications when
necessary. This grant funds efforts to facilitate a wider circulation of the
evolving model through improved computer tools to read and visualize the model.

Global crustal model CRUST1.0 saw its release to the community earlier this
year, after several years of compiling and updating active and passive seismic
databases on crustal structure, and initial model validation against surface
wave data. This highly anticipated model replaces CRUST2.0 which has served as
the "benchmark crustal model" for over ten years in a diverse, interdisciplinary
community. CRUST2.0 was originally compiled to apply crustal corrections in
whole-mantle tomographic studies, in an era and area of academia where Fortran
computer code was the most widely used and understood tool to work with.
CRUST1.0 has a simpler, new file structure, and similar Fortran codes are
provided to un-pack the model. However, since its short existence as an open-
source model, requests have been overwhelming to provide more modern and "user-
friendly" tools to work with CRUST1.0. This grant helps design and provide such
tools. At the same time, user feedback will be responded to improve CRUST1.0
following a through validation process. During Phase 1 of the proposed work,
user requests will be responded to provide the model in various file formats,
including xyz files, binary grd files and ArcGIS files. Reading and
visualization tools will be developed for CRUST1.0 for a variety of platforms
such as c-shell scripts, Python, Matlab, GMT and ArcGIS. By providing the
proposed tools, CRUST1.0 will have a much wider reach than CRUST2.0 ever had.
During Phase 2, enhanced model validation will be performed using existing
crustal databases. Work during this phase will be used to employ and educate
undergraduate students. During Phase 3, user feedback as well as new constraints
from surface waves will be iteratively incorporated. The release of an update of
CRUST1.0 is anticipated that will have an improved consistency with active
seismic as well as passive seismic datasets.