* 1415244
* An Investigation of the Dynamic and Thermodynamic Processes that Lead to Distinctly Different Pathways to Tropical Cyclogenesis
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Melville Nicholls, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 366,549.00

The formation of tropical storms and hurricanes, known as tropical cyclogenesis,
is a complex process involving interactions between the large-scale environment
and a smaller-scale atmospheric disturbance passing through. There have been
multiple theories developed to try to describe the pathway that a disturbance
takes on its road to becoming a tropical storm. In this project, researchers
will use advanced, high-resolution numerical modeling to analyze the processes
involved in two of these pathways. Improved knowledge of how tropical cyclones
form will aid forecasters and improve public safety, especially in the cases
where small storms develop very close to populated areas. This award will also
provide a training opportunity for a graduate student.

The first pathway to tropical cyclogenesis is characterized by a spin up of
cyclonic surface winds and vorticity building in the center of deep convective
towers. The second is characterized by a mid-level vortex that is followed by a
small surface concentrated vortex near the center of the large scale
circulation. The research plan is to conduct idealized numerical experiments
using the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) with new riming and
surface flux schemes and the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model with
moving nested grids. The main objectives that the project will address are to:
1) Determine the physical mechanisms responsible for the development of strong
mid-level vortices and the conditions that favor their occurrence, 2) Identify
the processes leading to the formation of a small surface concentrated vortex,
and 3) Determine the effect of vertical wind shear, including a mean flow, on
the pathway taken to tropical cyclogenesis.