* 1415034
* EAPSI: Creating a Geographic Information Systems Database for the Otago Museum
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Herman Robles, Robles                  Herman         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The Otago Museum in Dunedin, New Zealand currently houses a collection of
obsidian artifacts that were once in the possession of ancestral South Island
Maori. Obsidian is a naturally occurring volcanic glass found in many countries
around the world that was fractured and used for blades, arrowheads, and
ornamental purposes by the ancestral Maori. Although the stone artifacts are
known to have been collected mostly in the South Island of the New Zealand
archipelago, there is not much information as to where the ancestors of South
Island Maori originally obtained the raw material to create the stone artifacts.
Using x-ray florescence (XRF) analysis to geochemically characterize the
obsidian, a pilot study will be performed on the collection of stone artifacts
to provide a source location of each object based on their geochemical
signature. In collaboration with Dr. Mark McCoy at the University of Otago in
Dunedin, New Zealand, this study will explore how spatial technology can be used
to make these collections more useful and accessible for research on ancient
trade and exchange to public education.

XRF will be used to non-destructively source the obsidian artifacts by way of
geochemistry to create a spatially referenced Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) database that will bring together all current knowledge of where each
piece was discovered. The GIS database will include +1,300 accessions that have
been donated to the museum by collectors and early archaeological excavations.
The GIS database will also provide a spatial reference to each artifacts
respective region while providing accessibility to the data for the general
public and descendant Maori populations for use in public education and
research. This database is the type of summary information that would come out
of a modern archaeological excavation. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.