* 1415659
* Superstring Theory, Gravitational Instantons and Black Hole Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Wafic Sabra, American University of Beirut
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the research of Wafic Sabra, from the American University of
Beirut (AUB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the success of the unification of the
fundamental particle interactions within the standard model, the most pressing
question in theoretical physics has since been the unification of the laws of
quantum mechanics with the theory of general relativity, as well as the
incorporation of quantum gravity with the other fundamental forces in a unified
theory. Superstring theory is the leading candidate for a consistent finite
theory unifying quantum gravity with the other forces of nature. The
phenomenology derived from superstrings may have relevance to the problems
encountered in the study of the black holes, particle physics and cosmology. In
recent years, a new picture has emerged pointing to the existence of a
fundamental theory, M-theory. Many theories behave very nicely if there is a
small parameter, since one can perturbatively expand in this parameter and make
sensible predictions. This new fundamental theory behaves like string theory at
the perturbative level, but at the nonperturbative level, in which there are no
small parameters, it has a rich structure of symmetries connecting perturbative
aspects of string theory to nonperturbative states. This project will study
gravitational backgrounds in these theories, focusing on black holes in higher
numbers of dimensional backgrounds. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
research will make it of benefit to both physicists and mathematicians working
in fields related to string theory and differential geometry. It will also help
in the development of the graduate programs in physics and mathematics at AUB,
and in introducing students to the frontiers of research, particularly in the
various fields of high energy physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M-theory
behaves like string theory at the perturbative level, but at the nonperturbative
level has a rich structure of duality symmetries connecting perturbative
excitations to solitonic states. A major development is the equivalence between
string theory on anti-de Sitter spaces and certain superconformal Yang-Mills
gauge theories living on the boundary of these spaces. This equivalence gave
more importance to the study of gravitational anti-de Sitter configurations as
they provide a tool to the study of quantum gauge field theories important for
particle physics. The main focus of Sabra's supported research is: a) The study
and the classification of supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric gravitational
backgrounds in various spacetime dimensions and in particular the search for
black rings in gauged supergravity models. b)The study of gravitational
instantons and their relation to integrable models, Einstein--Weyl structures
and black holes in higher dimensions as well as the interpretation of Euclidean
supergravity solutions in terms of string and M-theory. c) The development of
our understanding of the nonperturbative theory underlying string theory, and
incorporating this in the study of the phenomenological implications of string
theory to gravitational physics, particle physics and cosmology