* 1415639
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Membranes with Metal-Organic Frameworks for Carbon Dioxide Removal from Natural Gas
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Bee Ting Low, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to strengthen the
competitive position of membrane companies in the natural gas treatment market.
This would also allow users to benefit from the ease of processing and
environmental advantages offered by membranes at substantially reduced costs.
Natural gas processing to remove carbon dioxide and other contaminants is the
largest industrial gas separation application. At present, membrane processes
have 10% of the U.S. market of $1.2 billion. Amine absorption technology is the
current industry standard. But membranes provide both cost and environmental
advantages over amine absorption. The U.S. Energy Information Administration
projects a rapid rise in domestic natural gas production over the next two
decades. The expanding natural gas market presents a timely opportunity for
membrane companies to acquire a greater market share. Today's membranes lose too
much methane with the removed carbon dioxide. If more selective membranes could
be made, the process would be much more widely used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project work is targeted at
developing advanced membranes for natural gas purification. At the high
pressures and high CO2 concentrations in natural gas processing, the CO2/CH4
selectivity of commercial cellulose acetate membranes is 12 to 15. This modest
selectivity has limited the application of membranes. Better membranes with
higher CO2/CH4 selectivities are required. The objective of the proposed project
is to achieve a mixed-gas CO2/CH4 selectivity of 30 and CO2 permeance of 400
gpu, which would be more than twice the levels of separation currently available
from cellulose acetate membranes. To achieve this goal, we propose to use
polymer/metal-organic framework (MOF) hybrid materials to develop advanced
membranes for CO2/CH4 separation. Molecularly tailored MOFs will be added into
suitable polymer matrices, to enhance CO2/CH4 diffusivity selectivity or CO2/CH4
solubility selectivity. This project will make thin-film composite membranes
using different polymer/MOF combinations and evaluate the CO2/CH4 separation
properties. Successful development of polymer/MOF-membranes can significantly
reduce operating cost by 30 percent and capital cost by 40 percent. This could
be transformative in natural gas processing. The proposed technology can
potentially be extended to other applications such as hydrogen/carbon dioxide
and olefin/paraffin separations.