* 1415083
* EAPSI: Branding, business strategies, and economic change in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Peter Leykam, Leykam                  Peter
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

As the industrial manufacture that fueled Taiwan's rapid economic growth shifts
overseas, both the Taiwanese state and businesses are focusing on developing
brands. But, a brand isn't simply a different kind of product, it relies on an
expanded understanding of consumers, as well as design and marketing strategies,
legal frameworks, and distribution methods. Through researching the development
of Taiwanese brands, this research will provide a better understanding of
business strategies, social trends and economic policies necessary for
integrating developing economies into global markets. In collaboration with Teri
Silvio, an expert in Taiwanese toy design, at Academia Sinica's Institute of
Ethnology, this project looks branding in Taiwanese businesses to see how large
scale economic transformations are carried out in everyday life.

The ubiquity of branding makes it difficult to isolate what is unique to
branding as a business strategy, and as a way in which consumers interact with
commodities. This ethnographic research project will study societies where
branding is emerging to examine branding as a set of practices which both
respond to and enact social change; through reorganizing the design, production
and distribution of commodities; and through reorganizing social behavior around
commodities. Taiwan is ideal for studying branding, as many Taiwanese businesses
are moving from a strategy of subcontracting production for multinational
companies (MNCs) to the development of their own brands. This shift is driven
both by the profit seeking of individual businesses, and by the Taiwanese state,
which views the development of brands as essential to the national economy, as
the manufacturing jobs which fueled its economic growth for the last several
decades shift to China. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Science Council of Taiwan.