* 1415808
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Thin, Cooling Solutions for High Performance, Mobile Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Lilla Smith, ChillFlux, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2015
* USD 149,960.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to apply the novel
ultra-thin cooling technology beyond just mobile phones toward multiple mobile
platforms in the communications sector ? an area with several large, multi-
billion dollar markets, including tablets and ultrabooks. With the novel
technology's modular, scalable design for ease in manufacturing and bendability
for mounting into ultra-thin, tight spaces, the platform can also be adapted for
use in routers and other telecommunications hardware platforms. With data
centers, which are already shifting towards using mobile chip technologies to
increase energy efficiency and lower cost, this novel cooling technology, once
proven in mobile phones, stands to be adopted in this market as well. Overall,
multiple markets are in need of ultra-thin, high performance, but low cost
thermal solutions which the cooling technology being developed will be able to
address broadening its impact as a thermal management
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project works toward solving major problems in thermal management for mobile
chip sets with novel, ultra-thin cooling technology, the initial prototypes
which will be developed in Phase I. Current chipsets do not produce excessive
amounts of heat (less than 10W), but their location deep within the phone, and
proximity to plastic components with low thermal conductivity, makes it
difficult to dissipate heat. The cooling technology being ultra-thin at 500 um
or less and with the ability to be modularly integrated with the unique
characteristic of needing little to no changes to current phone topology is
ideal for mobile applications. It can connect with hard to reach hot chips, move
heat long distances, and evenly distribute heat along a low conductivity back
plate or case. To maintain comfort for device users, cooling technology being
developed would limit temperatures to 45°C at maximum performance, while still
being able to dissipate heat to ambient conditions, such as a hand or pants
pocket at around 30 degrees celsius.