* 1415944
* Collaborative:  International Deltas Meeting: Genesis, Dynamics, Modelling, and Sustainable Development
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2015
* Jeffrey Nittrouer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2015
* USD 32,561.00

This four-day international meeting will bring together 70 participants,
including leading experts on delta processes, promising up-and-coming
researchers, and graduate students, to present science and synthesize frontier
states of knowledge on physical and biological processes in deltaic systems. The
meeting will be in Istomino, Russia, on the shore of Lake Baikal and next to the
Selenga River delta, one of the world's largest freshwater deltas. The
overarching goal for this meeting is to promote discussion amongst international
and multidisciplinary scientists who focus on delta research, to describe recent
and ongoing scientific advancements, to pinpoint improvements needed, and to
foster near-future transformative delta research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to
their extraordinary natural resources and ecosystem services, river deltas have
fostered the development of past and present civilizations, and today host over
a half billion people. The sustainability of these coastal landscapes is far
from certain, however, due to strong anthropogenic influences including
sediment-supply reduction, subsidence from sub-surface fluid extraction,
leveeing, and sea-level rise. This international workshop will bring together a
multidisciplinary range of delta scientists to influence the delta research
agenda at a critical juncture for delta inhabitants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation of US scientists and students at the
workshop is jointly supported by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics program
in the Division of Earth Sciences and the International Science and Education
section of the Office of International and Integrated Activities.