* 1415628
* Realizing Quantum Memory for Light
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Rufus Cone, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,286.00

The rapidly developing field of quantum information science (QIS) employs the
unique properties of quantum systems to process, store, and transmit data in
ways that are impossible to achieve with classical information systems. For many
practical applications of QIS in quantum computing, secure communications,
quantum networks, and non-classical metrology, a "quantum memory" that is
capable of storing and retrieving quantum states on demand is an enabling
component urgently needed. Of all the optically addressed quantum memories being
investigated, rare-earth ions in crystals at cryogenic temperatures stand out as
one of the most promising light-matter interfaces that can store and recall the
quantum states of light with high fidelity, efficiency, and bandwidth. This
project focuses on the demonstration of efficient solid-state quantum memories
based on special rare-earth-activated crystals in collaboration with the
experimental quantum communication group of Prof. Wolfgang Tittel at the
University of Calgary, a world leader in quantum memory system development. The
broad goal of the work is to uniquely integrate understanding of fundamental
material physics with practical quantum optics to enable transformative advances
in solid-state quantum memories and realize all the requirements for
teleportation of quantum states between light and matter. Quantum memories that
enable long distance quantum key distribution are of strategic importance for
transmitting confidential information in a way that remains secure far into the
future. The group will study the intrinsic material properties, manipulate the
nanoscale material dynamics that cause decoherence in the memory, and
characterize the material performance in actual quantum memory demonstrations to
guide and validate the system optimization process. A central objective is to
increase the direct storage time of entangled photons to the hundreds of
microseconds required for practical long-distance quantum communications and for
other quantum information systems. Fundamental advances in the exceptional,
high-quality, rare-earth-activated materials pursued in this project have direct
applications in a broad range of other rare-earth-enabled photonic technologies
including classical optical signal processing, ultra-stable optical clocks, and
solid-state lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reviews highlight the importance
of rare earth ion ensembles in demonstrations of robust quantum memories for
light. These solid-state systems store and recall quantum states of light with
high fidelity and are competitive with or better than alternative approaches.
Analysis and demonstrations have shown that rare-earth systems offer the
potential to simultaneously achieve massively multimode quantum storage
(spatial, temporal, spectral, and polarization) with &gt;90% efficiency, &gt;95%
fidelity, and GHz access bandwidths. Quantum memories that simultaneously
satisfy all these properties are critical in the race to develop quantum
networks, long-distance quantum communication and quantum cryptography, and
linear optics quantum computing. In recent demonstrations of a high-fidelity
solid-state waveguide quantum memory for entangled photons by Tittel, et al.
(Nature, 2011), the total system recall efficiency was limited by decoherence
and population relaxation in the Tm3+-doped storage material. In this one year
effort, the group will build on recent successes in increasing quantum memory
material performance to achieve a major new milestone of a 500 microsecond
direct storage time in integrated solid-state quantum memory using
Tm3+-activated crystals such as LiNbO3, LiTaO3, Y3Al5O12, and Y3Ga5O12 that
operate at wavelengths near 795 nanometers. This project combines experimental
study of optical decoherence with theoretical modeling of the material physics
and quantum memory demonstrations in collaboration with Professor Wolfgang
Tittel at the University of Calgary to reveal and control mechanisms for excess
decoherence that limit current material performance. This collaboration combines
expertise ranging from solid-state chemistry, optical material characterization,
non-linear optics, and quantum information science, and is essential to achieve
major advances in solid-state quantum memory materials. These studies uniquely
enable improvements in performance through routes including new chemical
compositions, improved quantum storage protocols, alternate crystal fabrication
processes, and manipulation of ion-ion and spin-ion dynamics.