* 1415417
* SEES Fellowship: Integrating Computational Toxicology and Green Chemistry to design inherently safer functional replacements for harmful industrial chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Martin Mulvihill, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2017
* USD 504,512.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project focuses on
sustainable materials, with a multidisciplinary approach combining chemistry and
toxicology. This integrated approach to sustainable chemical development will
provide the Fellow with tools and experiences to make fundamentally better
molecules and materials. This approach enables new classes of safer chemicals to
be characterized and preferentially adopted early during the design process. The
products of this research will be disseminated to students through the Berkeley
Center for Green Chemistry (BCGC) Greener Solutions Program and to relevant
industry partners through the BCGC Consortium Program and the UC Berkeley
Industry Research Alliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greater than 95% of synthetic
chemicals and materials are petroleum-based, the vast majority of which are
built around a relatively small subset of roughly 140 petroleum-derived
feedstock chemicals. The environmental and health costs of using non-renewable
and often toxic petrochemical feedstocks and their derivatives are high.
Renewable chemicals with desired functions that also lack the disadvantages of
conventional petrochemical-based chemicals are urgently needed. Biological
molecules are an attractive pool of feedstock molecules. Due to their structural
and chemical diversity relative to petroleum feedstock molecules, there may be
molecules that are functionally equivalent to toxic petroleum molecules yet have
fewer negative attributes than their conventional counterparts. This fellowship
builds on existing partnerships between professors Chris Vulpe and Dale Johnson
in the Molecular Toxicology graduate program at UC Berkeley and the Chemists
working with the Berkeley Center for Green Chemistry. In addition to bridging
chemistry and toxicology, the molecules and approaches identified in this work
will be evaluated by Rui Resendes at the GreenCentre Canada, to assess their
commercial viability. By combining state of the art computational tools with
basic statistical analysis it will be possible to rapidly screen large data sets
and uncover new classes of biological molecules that share essential functional
properties with the current generation of industrial chemicals. As promising
candidate molecules are identified, they will be screened against relevant human
and environmental health hazards. The work combines chemistry and toxicology to
discover and characterize chemicals that are fundamentally safer and perform a
range of industrial functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develosp tools
that identify and transition inherently more sustainable chemistries into the
market. The results of this research will be leveraged by interactions with the
Berkeley Center for Green Chemistry (BCGC) which interacts with stakeholders
across chemically intensive supply chains. The current market lacks clear tools
for identifying chemical hazards early during the design process leading to
regrettable substitutes. This fellowship will develop ties between academia and
external entrepreneurs who have experience taking green technologies to scale in
the market place. This partnership will promote early stage techno-
economic&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of innovations and translate basic science to
influence industrial chemical selection. The range of professional development
and industry interactions will ensure that the technologies and insights gained
as a part of this fellowship are translated into the broader stakeholder
community.