* 1415189
* SEES Fellows: Synthesis of a New Class of Thermostable Proton Conducting Materials to Enable High Efficiency Hydrogen Fuel Cells
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Reuben Hudson, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 392,421.00

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish herself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This SEES Fellowship
project focuses on the development of sustainable alternative fuels for
automobiles. Partnerships and activities in this project will broaden the reach
of the research and help advance the PI's career development. For example, the
Warner Babcock Institute brings expertise with commercialization of sustainable
innovation; Eric Beckman will provide knowledge of life cycle assessment, and
Beyond Benign will help with K-12 outreach. The PI will teach a course on green
chemistry as well as lead a summer module on the subject as part of a summer
bridge program for underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific core of the project is on the creation of new materials for high-
efficiency fuel cells. The production and combustion of gasoline for use in
domestic automobiles continues to be a worldwide source of global carbon
emissions and driver of fossil fuel demand. Long term controls on atmospheric
carbon levels will require the commercial implementation of nonpolluting
alternative technologies that rely on readily available and renewable fuel
sources. This project is focused on the creation of new polymer electrolyte
membranes (PEMs) that will enable the development of viable automotive hydrogen
fuel cells. The project includes synthesis, characterization, and potential
commercialization of poly(meta-phenylene oxides) for use as proton conducting
membranes in automotive fuel cells. Sulfonation of poly(para-phenylene oxides)
(PPO) has yielded materials with proton conductivties similar to Dupont's
nafion, but the viability of sulfonated PPO or the related polymers PES and PEEK
for fuel cell applications is limited due to their susceptibility to oxidative
degradation. Recent research in the host mentor's lab elucidated a novel route
to more oxidatively robust meta-linked aryl ethers via an SNAr step-growth
mechanism. With these poly(meta-phenylene oxides) now readily available for the
first time, the PI proposes to create sulfonated, carboxylated, alkylated, and
basic-residue-tagged poly(meta-phenylene oxides), to optimize the construction
of such materials, and to measure and maximize their ion conduction capacity for
application in fuel cells. The co-polymerization of two inexpensive,
functionalizable monomers, a 1,3-diphenol (a biorenewable feedstock) and a
1,3-benzenedihalide (or heteroaromatic analogue) presents the opportunity to
easily incorporate multiple functional groups with minimal synthetic effort and
waste. In order to evaluate the industrial viability of these materials for
commercial application, the PI will perform life cycle and market
analyses.Research by the PI/SEES Fellow and undergraduate students in the host
mentor's lab would entail synthesis of functionalized poly(meta-phenylene
oxides) and spectroscopic/materials analysis, such as measuring thermal
stability and phase transition behavior. Collaboration with the partner mentor
will focus on more sophisticated materials and applications analyses, such as
ion conduction measurements, oxidative stability, chemical degradation pathways,
and membrane preparation. The proposed activities include high impact research
in organic synthesis and polymer chemistry by creating materials in a
sustainable way that can be used in society's push for cleaner fuel sources. The
PI will seek to communicate this research to the scientific community, industry,
K-12 students, undergraduate and public audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colby
College is keen to recruit and retain a racially and ethnically diverse student
body, especially within the sciences. With the understanding that early and
continued research activities positively influence students to follow career
paths in science, faculty at Colby created the Colby Achievement Program in
Sciences (CAPS), a research-based summer bridge program for incoming first-year
students of African American, Latino/a, and Native American backgrounds. The
summer program combines coursework and research directly with faculty in the
summer before the first year, and fosters relationships with faculty and staff
that persist upon matriculation. The program takes the form of thematic 1-week
research modules conducted by faculty with the entire CAPS class. During the
grant period, the PI will lead a green chemistry module as part of the CAPS
program, as well as teach an upper-level course on the same subject during the
academic semester. The PI would further broaden the reach of the work by
partnering with Beyond Benign for K-12 and public outreach. In order to engage a
larger public audience, the PI will seek to help students publish in local
newspapers stories that they write for class about principles of green chemistry
being adopted in the local business community.