* 1415388
* SuperCDMS SNOLAB
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2023
* Betty Young, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* William Wester
* 04/30/2023
* USD 13,603,049.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration
has pioneered the use of low temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the
rare scattering of WIMPs on nuclei and distinguish them from backgrounds. This
work will have a broad impact which extends beyond a dark matter search. The
technical developments will further advance phonon-mediated detectors, which
have already found many applications in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for the design
and fabrication of a next-generation (G2) experiment, SuperCDMS SNOLAB, which
will operate at the deepest large clean underground laboratory in the world. The
high background rejection and control of contamination that the SuperCDMS
technology offers provide significant advantages compared to other technologies.
The baseline design for this new experiment will deploy an initial 50 kg payload
of germanium (Ge) and silicon (Si) detectors. Some of these detectors will be
operated in a manner that provides very low energy thresholds and thus world-
leading sensitivity to the lowest dark matter particle masses (&lt; 0.5 GeV) and
multiple-target complementarity in a single experiment. It will provide a strong
possibility of the discovery of particle dark matter and detailed information on
its properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will also contribute to the
training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers,
using techniques at the leading edge of measurement technologies. SuperCDMS
scientists will continue their involvement in public outreach, collaboration
with K-12 teachers, and support for Berkeley physics majors who are training to
teach science and for promising high school students from underserved
backgrounds.