* 1415321
* Perovskite and post-perovskite in the (Mg,Fe)GeO3 system
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Thomas Duffy, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The geological activity at Earth's surface that can so profoundly affect
humanity ultimately arises from on-going processes within the deep interior.
These large-scale processes are in turn controlled by the properties of the
constituent materials of the deep Earth. A mineral's crystal structure is its
most fundamental characteristic, from which all other physical and chemical
properties follow. Due to the incredibly high pressures (millions of
atmospheres) and temperatures (thousands of degrees) of the deep Earth, our
knowledge of the crystal structures of minerals residing near the base of
Earth's mantle remains far from complete. This region of the Earth is primarily
composed of silicate minerals that adopt structures known as perovskite and post
perovskite. In this project, the PI will conduct laboratory experiments to probe
the basic structural properties of magnesium iron germanates, a class of
compounds that serve as close analogs for the silicate minerals of the deep
Earth, but which can be studied at lower pressures and temperatures which are
more easily attainable in the laboratory. Through this work, he and his team
will provide fundamental knowledge of mineral crystal structures and properties
that are needed to understand and interpret geophysical observations of the
Earth's interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Earth's deep lower mantle is key for
understanding the overall structure, dynamics, and evolution of the planet.
Seismic evidence indicates this region exhibits considerable chemical
heterogeneity as exemplified by features such as large low shear velocity
provinces, ultra-low velocity zones, and the complexity of the core-mantle
boundary region. The PI will conduct high-pressure X-ray experiments on Fe-
bearing compositions in the (Mg,Fe)GeO3 system, an analog for the silicates of
the deep mantle. The advantage of this system is that the perovskite to post-
perovskite transition occurs at much lower pressure for germanates, allowing the
team to avoid or reduce the experimental complications that plague silicate
studies at ultrahigh pressures. They will use the laser-heated diamond anvil
cell to carry out a series of synchrotron-based studies of the crystal
structure, equation of state, electronic configuration, and local environment of
iron in germanates with the perovskite and post-perovskite structures. The
results will lead to a better understanding of how iron content affects
mineralogical behavior in these phases and will directly impact the fields of
seismology, petrology, geodynamics, geochemistry, and mineralogy.