* 1415974
* Investigations on the Nature of Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Paolo Gondolo, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor Paolo Gondolo at the University of
Utah. The central question addressed in the research is the nature of dark
matter, a mysterious substance introduced to explain the measured motion of gas
and stars in galaxies, the gravitational force in galaxy clusters, and the
formation of galaxies out of the tiny lumps observed in the early universe. It
has by now been established that dark matter cannot be made of any known
particles. Many theoretical ideas exist for dark matter as a new elementary
particle, and many experiments are being performed to test these theories.
Professor Gondolo's group studies some of these theories, with the aim of
understanding their validity and the ways to test them, and at the same time
providing the science community with publicly-accessible assessment tools of
theories and experiments. The discovery of dark matter particles, and therefore
the direct confirmation of the existence of dark matter, would be a completion
of the Copernican revolution, and would be the empirical foundation that the
material substance humans are made of is only a minority component of the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the research funded by this award
addresses the question of the nature of dark matter by (1) providing state-of-
the-art and user-friendly software tools to the particle dark matter community
for the computation of cosmic densities and direct and indirect signals from
generic models of weakly-interacting massive particles, (2) assess the nuclear
physics uncertainties in the predictions of galactic cosmic ray fluxes as
backgrounds to the indirect detection of dark matter particles, (3) supply
proper statistical meaning to astrophysics-independent analyses of direct dark
matter detection data, and (4) unify and complete the theory of generic dark
matter scattering off atomic nuclei. The educational component of this award
continues a very successful physics outreach program at the local museum and in
local schools, seeking to attract young students to science in a fun, energetic,
and engaging way so as to ultimately increase the number of responsible citizens
and leaders who can address the major issues of our time with basic knowledge of
science.