* 1415543
* Upgrade of community-orientated ICP-MS facilities for teaching and research at the University of Michigan
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Ingrid Hendy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 534,820.00

This award will provide funds to replace the 12 year old, collectively-owned,
community-based High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
(HR-ICP-MS). Updating the ICP-MS facilities at the University of Michigan will
provide both traditional and novel tools to understanding surface geology,
marine systems, environmental science, regional climate and subglacial
processes, and will be a significant infrastructure improvement to the
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. Continued infrastructure support
to the University of Michigan will also be a resource to other local
universities in the SE Michigan region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects
supported by the updating and retooling of HR-ICP-MS capabilities include: trace
element geochemistry of marine sediments and carbonate archives to determine
past environments and anthropogenic influence including proxy records of
droughts, floods, ocean-atmosphere dynamics and sea surface temperature; trace
and REE geochemistry of terrestrial sediments, paleosols and ancient sedimentary
units, to reconstruct paleo-redox, ancient atmospheric CO2, and basin
environments; major and trace element concentrations to elucidate factors
controlling spatial and temporal variations in chemical fluxes from glaciated
terrains; radioactive heavy isotope concentrations to accurately determine the
age of the deepest ice within ice sheets; radioactive isotope concentrations by
isotope dilution, as part of the U-Th/He thermochronology method used to study
young tectonic histories and climate-tectonic interactions; the geochemistry of
biological material from fossils to proteins; and the biogeochemistry of trace
metals, including the release, transport and bioaccumulation of metals within
the environment.