* 1415077
* EAPSI: Physical causal reasoning in Chinese and American 4- and 6-year-olds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Adrienne Wente, Wente                   Adrienne       O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The world we live in is composed of physical causality. For example, a ball
moves towards another ball, the balls collide, and both roll in opposite
directions. Children must form models or theories of causation to understand how
the world works. Cross-cultural psychologists and social anthropologists have
found that causal models are culturally influenced. In particular, individuals
from western cultures engage in an analytic style of reasoning, and place a
greater emphasis on a focal object, whereas individuals from East Asian cultures
engage in a holistic style of reasoning, and take into account the
relationship(s) between the object and its context. While cultural differences
in physical causal models have been studied in adults, developmental
psychologists have not yet explored when in childhood they emerge. In
collaboration with Dr. Zhu at the Chinese Academy of Sciences this project will
explore the influence of culture on the development of physical causal reasoning
in American and Chinese 4- and 6-year-olds.

Children from the two cultures will be shown covariation patterns that contain a
focal object that either sticks or does not stick to a contextual object.
Covariation information will be manipulated to imply that either the focal or
contextual object causes the sticking. Following observation, children will be
asked to explain why the objects stuck or did not stick. Explanations will be
coded as referencing contextual or focal factors, and compared across cultures
and ages. Researchers hypothesize an age by culture interaction. Specifically
they predict that 4-year-olds will be more sensitive to covariation patterns
than 6-year-olds, and provide explanations reflecting the information they
observed. Six-year-olds, on the other hand, will be more likely to disregard the
covariation evidence and instead provide explanation types consistent with their
cultures. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.