* 1415656
* New Tools for Radiative Neutron Capture in Stars and on Earth
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Akram Zhanov, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Neutron capture in stars leading to the formation of heavy elements, as well as
nucleon induced fission, are at the forefront of nuclear physics research.
Because the neutron lacks charge, reactions with free neutrons are very
difficult, and popular tools such as deuteron stripping (d,p) reactions are
often used instead. The neutron inside the deuteron is bound and its energy,
momentum, and angular momentum do not directly relate to the same quantities for
a free neutron. Hence, the development of advanced (d,p) theory is critical for
the success of many experimental programs at existing and future radioactive
beam facilities. The overarching objective of this project is to advance the
theory of deuteron stripping reactions leading to bound states and resonances,
providing reliable connections between (d,p) reaction cross sections and the
corresponding (direct or resonant) neutron capture cross sections on unstable
nuclei. In this project the investigators will develop publicly available
computer codes that will aid in the interpretation of low-energy experiments at
radioactive beam facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simple transfer reactions such
as deuteron stripping (d,p) reactions carry many of the basic features of
rearrangement reactions induced by heavier nuclei. They provide a unique tool
for extracting nuclear information for neutron capture identified as one of the
crucial inputs needed for nuclear astrophysics and applied physics studies, such
as in advanced fuel cycles, nuclear energy and nuclear safety applications, and
nuclear stockpile stewardship. Advanced reaction theory is the key to connecting
(d,p) cross sections to neutron capture cross sections. This project is devoted
to advancing low-energy reaction theory. The investigators will focus on
obtaining accurate solutions of the generalized three-body Faddeev integral
equations including explicitly the Coulomb interaction between nuclei. This
project will provide training opportunities for students, who will have the
chance to work on cutting-edge theoretical and computational developments of
great importance for the future of nuclear physics.