* 1415604
* Dimensions:   Genomics, functional roles, and diversity of the symbiotic gut microbiotae of honey bees and bumble bees
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Nancy Moran, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,053,773.00

Microbial gut symbionts are essential for the life of most animal species, but
their diversity and functions in hosts and their responses to ecological
disturbance are poorly understood. Apis mellifera, the honeybee, possesses a
distinctive set of about eight symbiotic bacterial species; some of these also
occur in other Apis species and in the related genus Bombus (bumblebees). This
study integrates the genomic, taxonomic and functional dimensions of the
biodiversity of gut symbionts in these bees. The research will determine genome
sequences and metabolic capabilities for these bacterial species and probe how
their abundances and gene expression respond when hosts are subjected to
different environments. The consequences of altered microbiota for host fitness
will be experimentally assessed under nutrient stress and pathogen challenge.
The study will also characterize the taxonomic composition of the microbiota of
Bombus and Apis species collected globally, with emphasis on North America and
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These pollinator species have immense economic,
ecological, and agricultural importance; this project will provide new insights
into their ecological resilience as mediated by their gut microbes. The data
will inform bee conservation and land management policies. This effort will also
establish a collaborative exchange with Chinese scientists. Several US students,
at different levels, will be trained. High school student researchers and
educational activities will be sponsored through the Peabody Museum in New
Haven, CT. A large global collection of cryopreserved bees will be established
to serve as a reference resource for future changes in bee populations. Overall,
this research will provide novel insights into the biology of these important
pollinators and their symbiotic microbial biodiversity.