* 1415092
* EAPSI: Understanding the origins and global threat of white-nose syndrome in Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Joseph Hoyt, Hoyt                    Joseph         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The fungal pathogen associated with the disease white-nose syndrome,
Pseudogymnoascus destructans, has caused catastrophic declines in hibernating
bat populations across eastern North America. This disease now threatens several
species in the United States and Canada. The current known distribution of P.
destructans includes a large portion of the European continent, but bat
populations in Europe have not experienced the same declines as bats in North
America. The pathogen is now believed to have long coexistence with European
bats, but has only recently been introduced to the United States. No one knows
whether P. destructans exists in temperate Asia. Determining the global
distribution of P. destructans is important for understanding the origins and
global threat of white-nose syndrome. Conditions in China are suitable for
pathogen growth and spread, and large numbers of hibernating bats exist in cave
habitats in China. In this study P. destructans will be sampled across
northeastern China in collaboration with Professor Jiang Feng at Northeast
Normal University, a leading expert in bat ecology in China.

Up to 10 caves and mines where bats hibernate during winter across northeastern
China for P. destructans will be explored. Samples will be collected from soil
and wall substrate, specifically targeting locations where bats roost during
winter. Using molecular techniques, samples will be tested at Northeast Normal
University for the DNA of P. destructans. Presence of P. destructans in China
will show a broad distribution of this pathogen in temperate climates across the
Euro-Asian continent. Alternatively, if P. destructans is not present in China,
the introduction of this pathogen could pose a major threat to Chinese bat
populations. This study will provide critical information on the global risk of
human-mediated movement through international caving expeditions of P.
destructans to Asia. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.