* 1415103
* EAPSI: Identifying the feasibility and cost effectiveness of ozone as a treatment technology in water reuse systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Erica Marti, Marti                   Erica          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Water reuse refers to the advanced treatment of wastewater for intentional reuse
options, such as irrigation or drinking water, and it is usually associated with
water scarcity. Some water contaminants occur as a result of disinfection. N-
Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) is one of those contaminants of particular concern
for potable water reuse as drinking water, since it is believed to be a
carcinogen or cancer-causing agent. This research will investigate the use of
ozone to reduce NDMA formation in water reuse systems. Australia is a leader in
water reuse projects, which is in part due to their arid climate and limited
water supply. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Drs. Jeff
Charrois and Cynthia Joll, who are noted experts on NDMA and water reuse, at
Curtin University in Australia. Ozone is an effective treatment for
disinfection, non-selective destruction of potentially harmful organic
compounds, and removal of taste, odor and color. However, some treated
wastewaters contain compounds that react with ozone to directly form NDMA during
treatment. Since the compounds or precursors that form NDMA with ozonation are
not well established, the only way to determine the potential for NDMA formation
is through direct testing. At this time, Australian water reuse projects do not
use ozone as a treatment step. The aims of this research are to 1) determine the
potential of Australian wastewaters for direct NDMA formation with ozone, 2)
investigate pre-chlorination as a strategy to reduce NDMA formation with ozone,
and 3) evaluate the cost and efficiency of different water reuse treatment
scenarios, with and without ozone, for NDMA removal. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.