* 1415069
* EAPSI: Searching for links between protozoan communities and changes in nutrient availability over time in Antarctic Dry Valley soils
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Andrew Thompson, Thompson                Andrew         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Many protozoa have been shown to play a major role in regulating metabolism in
bacteria, which is central to nutrient cycling in virtually all ecosystems on
Earth. All organisms depend on these cycling processes, and thus protozoa are
integral to the continual existence of life on earth. Understanding which
species of protozoa play which role in nutrient cycling will result in more
accurate environmental models, a greater ability to manipulate microbial
communities in bioreactors, an improved understanding of ecosystem engineering,
and aid projects aimed at increasing agricultural productivity. Because the
ecology of microbial communities is usually highly complex, this project will
use soils from the relatively simple ecosystems of the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV)
in Antarctica to explore the relationship between protozoan communities and
nutrient cycling. Dr. Craig Cary at the University of Waikato in Hamilton, New
Zealand is accomplished at characterizing microbial communities in Antarctic
environments and has access to unique microcosms that will be essential for this
project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Antarctic soil will be incubated in artificial
soil microcosms for an extended period of time to capture the dynamics of a
community in nature. Changes in protozoan and bacterial community structure will
be subsampled and sequenced at prescribed intervals. Soil geochemistry and
nutrient concentration will be analyzed to link nutrient availability to
community composition. To provide context for the incubation experiment,
environmental DNA from diverse locations and a range of soil chemistries will
also be target-sequenced. Significance of bacterial and protozoan species
correlation will be inferred using multidimensional scaling (MDS). These data
will elucidate habitat suitability models for MDV protozoa, clarifying which
elements of the community are driven by abiotic or biotic constraints,
respectively. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with Royal Society
of New Zealand.