* 1415813
* SBIR Phase I:  Geometric System for Music Composition
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Mark Strachan, CodeSource Software Corp
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 179,999.00

This SBIR project's broader and commercial impact of this project is a benefit
to society, because it will help more people learn and experience music in a new
and fun way. This project will share concepts from upper division and graduate
mathematics graphically with the general public. By helping people through the
learning curve for music writing, it opens up commercial potential for new
economic interactions?allowing users to sell each other content they create. The
marketplace for online music applications has grown by a factor of 10 in the
last 2 years. As an example, one major music application now has 250 million
users, up from 10 million users 2 years ago. This project provides an
opportunity to compete in this space. This project can impact society by helping
transform the internet from a market of advertisers to a more desirable market
of content producers, and simultaneously advance the state of the art in
distributed computing.

This SBIR project addresses the following problem: to write music, students must
learn to understand music notation. Music notation is based on a centuries old
system which obfuscates the mathematical structures present in music, and
complicates the learning process. This project advances the knowledge of the
student and/or composer using 3 dimensional views and color systems to construct
a higher dimensional spatial representation of music. This representation
removes obfuscations, and enables user interfaces for intuitive musical
expression, helping the student learn faster. The research objectives for are to
complete the user interface design to enable artistic expression through the
tool, to identify software architecture features for optimal system performance,
to design and partition a domain and data model to enable user to user commerce
across the cloud and social network, and to define appropriate interface points
to external systems for full functionality. Research will consist of
mathematical modeling by the principal investigator, combined with graphic
design for user interfaces by a senior investigator. These results will refine
and integrate with existing and new interfaces for the system, in a prototyping
process. The results of the research should include a completed system
specification and/or system prototype.