* 1415790
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a transgenic hypoallergenic peanut
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Hortense Dodo, NgateGen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to produce and commercialize a hypoallergenic
peanut. This new peanut variety will provide broad and efficient protection
against peanut allergy at low cost to individuals at risk; i.e., individuals who
are clinically declared to be allergic to peanut as well as those who might not
be aware yet of their sensitivity to peanut. The hypoallergenic peanut is
expected to: 1) Reduce the incidence of peanut allergy and save the lives of
individuals who are severely allergic to peanut; 2) Eliminate emotional distress
of peanut allergic individuals and their families; 3) Reduce the cost of law
suits resulting from peanut allergy; and 4) Gain back the loss endured by the
peanut market and improve the U.S. competitive edge in the international arena.
Food allergies cost the U.S. $25 billion annually and peanut is a major
contributor. This project will bring a significant solution to this problem and
reduce the overall cost of food allergy.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a transgenic hypoallergenic peanut
that produces a homogeneous population of hypoallergenic peanut seeds. Peanut
allergy is on the increase and affects over 8% of U.S. infants and children.
Currently, there is no cure for peanut allergy and epinephrine is administered
as emergency treatment. RNA interference (RNAi) technology was used to down
regulate the most important and potent allergens, and resulted in significant
reduction in peanut allergenic potency. However, the peanut seed populations
displayed variable levels of allergenic potency. This was attributed to
chimerism in the transgenic plants. Friable embryogenic callus (FEC) reduces the
risks of generating chimeric transgenic plants. The objectives of this Phase I
project are: 1) To transform peanut FEC using Agrobacterium tumefaciens; 2) To
perform molecular analyses on transgenic regenerants (T0) and determine
integrity and stability of the transgene in the peanut genome; and 3) To perform
molecular and immunological analyses on resulting T1 seeds to determine the
level of allergenic potency. It is expected that at the end of this SBIR Phase I
project, at least one transgenic peanut line with homogeneous populations of
hypoallergenic seeds will be selected as commercial prototype for further
analysis and mass propagation.