* 1415548
* Hidden Particles in Weak Scale Physics and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2017
* Matthew Reece, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 149,323.00

This award funds the activities of Professor Matthew Reece at Harvard
University.

The Standard Model of particle physics was developed nearly forty years ago and
explains the vast majority of experimental data at distances as small as one
one-thousandth the size of a proton. Nonetheless, it leaves behind many
mysteries. Why is the gravitational force between two fundamental particles
vastly weaker than the other forces? What is the dark matter that is far more
prevalent in our universe than normal matter, but transparent to light and so
far detected only through its gravitational effects? This research aims to
provide theoretical support to the diverse experimental programs that are
probing these and other questions. It will propose new strategies for analyzing
data and extracting signals from the huge backgrounds present at the Large
Hadron Collider experiments. This research will also build new models that will
highlight discovery opportunities that current experimental searches may be
missing. It will also study the implications of new experimental results for
important paradigms like naturalness, which have shaped theoretical physics but
still require a confrontation with experiment. The broader impact of this
proposal will be include serving as a resource for local high school physics
teachers and helping to communicate recent discoveries in physics to young
students. By working with the existing, successful outreach program Physics
Theorynet, which has built connections with Boston-area high schools, the PI
will visit local high schools to answer student questions, explain the interplay
between theory and experiment that goes into developments like the Higgs
discoveries, and help students understand the career options available to them
in science.

The research supported by this award will proceed in several interconnected
directions. It will assess the status of scenarios for natural supersymmetric
theories, including the class of models called Stealth Supersymmetry developed
by the PI. This will be done through simulation of the predictions of these
models for existing LHC searches and through planning of how new, focused
searches could better test these models. It will also assess the status of
cosmology and dark matter in fine-tuned supersymmetric models, and develop a
better understanding of how R-parity violation could evade overproduction of
dark matter in scenarios with low-scale reheating temperatures. The research
will help to ensure that the LHC experiments do not overlook possible long-lived
particles, which could reveal the existence of new, higher scales to motivate
future experiments. It will also study the connection between possible indirect
detection signals of dark matter from space and hidden-sector physics that can
be probed in high-precision terrestrial experiments. The PI will also study
aspects of quantum field theory underlying all of these topics. By working on a
broad research program, the PI will provide theoretical tools to maximize the
impact of our very exciting, data-rich era.