* 1415009
* EAPSI: Mitigating earthquake induced failure and improving economic viability of steel special moment frames
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Brandon Price, Price                   Brandon        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Steel Special Moment Frames (SMFs) are one of the most commonly used systems to
mitigate the effects of earthquakes throughout the world. After the 1994
Northridge and 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquakes, severe damage to steel moment
frames, in particular the connections between the beams and columns, was
observed. Previous research stated that hollow structural sections (HSS)
increase the efficiency of columns in SMFs, but this configuration can be
particularly difficult because of the geometry of hollow structural sections.
There is a need for a simplistic, economically viable connection detail that
performs adequately under seismic excitation. The first phase of this project
will focus on the enhancement of beam-to-column connections between HSS columns
and wide-flange beams. The second phase will be an investigation into the
elimination of welding in beam-splices by utilization of a specialized adhesive.
This project will be a collaborative effort with Dr. Taichiro Okazaki, a
renowned expert in the area of steel structure beam-to-column connections,
structural mechanics, and earthquake engineering at Hokkaido University in
Japan.

Beam-to-column sub-assemblage specimens will be tested using a quasi-static
loading protocol, simulating the effects of seismic excitation on SMFs.
Subsequent tests will be carried out to improve the performance of the
connection and mitigate the effects of plastic flow restraint and low-cycle
fatigue. Then, the results will be analyzed and used to develop a pre-qualified
moment connection. In addition, wide-flange adhesive beam-splices will be tested
under both three and four point bending. The results of the tests will be used
to derive a design equation for the interaction of shear force and bending
moment. The NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.