* 1415111
* EAPSI: Computer simulations of dark matter with an altered gravitational attraction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Kevin Croker, Croker                  Kevin          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Physicists and astronomers have conclusively determined that a large percent of
the matter within our universe is dark and of unknown composition. While
computer simulations which model this dark matter over billions of years produce
a universe in agreement with observation at sizes larger than galaxies,
disagreement with data remains at the size of individual galaxies. Recent
extensions to Einstein's description of gravity have produced a new type of dark
matter which agrees with data at the size of individual galaxies. Through
supercomputer simulations, in collaboration with Dr. Naoki Yoshida jointly at
University of Tokyo and Kavli Institute on the Physics and Mathematics of the
Universe (IPMU) in Japan, this study will investigate whether this form of dark
matter can also produce a universe in agreement with data at sizes larger than
galaxies. This study has the potential to resolve a long-standing disagreement
between astronomers and astrophysicists, and could point toward more fruitful
extensions to Einstein's gravity.

N-body simulation of point-like dark matter agrees well with the galactic power
spectrum as inferred from comprehensive sky surveys. Yet, at the scale of a
single galaxy, N-body simulations predict densities that diverge toward galactic
centers, while observational evidence strongly suggests constant densities.
There have emerged extensions to Einstein gravity that predict a dark matter
candidate with Newtonian gravitational interactions at large separation but
which diminish linearly to zero at small separation. The N-body code GADGET-2
will be augmented to permit distinct gravitational interactions between
particles, with focus on deviations from point-mass behavior as predicted by
recent models featuring multiple metric tensors. The effect of these deviations
on large-scale structure will be compared against existing sky surveys. Research
outcomes will either lessen tension between large-scale and small-scale dark
matter observations, or exclude these specific models. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.