* 1415514
* Dynamic Decoupling and Noise Characterization in Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Simon Gustavsson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Superconducting qubits (quantum bits) are solid-state artificial atoms,
comprised of Josephson tunnel junctions and superconducting interconnects and
microwave resonators. When cooled to milli-Kelvin temperatures, these
superconducting circuits exhibit quantum mechanical behavior, such as quantized
states of flux, charge, or junction phase depending on design parameters. Such
superconducting artificial atoms have already proven a useful vehicle for
advancing the scientific community's general understanding of coherence in
quantum mechanical systems, particularly in regimes not easily accessible with
natural atoms and molecules. Moreover, superconducting qubits are promising
candidates for quantum information science and technology applications,
including quantum computing. The main limiting factor in using superconducting
qubits is noise, The sources of noise in these systems will be studied and
characterized. Established techniques from the related field of NMR (such as
those used in Magnetic Resonance Imaging), for example, the targeted control
sequences known as dynamical decoupling and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy,
will be adapted and extended. The underlying microscopic sources that destroy
the quantum nature of these superconducting qubits will be identified and
mitigated. While the future applications of quantum information science and
technology are still being recognized, a broad social benefit from the
technology itself (e.g., quantum sensors, simulation machines) is anticipated,
as well as from the the ancillary spin-off technologies that will arise (e.g.,
materials, fabrication, control schema), and the young researchers who work to
make them a reality. An educational feature of this work will be the access and
participation by students in academic (MIT, U. Tokyo, Chalmers), corporate
(NEC), and government (Lincoln Laboratory, RIKEN) research environments in the
US, Japan, and Sweden. Via shared research and student internships, this will
provide a culture that fosters young scientists with a global research
perspective, capable of developing and leading interdisciplinary teams across
institutional and international boundaries.

This work addresses the characterization, identification, and mitigation of
noise sources in advanced, high-coherence superconducting qubits. One objective
is to use control techniques such as dynamical decoupling to assess and mitigate
noise in a new generation of these advanced qubits (2D and 3D transmons with
high-Q materials, metastable flux qubit). In general, this is achieved using
NMR-based techniques that are known to benchmark and elucidate microscopic noise
generators in order to identify and mitigate the underlying sources of
decoherence. The goal is to understand what is limiting their coherence times.
The information can then be used to improve fabrication processes and materials.
A second objective is further advance the noise characterization and mitigation
toolset. The research will utilize a quadrature amplitude modulator and
sequencer with arbitrary amplitude and phase to generate microwave pulse
sequences, which will be applied to transmons and metastable flux qubits in a
dilution refrigerator. Coherence characterization, including the measurement of
standard coherence times, will be performed as a function of the qubit
quantization axis. Randomized benchmarking, state tomography, and process
tomography will be used to characterize gate fidelity. Decoherence will be
mitigated through the application of dynamical decoupling pulse sequences. These
techniques will also be used to measure the noise power spectral density. Two-
dimensional NMR spectroscopy techniques will be used to assess the microscopic
nature and origin of decoherence.