* 1415018
* EAPSI: Examining Cancer Cells' Response to the Shape and Stiffness of their Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Bryant Doss, Doss                    Bryant         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The behavior of single mammalian cells is strongly dependent on their growth
environment. For example, cells grown on plastic surfaces will have different
morphologies and movement mechanisms compared to cells that are grown on softer
materials designed to resemble growth substrates in vivo. This effect is
particularly important in cancer research because there is a high degree of
interaction between a cancer cell and its local environment during invasion into
nearby tissue. Understanding how cells react in different physical environments
may lead to new therapeutic strategies to combat cancer metastasis. Dr. Keng-hui
Lin at Academia Sinica in Taiwan has developed a technique to produce 3D
scaffolds with adjustable stiffness and dimensions which may be used as a cell
culture platform to study cell behavior under more physiological conditions. The
goal of the project is to learn the scaffold technique under the supervision of
Dr. Lin and apply the technique to study malignant breast cancer cells. This
will provide local researchers a first-hand understanding of the 3D culture
technique and will foster additional international collaborations.

Recent studies using a combination of atomic force microscopy and confocal
fluorescence microscopy on MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells show a significant
increase in Young's modulus as they invade into bovine collagen I hydrogels.
This process is thought to be ROCK dependent, but it is unclear whether the
cause is the 3D porous nature of the collagen or the act of invasion where the
cells actively deform the collagen matrix. The goal of the project is to perform
similar experiments on cells grown in the scaffolds to elucidate the basis of
the observed cell stiffening. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the National Science Council of Taiwan.