* 1415589
* Empirical and mathematical approaches to study gradient sensing using yeast as a model
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Robert ARKOWITZ, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,114,481.00

The individual cells of multicellular organisms sense chemical signals that are
essential both to maintain the organisms and to enable them to respond to
changes in the environment. Cells have developed complex biochemical events
(signaling) that allow them to sense very subtle changes in the concentration of
these chemical signals (gradients). The PI uses yeast cells as a model to study
these signaling events, but they are likely broadly applicable to cells in more
complex organisms as well. In previous studies, he identified a variety of
biochemical events that are required for cells to interpret chemical gradients.
In this project, he will investigate the contributions of two novel signaling
events, using the classic tools of cell biology, molecular genetics, molecular
biology, biochemistry, and imaging. In addition, the PI will develop a
mathematical model that not only describes the known components of the signaling
system, but also predicts novel components of the pathway. This approach is
particularly exciting because it will allow the PI to identify signaling events
that might not have been identified through experimentation alone. In short,
this project will work at the interface of mathematics and biology to identify
the critical regulators of cells' responses to the chemical signals that allow
them to function appropriately. The PI is committed to science education at all
levels and will use the project to train undergraduates and students in an AP
biology class. Every other year, the PI will offer his newly developed graduate
seminar course, "Explaining Science" designed to teach graduate students how to
talk about their work with anyone, from a child to a congressperson. The project
will give the PI's students and postdoc the chance to work with collaborators
who are experts in diverse areas. Because the project is at the interface of
math and biology, researchers in each discipline will gain a better
understanding of how those in the other discipline
think.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemotropism, directed cell growth in response to a
chemical gradient, is integral to axon guidance, angiogenesis, pollen tube
guidance, and fungal infection. Naturally occurring chemical gradients are very
shallow and dynamic. Models of chemotactic phenomena invoke positive feedback
loops that amplify small differences in receptor activation across the cell
surface into a substantially steeper intracellular signaling gradient. It is
presumed that the response of chemotropic cells to shallow chemical gradients is
also amplified by interacting feedback loops, but a mechanistic understanding of
such loops is lacking. The goal of this project is to understand how the
chemotropic growth site is established upstream of directed secretion, and how
the cell responds to changes in the gradient after initial orientation.
Observations made during the current project suggest that two interconnected
positive feedback loops underlie the establishment of receptor polarity upstream
of directed secretion. A mathematical reaction/diffusion model of these
mechanisms has been developed, and will be used in combination with experimental
approaches to provide a better understanding of how gradient-aligned receptor
polarity is established and maintained. The degree to which the model mimics the
behavior of gradient-stimulated yeast cells will guide both experimentation and
the evolution of the model itself. This project will lead to a deeper and more
comprehensive understanding of gradient sensing while simultaneously developing
mathematical modeling as a tool for biologists. During this project period, the
PI will continue to administer and train students in the NSF-Capstone
Undergraduate Research Program, which he co-developed. He has also developed a
graduate course, "Explaining Science", designed to teach graduate students how
to explain their science to laypersons. He will meet annually with a high school
AP biology class to discuss his research. The project will provide the PI's
students and postdoc with interdisciplinary training, through interactions with
collaborators who are experts in diverse areas. Specifically, the project is at
the interface of math and biology and will provide students and postdoctoral
researchers with training in this emerging area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded jointly by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division and by the Mathematical Biology
Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences.