* 1415345
* Spin Polarization and Transport at the Nanoscale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,02/28/2018
* Paola Cappellaro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Quantum spins associated with defects in diamond (Nitrogen-Vacancy color
centers) can be used to sense magnetic fields with an unprecedented combination
of sensitivity and spatial resolution. These novel sensors could elucidate the
structure and dynamics of materials and biomolecules at the nano-scale and
ambient conditions. A critical ingredient to the success of these sensors is the
understanding of their environment (composed of other diamond spin defects) that
usually spoil their properties. The focus of this project is not only to
understand the interaction of Nitrogen-Vacancy centers with their spin
environment, but also to turn these spins into a resource. This goal will be
accomplished by studying the environmental spin properties and dynamics and by
developing control techniques to manipulate and measuring them. In turns, a
better understanding of the spin system and novel control techniques will yield
improved quantum devices for sensing and bio-imaging. In addition, the ability
to explore spin dynamics at the nano-scale, a possibility opened by the use of
Nitrogen-Vacancy centers in diamond, will advance the knowledge of this complex,
many-body non-equilibrium quantum phenomenon and have impact in broader
disciplines, including quantum computation and MRI. This project will support
the training of graduate student researchers in an exciting and
multidisciplinary research field.

This research program will explore fundamental physics and potential
applications of spin polarization at the nanoscale, with a synergistic interplay
between theory and experiment. The project exploits the Nitrogen-Vacancy (NV)
center in diamond as a seed and sensor of local spin polarization in the
surrounding electronic and nuclear spin environment. The goals are to first
achieve efficient polarization buildup via optical cooling of the NV center and
its thermal contact with the spin bath; and second, to investigate the
subsequent dynamics (polarization transport) in the mesoscopic spin environment.
Thanks to high spatial resolution of NV detection and to novel material
engineering techniques, these phenomena on single-spin systems, will be able to
be studied at the nano-meter scale. The intellectual merit of the program lies
in elucidating, via experiments and theoretical models, the phenomenon of spin
diffusion, investigating scales not previously accessible to conventional
magnetic resonance techniques. Spin diffusion is a complex quantum many-body
process, which underlies, for example, decoherence in magnetic resonance
experiments as well as dynamic polarization. In addition, by using engineered
materials, how to promote coherent spin transport between distant NV centers,
mediated by a quasi-one dimensional bath of electronic spins, will be studied.
These studies will have a broader impact in different disciplines, from quantum
computation and metrology, to protein sensing via dynamic nuclear polarization
(DNP). Electronic spins in diamond can be used as spin wires to transfer quantum
information between quantum registers located at the NV centers. A polarized
spin bath can be used to improve quantum metrology via NV centers, by achieving
longer coherence time and Heisenberg-limited sensitivity via the creation of an
entangled state. Novel insight into spin diffusion -especially at the spin
diffusion barrier- would lead to improved strategies for DNP, a popular
technique in protein structure determination with NMR. Hyper-polarized nano-
diamonds could themselves be used as polarizing agents, dissolved in bio-samples
of interest for improved sensitivity.