* 1415547
* Advanced Accelerating Structures Based on Metamaterials
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Gennady Shvets, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 487,535.00

This award will fund theoretical and experimental efforts on critical issues
related to developing a new class of advanced particle accelerators based on
exotic new materials: metamaterials of photonic matter. Metamaterials are
artificial materials usually assembled from conventional microscopic materials.
Photonic matter in this context is a new state of matter in which photons
interact with each other, usually through mutual interactions with ordinary
atoms. The metamaterials of photonic matter in this award will be used to
advance techniques in particle accelerators. By taking advantage of highly
unusual propagation properties of high-frequency electromagnetic waves in
metamaterials, this award will develop both beam-driven (two-beam) and wave-
driven accelerators utilizing highly unorthodox propagation geometries that will
ultimately lead to developing high frequency switched matrix accelerators
capable of overcoming the most severe challenge to high gradient acceleration:
the breakdown of the accelerating structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
brings together two areas of science: electromagnetics/metamaterials and
accelerators. Graduate students will be involved in all stages of this project.
Significant outreach effort to high school, undergraduate, and graduate Hispanic
students in Texas is planned. High school students from local schools will
conduct summer research in the PI's laboratories, collaborate with graduate
students, and receive mentorship from the recently established Mentorship
Networks among minority students in the San Antonio/Austin area aimed at
enhancing the interest and awareness of nanoscale science among minority
students. The Mentorship Network has been established through the NSF's
Nanotechnology Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) grant to UT-San
Antonio/UT-Austin. One of the supported graduate students will have the
opportunity to spend considerable time at Argonne National Laboratory and at the
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory's Facility for Advanced Accelerator
Experimental Tests (FACET) facility testing these novel accelerating structures
using short ultra-relativistic beams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
focus of this work is the design, fabrication, and experimentally testing
accelerating structures that support luminous electromagnetic waves capable of
strongly interacting with ultra-relativistic electron beams. The award will also
be used to investigate the possibility of utilizing the recently invented
Photonic Topological Insulators (PTIs) based on metamaterials as novel
accelerating structures. All accelerating structures will be tested at
facilities at Argonne National Laboratory and at SLAC, with particular emphasis
on structural breakdown at high accelerating gradients and on techniques needed
for short wavelength operation.