* 1415297
* SEES Fellows: Landowner decision-making and landscape-level reforestation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Trevor Caughlin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 353,178.00

The project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. Sustainability science is an emerging field that addresses the
challenges of meeting human needs without harm to the environment, and without
sacrificing the ability of future generations to meet their needs. A strong
scientific workforce requires individuals educated and trained in
interdisciplinary research and thinking, especially in the area of
sustainability science. With the SEES Fellowship support, this project will
enable a promising early career researcher to establish himself in an
independent research career related to sustainability. This project addresses
the more sustainable management of degraded agricultural areas in Panama, with a
particular focus on how the natural regrowth in abandoned areas may be more
effectively managed to enhance the conservation of biodiversity. The work will
be done in Panama in collaboration with a local non-governmental organization.
Results will include a freely available computer model for exploring the coupled
human and natural aspects of reforestation in the tropics, as well as workshops
involving both local people using the land for agriculture, researchers, and
government officials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native secondary forest regrowth in
degraded tropical landscapes is critical for biodiversity conservation, carbon
sequestration and human livelihood. Reforestation over a large spatial extent
will be necessary to counteract tropical deforestation rates of millions of
hectares per year. Although landscape-scale reforestation requires an
understanding of both social processes enabling land use change and ecological
processes enabling forest succession, the social and ecological drivers have
largely been studied in separate disciplinary frameworks and at different
spatial scales. This project will bridge this knowledge gap using a novel
modeling approach to link landowner decision-making with forest dynamics. The
model will be applied to the Azuero Peninsula in Panama, a landscape similar to
many other Latin American sites. Three questions are posed: (1) How does
landowner decision-making determine the spatial configuration of patches
available for reforestation? (2) How does the spatial configuration of
reforesting patches determine the rate of reforestation? (3) Where in the
landscape will spontaneous reforestation occur, and where are socioeconomic or
ecological interventions necessary to promote an increase in native forest
cover? Ultimately, the research will apply complexity theory to produce a
systemic conservation plan with detailed, site-specific recommendations for
increasing reforestation. This will provide key insight into restoring
Mesoamerican tropical dry forest, an endangered ecosystem, and develop a
modeling framework for uniting social and ecological data that could be applied
to many other regions. This project is co-funded by the NSF International
Science and Engineering program (ISE).