* 1415525
* Research in High Energy Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Herbert Neuberger, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 210,000.00

This award supports the research of Professor Herbert Neuberger, from Rutgers
University. The recent experimental discovery of a new particle ("Higgs") at the
Large Hadron Collider has firmly established a level of validity for the 50
years old theoretically constructed "Standard Model". Several theoretical
concerns about the Higgs sector led many to develop theoretical alternatives
involving new strong forces. While many of these new alternatives have been
ruled out by the new discovery, several somewhat formal theoretical concerns
remain. The award will support research on a reevaluation of the fundamental
assumptions underlying the field theory that is the basis of the Standard Model,
with the hope of tying together the observed Higgs sector to possible strong
dynamics at higher energies, and will also study some other aspects of the
Standard Model which never were under good theoretical control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main viewpoint of this work is to see how much
flexibility there is in the restriction of imposing strict locality on the
theory. Specifically, the question is whether it is mathematically possible to
relax locality in such a manner that some of the above theoretical concerns
would be eliminated. The Standard Model is classically conformal at high
energies, and one wonders whether relaxing locality in a conformal theory can
lead to a low energy theory that is non-conformal and local. This will be done
by looking at simpler toy models in the hope that even simple mathematically
well-defined systems could teach us something of ultimate value to the
understanding Nature. The tools to be used will be computer simulation and
expanding in a large number of colors.