* 1415378
* SBIR Phase I:  Selective Catalytic Hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of Wood Biomass to Market Driven High Value Phenolic Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Basudeb Saha, Spero Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 175,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this project is the development of a
catalytic process for the selective production of high value specialty chemicals
from lignin. 70 million tons lignin waste, generated by paper and pulp
industries and biorefineries annually. While lignin is a rich source of aromatic
building block chemicals that can lessen our dependence on petroleum, its
selective deconstruction into aromatic chemicals without affecting the value of
carbohydrate is a big challenge. The proposed technology provides a unique
solution to this challenge in which lignin constituent of wood biomass and
municipal wood chips is selectively converted into two high value specialty
phenolic compounds in one-step with the simultaneous production of reactive
cellulose and xylose. The markets for the lignin derived phenols and their
secondary products (isoeugenol, vanillin, dimethoxylphenol) are over $1.1
billion dollars per year of available market. Currently these chemicals are
manufactured from high cost clove-oil and petroleum feedstock. If techno-
economic analysis for large scale production is favorable, this one-step
technology will greatly benefit the paper and pulp industries and biorefineries
by generating value from lignin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will evaluate and establish the commercial
feasibility and economic viability of this unique technology by demonstrating a
more accurate economic analysis, process design and separation methods, and
validating the products specifications for the target application. The current
biorefinery processes make full use of the carbohydrate fractions of wood for
the production of cellulosic ethanol and fermentable sugars. However, because of
lack of effective technology for breaking the recalcitrant lignin, this fraction
accounting for an average 25-30 wt% of the plant mass is largely underutilized.
This one-step catalytic technology adds unique value by producing high value
chemicals, increasing the overall carbon efficiency, while simultaneously
delignifying biomass without the need for excess water.