* 1415914
* Variations Along a Continental Convergent Margin: Seismic imaging of the western margin of South America
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2019
* George Zandt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,998.00

Convergent margins, where an oceanic plate dives under the edge of a continental
plate, are the sites of many fundamental Earth processes and features that
include the world?s largest earthquakes, the longest volcanic chains with some
of the youngest supervolcano eruptions, and one of the world?s longest mountain
ranges, the Andes. The subduction of the (Pacific) oceanic plate beneath the
western margin of South America constitutes the largest ocean-continent
convergent margin system on Earth, and hence, is an ideal location to study
these important processes and features. We propose to study a large portion of
the South American convergent margin by taking advantage of existing seismic
data from over 1000 permanent and portable seismic stations that span over 4000
km of the central Andes. We will use modern computational techniques to generate
seismic images of the subsurface beneath the Andes to depths as great as 1000
km. By using these new seismic images, our specific scientific goals are to
improve our understanding of how earthquakes and volcanoes are building and
destroying the mountains, and whether and how water is transported to great
depths in the Earth. This project will build on and synthesize two decades of
work in the region by the seismology group at the University of Arizona and our
scientific collaborators in Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil. The
broader impacts include training graduate students in modern seismic techniques
and strengthening our international collaborations in South America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic methods potentially provide the highest resolution
images of the Earth from the upper crust to the lower mantle. We will use
Surface Wave Tomography, Finite-Frequency Teleseismic Travel Time Tomography (P-
&amp; S-wave and Vp/Vs), Receiver Functions and a joint inversion of Surface
Wave Data and Receiver Functions to produce uniform seismic images of the
western margin of South America. Using our newly developed seismic images, our
specific scientific goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;? Evaluate the along strike role of
delamination in the building of the Andes.&lt;br/&gt;? Investigate the along
strike variability in lower crustal accommodation of crustal shortening,
including pure shear thickening, lower crustal flow, and high-angle Moho-cutting
faults.&lt;br/&gt;? Revisit the question of the importance of magmatic addition
in the thickening of the Andean crust. &lt;br/&gt;? Investigate the deformation
of the subducted Nazca slab as it penetrates the mantle transition zone, and the
role of deeply subducted fluids in the mantle transition zone and below the
slab.&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase our knowledge about mountain
building, crustal deformation and the subduction process by producing a uniform
set of high-resolution seismic images of a large along-strike region of the
western margin of South America. With uniform seismic images, we can better
evaluate different mechanisms that create high elevations and the causes of
along-strike variability. Our last goal is related to improving our
understanding of the deeper structure of the Nazca slab and the surrounding
mantle. Our improved seismic images will help us evaluate the presence of and
pathways for water in the mantle transition zone.