* 1415386
* Development of the Ionization-Injection Scheme for Generating High-Quality, Multi-GeV Electron Beams from a Plasma Wake Field Accelerator, Using the FACET Facility at SLAC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Chan Joshi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,070,000.00

Plasma acceleration is a cutting-edge technique for accelerating charged
particles such as electrons using the electric field associated with a plasma
structure, such as an electron plasma wave. The plasma structure is created
using either ultra-short laser pulses or particle beams. This technique offers a
way to build high performance particle accelerators of much smaller size than
conventional accelerator techniques. The stimulating laser or electron beam
creates a charge "wake" in the plasma. Particles "ride" this wave and are thus
accelerated in this technique called plasma wakefield acceleration (PWA).
Exploiting new modes for particle acceleration can have significant impact, as
accelerators represent a significant technological tool addressing many
applications in medicine and industry.

This award will focus on developing ionization injection for plasma wakefield
accelerators. To make a practical PWA device, a narrow energy spread of
electrons of sufficient energy must be controlled and injected into the plasma.
This award will allow the development of these electron bunches, called
bunchlets. The work will include a demonstration that the bunchlets can be
controlled and can be tuned to a desired energy.

Intellectual Merit If successful this work will solve the problem of precisely
(self-) placing an ultra-short electron bunch in the plasma wake that can
extract a significant amount of energy from the wake and has the potential to
generate extremely low emittance beams. The successful demonstration of the
ideas presented here will greatly impact both future accelerator and light
source development.

Broader Impacts Modern beam physics/accelerator science needs a workforce with
training in broader areas than currently offered within the conventional
accelerator field such as laser science, plasma physics and atomic physics. This
award will provide this type of training to excellent students with just such a
broad background. If successful, the ideas pursued in this work could
potentially transform future particle accelerator and light sources.