* 1415106
* EAPSI: Improving the performance of extreme high frequency, radio amplifiers
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Luke Renaud, Renaud                  Luke           P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

With the rising demand placed by consumers upon computing technology in the form
of massive volumes of video and multimedia information, the limitations placed
upon communication systems within computers themselves has become a rising
concern. As features of computing circuits become smaller, the speed of these
systems becomes a greater problem for designers. Thus, while consumers want
faster and smaller devices, making smaller devices may also impede the ability
to make them faster. To alleviate some of these problems caused by
miniaturization, wireless-networks-on-chip (WiNoC) have been proposed to remove
long wires in devices and replace them with wireless transmitters. Currently,
key performance of such systems is limited by the final amplifier used in the
radios transmitter. This project will research the implementation of a Doherty
amplifier, designed to dramatically improve the performance of all components in
a WiNoC system. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Youngoo Yang at Sungkyunkwan University in Korea. Dr. Yang is an expert in the
design of high power, moderate frequency, Doherty amplifiers, and will provide
invaluable insight and design assistance into the extension of design into
higher frequencies, at lower power.

This work will push beyond current designs placed at multi-watt power output for
cellular applications in the vicinity of 3GHz, towards lower power
implementations in 65nm CMOS, targeted for use at and beyond 60GHz. The high
linearity and efficiency of the Doherty amplifier will allow for the adoption of
more sophisticated modulation schemes in WiNoC systems, reducing bandwidth,
power consumption, and signal strength requirements. Performance of the
amplifier will be analyzed through the use of the CAD tools Cadence, and
electromagnetic simulations of on-chip passives through Ansys HFSS. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with National Research Foundation of
Korea.