* 1415924
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthetic Household Travel Data Using Third-Party Targeted Marketing and Mobile Phone Data
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Josephine Kressner, Transport Foundry
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes improving the transportation planning
process through better and more frequent data. An integral part of
transportation planning at the federal, state, regional, and local levels of
government involves testing infrastructure, policy, or population changes with
travel demand models. Improved travel demand models enable more accurate
predictions and more efficient funding to achieve important regional
transportation goals, such as decreasing congestion on a specific corridor,
enhancing regional economic growth, improving safety, and attainment of air
quality standards. Unfortunately household travel surveys, the backbone data for
these models, are increasingly expensive. They are so prohibitively expensive
that sample sizes typically represent less than 0.5% of the population, and they
are only collected about every ten years. Furthermore, only 5-10% of households
respond to surveys, creating a significant nonresponse bias. This SBIR Phase I
project aims to create a replacement for traditional household travel surveys
with up-to-date, inexpensive, readily available, and representative data. The
goal is to transform the practice of travel and urban modeling, helping the
nation achieve important transportation and infrastructure goals for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will determine whether synthetic household travel data can be created by
combining targeted marketing (i.e. consumer) data and anonymous mobile phone
data from many different sources to create realistic synthetic household travel
data for a full population in such a way that individual privacy is protected
while near real-time travel data is provided to decision-makers. The process
will use statistical weighting, imputation, simulation, and data fusion
techniques to create synthetic household travel data at a fraction of the cost
of current survey-based data collection methods. By fusing data together to
create inexpensive, up-to-date, and detailed synthetic household travel data at
regular intervals for nearly 100% of the population, researchers and decision-
makers alike will be far better equipped to make important transportation
decisions that affect our lives each day.