* 1415509
* Learning Trajectories in Grades K-2 Children's Understanding of Algebraic Relationships
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Maria Blanton, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 06/30/2017
* USD 449,893.00

Algebra is a central concern in school mathematics education. Its historical
gatekeeper role in limiting students' career and life choices is well
documented. In recent years, the response has been to reframe algebra as a K-12
endeavor. To this end, research on children's algebraic thinking in grades 3-5
shows that students can begin to understand algebraic concepts in elementary
grades that they will later explore more formally. However, there is much that
is unknown about how children in grades K-2 make sense of algebraic concepts
appropriate for their age. This project aims to understand specific ways in
which grades K-2 children begin to think algebraically. It will identify how
children understand mathematical relationships, how they represent the
relationships they notice, and how they use these relationships as building
blocks for more sophisticated thinking. The project will use classroom-based
research to teach children about important algebraic concepts and to carefully
explore how children come to understand these concepts. The primary goal is to
identify levels of sophistication in children's thinking as it develops through
instruction. Understanding how children's thinking develops will provide a
critical foundation for designing curricula, developing content standards, and
informing educational policies, all in ways that can help children become
successful in algebra and have wider access to STEM-related careers.

While college and career readiness standards point to the role of algebra
beginning in kindergarten, the limited research base in grades K-2 restricts
algebra's potential in K-2 classrooms. This project will develop cognitive
foundations regarding how children learn to generalize, represent, and reason
with algebraic relationships. Such findings will inform both the design of new
interventions and resources to strengthen algebra learning in grades K-2 and the
improvement of educational policies, practices, and resources. The project will
use design research to identify: (1) learning trajectories as cognitive models
of how grades K-2 children learn to generalize, represent, and reason with
algebraic relationships within content dimensions where these practices can
occur (e.g., generalized arithmetic); (2) critical junctures in the development
of these trajectories; and (3) characteristics of tasks and instruction that
facilitate movement along the trajectories. The project's design will include
the use of classroom teaching experiments that incorporate: (1) instructional
design and planning; (2) ongoing analysis of classroom events; and (3)
retrospective analysis of all data sources generated in the course of the
experiment. This will allow for the development and empirical validation of
hypothesized trajectories in students' understanding of algebraic relationships.
This exploratory research will contribute critical early-grade cognitive
foundations of K-12 teaching and learning algebra that can help democratize
access to student populations historically marginalized by a traditional
approach to teaching algebra. Moreover, the project will occur in
demographically diverse school districts, thereby increasing the
generalizability of findings across settings.