* 1415052
* EAPSI: Studying diversity and evolution of ambrosia fungi in Taiwan, with an emphasis on Raffaelea and closely related genera
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Caroline Wuest, Wuest                   Caroline
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

The symbiosis between ambrosia beetle and their fungal partners is one of the
most successful yet understudied forms of mutualism. The majority of the known
species of ambrosia beetles have not been studied, and even fewer of their
fungal symbionts have been identified. Some of these fungi, if newly introduced,
could be pathogenic to native trees and, along with their insect partner, cause
economic damage and major crop loss. Thus, the diversity and ecological
importance of ambrosia beetles and their fungal symbionts require further
exploration. The proposed research will serve as an opportunity to advance
knowledge of ambrosia beetles and their fungi, which could improve the
management of diseases caused by these fungi in the future. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Chi-Yu Chen, an expert in close relatives
of ambrosia fungi, at National Chung Hsing University in Taichung, Taiwan. In
order to test critical hypotheses on the evolution of ambrosia beetles, such as
the level of specificity of Raffaelea and related genera to ambrosia beetle
species, it is important to have access to the level of diversity in ambrosia
beetles that Taiwan provides. The objectives of this research are to study the
diversity, morphology, and evolutionary history of ambrosia fungi associated
with ambrosia beetles in Taiwan, focusing on Raffaelea and closely related
genera. The methods to complete this project are to collect beetles in Taiwan,
isolate purified fungal cultures, and quantify fungal species isolated from
individual beetles. Sequences will be used to study the evolutionary history of
ambrosia beetle symbionts, and how this history relates to that of scolytine and
platypodine ambrosia beetles. New species will be described and new fungus-
beetle associations will be discovered, and a broader sampling of the
biodiversity of the fungal symbionts would lead to new insights into the
evolution of the fungal symbionts. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Science Council of Taiwan.