* 1415114
* EAPSI: Deciphering functionality of mutations across the human genome with respect to parental DNA contribution
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Danjuma Quarless, Quarless                Danjuma        X
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Every human genome consists of approximately 6.5 billion deoxyribose nucleic
acid (DNA) bases organized into two sets of 23 chromosomes. Each individual
receives one haploid set of chromosomes (n=23 chromosomes, ~3 billion DNA bases)
from their mother and one set from their father upon fertilization, making a
diploid genome. More effective methods accounting for diploid genome could help
elucidate genome function and missing genome heritability in a number of genomic
sub-disciplines including clinical genome annotation and complex disease
studies. In collaboration with Dr. Ken Wing-Kin Sung at the National University
of Singapore who has expertise in computational genomics, this research project
will develop computational methods to uncover features dependent on the diploid
nature of the human genome.

Human genome sequencing technologies have rapidly advanced in recent years.
However, accurate statistical and computational methods are needed to assign
maternal or paternal specific (phase) function to individual mutations. Sequence
analyses that take into account the phase-specific context of each variant by
leveraging familial trios may uncover the functional effects of mutation
combinations that would otherwise go undetected. The goal of this project is to
provide a modular phase computational pipeline that can be adapted for datasets
of sequenced trios, thus datasets where nuclear trios and extended pedigrees
have been sequenced will be incorporated into this study. Currently, a
preliminary 'functional phase' pipeline to analyze samples has been implemented
in the programming languages Python and R. This early stage software has already
uncovered novel insights regarding the frequency of phase-specific functional
coding pairs and statistical determination of functional variants alleles in the
available dataset. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.