* 1415013
* EAPSI: Enhancing efficiency in a nanomaterial light source for laser applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Claire Marvinney, Marvinney               Claire         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Solid-state light sources, such as lasers, can be made more efficient by
correlating the physics of light emission in semiconductors, materials with
light emission properties and decent conductivity, with their composition and
physical structure. The goal of this project is to improve the efficiency of a
promising ultraviolet light source, zinc oxide, by fabricating it in the form of
a nanowire, a nano sized wire structure. Vertical nanowires, instead randomly
oriented wires, are ideal for studying the link between the optical physics and
the material properties. The efficiency of these nanowire light sources can be
improved by decorating the wires with metal nanoparticles. The goal of this
project will be to fabricate vertical nanowires and decorate with aluminum, with
possible better light-emission enhancement properties than either silver or
gold. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professors Yi Chun
Liu and Hai Yang Xu at Northeast Normal University in China, known around the
world for fabricating vertically oriented zinc oxide nanowires for lasers
applications.

The vertical nanowires to be grown are similar to previously studied randomly
oriented zinc oxide/magnesium oxide core/shell nanowires, where the additional
photoluminescence enhancement observed is dramatically enhanced by plasmon-
exciton coupling due to a silver nanoparticle coating. Alumium nanoparticles,
not previously studied with zinc oxide nanowires, have a localized surface
plasmon resonance (LSPR) that fully overlaps the band edge exciton emission of
zinc oxide, making it more promising for photoluminescence enhancement of zinc
oxide than silver nanoparticles, who's LSPR does not fully overlap zinc oxides
band edge emission. In this project, magnesium oxide and zinc magnesium oxide
will provide spacer layers between the plasmonic and semiconducting materials
allowing for both the plasmon-exciton coupling strength to be fully studied and
for optical cavity effects in the core-shell structure to create additional
enhancement. Aluminum nanoparticle plasmon-exciton coupling strength will be
compared to silver nanoparticle coupling strength. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.