* 1415616
* Information Propagation and Entanglement Generation in Systems with Long-Range Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Alexey Gorshkov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 245,000.00

Allowing for phenomena such as the ability of a particle to be in two places at
the same time, quantum mechanics is extremely weird. In the past few decades,
physicists have been trying to harness this weirdness to build new technologies
such as extremely fast quantum computers, provably secure quantum communication
devices, and exotic quantum materials. Most quantum systems feature short-range
interactions, that is, interactions between adjacent particles only. On the
other hand, many recently engineered AMO (atomic, molecular, and optical)
systems, such as ultracold atomic ions, polar molecules, and highly excited
neutral atoms, feature long-range interactions, that is direct interactions
extending far beyond adjacent particles. These long-range interacting AMO
systems are arguably the most controllable, tunable, and strongly interacting
quantum systems. Precise control over them has recently opened a new paradigm
for quantum computing, quantum communication, and engineering of new materials.
The goal of this project is to advance the frontier of this new paradigm by
exploring the - still largely unknown - potential of these systems. First,
concepts from mathematical physics will be used to tackle the challenge of
establishing and saturating new limits on how rapidly one can send information
across these long-range interacting quantum systems, with applications to
quantum communication and quantum computing. Second, methods from quantum
information theory will be used to study how long-range interactions can speed
up the generation of some of the most complex and exotic quantum states, states
that are as different from classical states as possible. The ability to prepare
these exotic quantum states will significantly enhance the precision of quantum-
based metrology, including clocks, magnetometry, and gravimetry. In synergy with
parallel developments in condensed matter physics, the ability to prepare these
exotic states may also lead to the design of materials with unprecedented
electromagnetic, thermal, or structural properties. All of the above-mentioned
groundbreaking quantum-enabled technologies are bound to improve national
security and increase economic competitiveness of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdocs and graduate students will be advised and
trained and undergraduates will be involved in this research during the summers.
New opportunities to increase public scientific literacy by giving talks to non-
science audiences will be explored. Being highly interdisciplinary, this work
will also naturally foster synergistic interdisciplinary interactions between
AMO physicists, condensed matter physicists, computer scientists, and
mathematicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMO (atomic, molecular, and optical)
systems with long-range interactions, such as Rydberg atoms and polar molecules,
are arguably the most controllable, tunable, and strongly interacting quantum
systems. Precise control over them has recently opened a new paradigm for
quantum computing and communication, entanglement generation, and engineering of
new phases of matter. This work will advance the frontier of this new paradigm
by exploring the - still largely unknown - potential of these systems, which are
often evolving in time far out of equilibrium. First, concepts from mathematical
physics, such as Lieb-Robinson bounds, will be employed to tackle the challenge
of establishing and saturating new limits on how fast information can propagate
in a long-range interacting quantum system. Second, the quantum-information
concept of tensor networks will be used to study how long-range interactions can
speed up the generation of complex entanglement patterns in quantum systems. In
addition to proving mathematical statements, the generated results will be used
to engineer experimentally accessible systems to break the limits imposed by
short-range interactions and to saturate the new limits that may hold in the
presence of long-range interactions. These newly developed entanglement
generation protocols will be used to enable the preparation, in AMO labs, of
long-range entangled states, such as the fractional quantum Hall state, with
applications to fault-tolerant topological quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new Lieb-Robinson bounds on how
fast one can transmit quantum information directly advance and define the
frontier in various Lieb-Robinson-based fields ranging from quantum state
transfer and quantum communication to the study of correlations in gapped ground
states. Through the understanding of the structure and time evolution of
entanglement in strongly-correlated long-range interacting quantum systems, this
work will play a crucial role in harnessing entanglement for metrology, quantum
computing, and quantum communication. The proposed use of quantum information
science and long-range interacting AMO systems to advance the frontier in both
fields will have a particularly transformative impact in synergy with parallel
developments to interpret the new long-range-interacting phenomena in the
context of condensed matter theory. In particular, this synergy will advance the
frontier in understanding and classifying many-body quantum phases and quantum
dynamics, which may in turn lead to the design of materials with unprecedented
electromagnetic, thermal, or structural properties. All of the above-mentioned
groundbreaking quantum-enabled technologies are bound to improve national
security and increase economic competitiveness of the United States.