* 1415881
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Electronic and Vibrational Dynamics of Molecules and Polymers in Close Proximity to Nanostructured Metal Surfaces and Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Piotr Piotrowiak, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 510,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Piotr Piotrowiak,
Laura Fabris and Deirdre O'Connell of Rutgers University - Newark, their
Japanese collaborators (funded by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science) and Rutgers University graduate and undergraduate student researchers
are conducting experiments to study the ways in which electronic and vibrational
energy is transferred from small molecules and polymers to metallic
nanoparticles. The results from these experiments are of fundamental interest to
the physical chemistry and condensed matter physics communities. In addition,
the development of a better understanding of these processes could lead to
improved photonic devices. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project will receive training in laser science, microscopy, materials synthesis
and theory, while working with scientists from Japan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Profs. Piotrowiak, Fabris and O'Connell will collaborate
with Profs. Iyoda, Vacha and Fujii from Tokyo Institute of Technology. The US
and Japanese research groups are conducting a multi-pronged research effort
investigating the electronic and vibrational dynamics of molecules and
semiconducting polymers in close proximity to nanostructured materials. The two
groups will: (1) conduct experimental and theoretical studies aimed at
developing a better understanding of molecular excited state dynamics at the
plasmonic interface; (2) engineer these materials to maximize the desired
radiative enhancement effects through the control of order, periodicity and
alignment of the nanostructures and by optimizing the chemical interface between
molecule and nanostructure. The US students involved in this project will work
alongside Japanese researchers. Rutgers University - Newark is an urban
university with a diverse student body. The US investigators will incorporate
students from underrepresented groups in this international collaborative
project.