* 1415849
* SBIR Phase I:  An Interactive 3D Game of Evolutionary Robotics for STEM-based Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Jeffrey Sprenger, Xemory LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,936.00

The SBIR project aims is to excite high school and middle school children about
the possibility of working in a STEM-related career. According to the National
Center for Education Statistics there are 47 million students enrolled in K-12,
with 29 million in middle or high school (6-12). Inspiring and engaging these
students in STEM is a key component of the President?s ?Educate to Innovate
Initiative?. This project will produce a low-cost computer game designed to
heighten interest in STEM-related careers among these students by engaging them
in game play and interactive design of robotic controllers and robot body-parts
while they apply principles of mathematics, biomechanics, neuroscience and
computer science. With distribution through direct internet download and through
major app stores, this product taps into the commercial gaming industry with
revenues of over $14B annually according to the NDP Group. Partnering with local
high schools and university researchers, the project will advance our
understanding of how to balance the challenge of gaming with the rewards of
learning.

This SBIR project proposes to deliver a software game product for Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) education in the area of
evolutionary robotics. The project will explore the use of Interactive
Evolutionary Algorithms (IEAs) to evolve the behavior of simulated robots. In
collaboration with experts in evolutionary robotics and evolutionary algorithms,
the project team will measure the effectiveness of using IEAs as compared to
non-interactive simple genetic algorithms and direct controller programming.
With an IEA the user influences the direction of evolution through user
demonstration. This method can significantly reduce evolutionary time through
the search space and provides a more hands-on approach to evolutionary robotics,
continually engaging the student user during the design and simulation process.
The project will also investigate the use of scaffolding to physically support
the robot during the evolutionary process. The physical supports are removed
over evolutionary time, gradually increasing the difficulty of the task as the
robot evolves, until the robot can walk or run unassisted.