* 1415015
* EAPSI: Seismic faulting causes rocks to melt and capture earthquake parameters
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2015
* Caitlyn Korren, Korren                  Caitlyn        S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 5,070.00

Large magnitude earthquakes rattle the world. The MW 7.6 1999 Chi-Chi earthquake
claimed thousands of lives and cost Taiwan billions of dollars. Taiwan's history
of devastating earthquakes nominates this region as one of the world's most
seismically active areas. The collisions of the Eurasian and Philippine plates,
forms two subduction zones on the eastern side of Taiwan. The collision process
causes immense stresses with consequences including devastating earthquakes.
During an earthquake, rocks slip against one another causing crushing, grinding
and melting forming a rock called a pseudotachylyte. To better understand
earthquakes, pseudotachylytes will be collected and analyzed. A new
pseudotachylyte locality was recently discovered along the Hoping River in
Taiwan. These 4.1 M.y.o. pseudotachylytes hold information on the magnitude and
how sliding occurred. Sampling at the Hoping River will yield pseudotachylyte
for analysis by 3D model and magnetics at National Taiwan Normal University in
collaboration with Dr. En-Chao Yeh.

The principal objectives of this study are to determine if the pseudotachylyte
veins originate from single or multiple slip events, analyze and model vein
geometry in 3-D (to infer the attitude of the fault plane), average vein
thickness, magnitude of the slip event(s) and direction of slip(s). This
requires high resolution mapping and the collection of oriented samples. A
tomographic analysis requires images for building a 3D model. The width of a
pseudotachylyte generation vein is broadly proportional to earthquake magnitude.
The angle between injection veins and the generation vein primarily reflects the
ratio between normal and shear stresses. Furthermore, measuring the magnetic
minerals orientations in these pseudotachylytes can yield coseismic slip
kinematics. Together these techniques will aid in assessing focal mechanism and
magnitude of an ancient earthquake leading to a better understanding of Taiwan's
present seismic risk. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Science Council of Taiwan.